THE ANATOMY OF THE ROMAN CLERGY: OR, A DISCOVERY OF THE ABUSES THEREOF.

Written in Latin by sundry Authors of their own profession.

And Translated into English verse by G. L. Roma diu titubans, longis erroribus
acta Corruet: and mundi desinet esse caput.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at
the great South door of Paul's. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND WORTHY Lady Elizabeth Viscountesse Anan, Lady
Loghmaben, with all her other good graces, and virtuously deserved titles and
honors.
MADAME,
THough the conscience of my own unworthiness might have sufficiently
deterred me from this boldness, of offering these first and frivolous fruits
of my muses labors at the shrine of your Ladyships divine perfections, yet the
hope of your gracious acceptance banishing my fears, did encourage me with
this assurance, that as no darkness can remain at the approach of the Sun, so
no erroneous faults can be found or seen in those lines your Ladyships
honorable eyes have once ouershined: whereby I shall slight the censures of
carping Critickes, and laugh at the malice of malignant Momus, shadowed under
the wings of your favorable protection. In which security, my greatest
happiness I shall hold to be in your Ladyships honorable employment, which I
shall study to deserve by some greater work, till when I remain,

Your Ladyships most deuotely affected, G. L.

TO THE ROMAN Catholic Readers.
GEntle Readers, let it not offend you, that I have put forth in our Country
language those things which long ago were published by men of your own
Religion and society: It is not unknown to you what Ariosto that famous
writer and learned Poet, borne in Lombardie, has written in his Satires of the
Court and Clergy of Rome, being familiar servant for the time to Pope Leo the
tenth: likewise Francis Petrarch Archdeacon of Parma a Florentine borne, who
lived in the time of Benedict the twelfth, and being greatly esteemed in his
Court, was earnestly solicited by the said Pope, who offered to give him a
Cardinals Hat, if he would persuade his sister, a very fair young woman,
dwelling in Auignion to prostitute her body to his desire, who was desperately
in love with her, the honest man abhorring his desire and the offer, made
answer, that such a filthy Hat was not to be received upon such an dishonest
condition; and if it were not for the reverence he bore to the Sea of Rome, he
would make his pen paint forth his knauerie. After that being desired by some
of his friends (who had left the City) to let them understand the estate of
the Town there, he did write certain Epistles sine titulo, not daring either
name the writer, or to whom he wrote; out of which I have gathered the most
remarkable things, and put forth to your reading in the best sort I could, as
likewise the order of the Friars, written according to Virgils verse in form
of a Cento by Lelius Capilupus a Catholic Roman: sundry other verses are
translated out of your own Poets, such as Mantuanus and Palingenius, both
famous men of your own Religion. Now seeing I give you no invention, made
either by my self or any other of your adversaries, but that which was written
many years since by men of your own profession, most highly addicted to your
Religion, I doubt not but you will excuse me, who lets you see by your own
writers, what abuses have ever been in that Church from the beginning, and
daily do increase. Consider therefore with your selves, how miserably you are
blinded by that Roman Antichrist, and pray to God to give you the light of his
Spirit, that you may see all those filthy errors, and turn to his true
worship. Farewell.

Your wellwiller and friend, G. L.

THE ORDER OF THE Friars, written by Lelius Capilupus in Latin verse, and
translated into English.
I Am the man when others died for love, Ille ego qui quondam dum gallus amore
periret, etc.

Who in the woods my verses did endite
In Country rymes, which trifles then did prove:
But now resolved a greater work to write,
Yet not such lies as Virgill did invent,
Of Didoes death, and blamed Anchises son:
My song shall be of Friars multipotent,
Who harbor gravity within a gown:
Courageous men, young, lusty, strong, and stout,
Whose hearts and minds are from all labor free;
This will I sing, their praises all (no doubt)
By Mantoes help and pleasant harmony.
Their first beginning.
THeir race first came from Jupiter above, Capil. Ab Jove principium generis,
etc.

If herein we may Histories believe:
Yet not the less their constancy to prove,
They were constrained like Hermites poor to live
In dens and caves, through woods and wilderness:
No house they had, no resting place at all,
But wandering to and fro in great distress,
Did eat such fruit as from the trees did fall.
Fair fountain streams did serve to be their drink:
No wine was found amongst that company,
Of dainty fare they never once did think,
Nor of such things as tempt to lechery:
All sober men, religious, chaste, upright.
But who (alas) can choose but these times rue,
If he be pleased but to take a sight,
And mark the new-brood of Friars holy crew.
Their first Author Saint Francis.
Down from the skies a Saint came suddenly,
Who did convent this multitude most pure, Capil. Vnus qui nobis Deus oethere
missus ab alto, etc.

Charging them all from wilderness to fly
To civil Towns, where they might live secure.
Then like a raging torrent they ore ran
All Europe, Asia, Affricke, and Indie,
Possessing all this universe, which then
Seemed insufficient them to satisfy.
Thus changing desert woods, and flourie fields,
For golden cloisters, Palaces most fair,
The youth enured to pain, to pleasure yields,
When as they came where company repair:
And casting off the wonted gravity,
Which their forefathers in the days of old
So much had used, clad with impiety,
With open face grew impudently bold.
Their ease.
THeir chief care now is for to make good cheer, Capil. Ergo omni studio
laeti conuiuia curant, etc.

And by the fire to sit each winter night:
And in the Summer when the heavens look clear,
Provide a shadow from Apollos sight.
In gowns they go, to keep them from the cold,
(Or else to cloak their knaueries from being known)
And with a cowle or cap sowed twenty fold,
They arm themselves against the gout and stone.
The late off spring.
THis race (immortal studies to maintain Capil. At genus immortale, etc.

The honor which their Predecessors won)
Rare document, and orders did ordain,
With offices and rooms for every one,
Like magistrates who rule a civil Town:
Some are preferred to guide the holy band,
Some for the Church and service up and down:
Some with the Priest must at the Altar stand,
One, must receipt of gifts officiate,
Another for to dress their gardens well.
One must be porter of the cloister gate,
To keep them in from Nuns, if flesh rebel:
They are all shorn, both on the pate and chin.
Big bellied, bacon backed, as fat as swine,
With dainty cates they gorge their guts within,
All nosde like turkie-cocks with drinking wine.
Their Orders.
But though I had an hundred tongues and more, Capil. Sed neque quam multae
species, etc.

I could not tell how many sorts there be,
Nor show the names and orders which do flow
From this wast Sea in their posterity.
Their Mattins.
WHen this vile crew has soundly slept all night
From beds of softest down then up they rise, Capil. Omne adeo genus in
terris, etc.

At sound of sacred bells when day grows light,
And go to Church where each rare Relic lies:
With great denotion when they Mattins sing,
The Priest begins all clad in purest white,
Whose roaring voice, makes all the Church to ring:
The rest to answer him again delight.
This being done he to the Altar goes,
And reckons up a thousand Saints at once:
From his hoarse throat, and speaking through his nose
Thrice crying loud with many fained groans,
We be the cause of all our misery,
Oh holy Sire whom no place can contain,
Thy glorious name be praisd eternally:
Let us once see thy countenance again,
Since we thy holy issue are indeed,
And our first fathers from the heavens descended,
Be always present with us in our need,
And take us to thee when this life is ended.
Their Mass.
HEre are the relics Lord, which that last night, Capil. Stant aras circum
puraque in vestesacerdos, etc.

Thou left behind, when men thy death decreed:
Here is that Altar ever in our sight,
Upon the which we break the holy bread.
O Son of God, why see I now thy face,
With bloody wounds deformed all about:
And skin so rent with scarres in every place,
From hellish fire to hold thy servants out.
The damned fiends do tremble at thy sight,
And all the host of that infernal pit.
Thou with thy Father make our suite go right,
And we with God himself at banquets sit.
Oh hear our cries and to our plaints give ear,
Most holy Virgin, vndefil'd and chaste,
Mother of grace, request thy Son to hear
Our prayers, and on earth let us have rest.
This being done, the bread he takes in hand,
And turns it up and down with apish toys,
And that he says no man can understand,
His mind is so bereft with sudden joys.
At last the holy Host he breaks in pieces,
And swallows it all greedily at once:
Which time, to beat his breast he never ceasses,
And sadly sigheth forth his forged groans.
The Calix next he sighing holds up,
While all the people bowing down their heads,
Sit muttering (what, they know not) to the cup
And pray out all the number of their beads.
When in his swagging belly he does put
(As he affirms) the body of his God,
The cup he empties in his fasting gut,
At which, the stupid multitude does nod.
At last he sprinkles all about the Altar,
And on the people, as they sit and pray,
His diuel-driuing coniur'd holy water:
This done, bids them depart and go away.
The Friars preaching.
AN aged Friar, or old Father goes Capil. Consurgit senior diuosque in vota
voca. mit, etc.

Up to the pulpit in a Reverent pace,
Where while he stands (all white with years) he shows,
As if he were the mirror of all grace:
And there declares the torments of the hels,
And how the Assyrians tower did aim at heaven.
Of miracles a thousand jests he tells,
With some true tales, to make his lies go even.
He threatens then the rusticke people all,
With plagues and sickness which will them infest,
With tempests, rain, which on them he will make fall:
And that with famine they shall be oppressed.
What shall they do, the silly people cry,
And keep a woeful murmur in the place,
The women prostrate on their faces lie,
And earnestly entreat the Saints for grace.
He rests a space, and then begins again,
More soberly, and stretching forth his arm,
Holds up a rod, whose virtues he does feign,
To be mostrare, against sorceries and charms.
With this (says he) the souls I can recall,
That are condemned to Purgatory fires.
Down at his feet the people kneeling fall,
Suing for pardon to their buried siers.
Then he begins with every one apart,
To hear Confession how they led their lives,
And they declare the secrets of their heart,
As he demands, both children, men and wives.
Such as bring gifts of silver or of gold,
Or other things to serve their appetite,
He them absolues from all misdeeds of old;
And pardons freely all their errors quite.
But they from whom (poor souls) he naught receives
To Purgatory must, with woe and shame,
And to the devil their souls he careless leaves,
To be tormented in that purging flame.
Their Dinner.
THis Sermon done, to Cloister he retires, Capil. Ordine ahoena locant alij
flammasque ministrant, etc.

Where all the rest for dinner do attend.
Great work is made to fill the hungry Friars:
They every man to several office send.
Some in the kitchen turning spits are set,
Well granished with store of dainty fare,
Some from the Butler do the Naprie get:
Each to discharge his duty has a care.
Mean while the gourmonds stand with greedy eyes,
Ready to eat up very boords and all,
In expectation till their Prior rise,
And from his cabin shows himself in the hall.
At last he comes, Lord of that rabling rout, Capil. Tum pater omnipotens, etc.

Attended on with store of company,
A foul fat monstrous Lubber, full o'th gout:
Whose length and breadth of one dimension be.
His back and belly both of equal roundnesse,
He tumbleth forward like an empty tun,
Whose vast concauitie does sound profoundnesse,
Not to be filled before the euenings Sun.
Him all admire, and stand about his seat, Capil. Illeregit dictis animos, etc.

He charges them to peace when fallen at strife.
If any prove offending, he does threat,
Perpetual prison shall consume their life.
Remember (says he) wonted misery
In former time, your hunger thirst and cold,
And how ye now swim in felicity,
In ease and pleasure, health, wealth, full of gold.
This is the way to heaven which we now lead:
Go to, then all, and thank the God above,
Who makes you now upon these meats to feed.
Then to their rooms all instantly remove,
Each one makes haste that he may first sit down,
And who shall have his hand first in the dish,
Belching like basest Hind and rudest clown,
Throughout the house, and still for more they wish.
Some pick the bones, some lick the fallen crummes,
Some sit carousing in the German sort.
When all is done, and no more victual comes,
This graceless band ith fields themselves disport.
Their pastime.
THere they begin to wantonnize and play,
Among the woods and pleasant running springs, Capil. Ceu quondam niuei liquida
inter flumina, etc.

With sundry exercises all the day,
And every man his instrument forth brings.
Some for to fish with nets, and lines laid out,
Others to hunt, bring grayhounds for the Hare,
Some set their snares for fowls that fly about,
And others to the flowrie meades repair.
Whereas they iumpe, and dance, and loudly sing,
Laugh, tumble, sport, and live in iollitie,
That all the neighboring woods with echoes ring:
Filled with the clamors of that company.
But if it chance that any man of fame,
Should come to see their merry exercise,
Then all the troop do hide themselves for shame,
And back into the Cloisters each man flies.
The begging Friars.
OVt of the town the begging Friars fly,
The Countries charity and help to crave, Capil. Discurrunt alij ad portas.
etc.

Who with their lies and glosing flattery,
Get store of meat, such as the people have.
Both bread, meal, butter, oil, and fruit, and cheese,
Which they lay up in store for winters night:
And thus they work like waspes, not honey bees,
From Phoebus rise, till Cynthia shows her sight.
Funerals.
TO funerals when they are charged to go, Capil. Iampridem resides aegrisque
effusa iuuontus, etc.

This wanton flock is ready at command,
And there they march along two in a row,
With each a burning taper in his hand.
What sort of creatures may we deem this kind,
Who sing for joy, when all the rest so weep?
When others sigh, they have content of mind,
And for their gain, still wish more thus to sleep.
Their Supper.
WHen this is done, to Cloister they return, Capil. Deuexo interea propior fit
rerper olympo, etc.

There stay a while, till suppers on the board,
Their halls all stored with lights that flaming burn,
And every gallerie with lamps decor'd,
They make good cheer, and drink good beer and wine
Of diverse sorts, the best the country yields.
Which done, the elder to their nests incline,
The younger saine a walking to the fields:
But when overcome with heavy sleep and wine,
Their holy fathers slumber out the night,
The Youngsters and the Sisters so divine,
Have secret meetings for their youths delight.
The Nuns.
THe holy Nuns, like Danae in her Tower, Capil. Pectora maerentem tenebru and
carcere caeco, etc.

With hundred doors and bars are shut up fast,
Guarded with Beldames, yet there comes a shower
Of lusty gallants scales the fort at last.
Some much have wondered, and indeed they may,
How Cloystred virgins, from the world exiled,
Who never cease, nor day nor night to pray,
Should with the wind, conceive and have a child:
Where of a sacred seed does spring (no doubt)
And ouerflowes earths spacious face we see:
For from the vaults of Cloisters there comes out
A race most rare, conceived most wondrously.
The Authors farewell to all the Orders.
NOw fare you well, with all your several sects,
Who thus abound in all prosperity: Capil. Salut vera Ioun proles, etc.

You are the Saints, whom every man respects,
And honors most throughout all Italy.
In doubtful things your counsel they do crave,
As from the Delphian Oracle of old,
And gladly your responses do receive,
Trusting as truth it self what you have told.
Your care is all in Cloisters close to lie,
And keep the Saints from all corruption sure,
When we in arms (I do you not envy)
Must watch all night, that you may sleep secure.
Would I were but the meanest of your train,
To keep your gate, or sweep your sacred floores,
Where I in safety henceforth might remain,
Within the compass of your walls and doors.
Most happy, ye, the sons of mighty Jove,
Who live in mirth, while other men do mourn,
We must be gone, where raging Mars does roue,
Whose eyes shoot lightning, all the world to burn:
So great dissension rises every day,
Among the Kings and Princes of this age,
That Europe quakes in this most fearful fray,
To see the terror of Bellonas rage.
The misbeleeuing son of Gog Magog, The great Turk.

With troops past number boasts to tread us down,
And all the followers of that faithless dog,
Vow to over run us with their horned moon:
But you his awful threats do never fear,
Nor are you moved, but live at quiet ease,
And bid your Nuns sleep sound, and make good cheer
With open gates, at midnight if they please.
O blessed are you, how ever matters go
Throughout the world, your wealth and honors last,
Your worthy praises I will ever show,
And sing your orders equal to the best.
An addition by the Translator.
THere is a monster strange begot of late,
Betwixt a begging Friar and a Nun,
Whose subtlety has troubled Europes state,
And sowing iarres, all Princes has undone.
His shaueling followers do him deifie,
As he were God, and Lord of sea and land:
For he (but stay there) most impetuously,
For supreme power and highest seat does stand.
Of this vile stock a filthy race is sprung,
Which ouer-rules the land of Italy,
And in new Rome has swayed the Scepter long,
By witchcraft, incest, and foul Sodomie.
Some call him Pope, some father of the Saints,
Some say he is Christ's Vicar, left behind:
The knave himself most arrogantly vaunts,
That he in heaven can loose, in hell can bind.
Such is the power he has the world throughout,
With triple crown when he in chair does sit,
Kings, Emperors, and great Monarkes all about,
Most humbly come, to kiss his foot, as fit.
This monster now in Europe does command,
And to the Inds his putent power's extended,
So that no King, nor Prince dare once withstand
The torrent of his wrath when he is offended,
This Prelates pride I cannot all declare,
Nor gorgeous pomp, which daily does increase
With Cardinals, who Kings companions are,
Whom to enrich, poor Princes states decrease.
When hels great Monarch ended has his life,
The Cardinals convent to choose another,
Whose holy meetings often are marred with strife,
Which to appease, they take some Friar brother.
This done, they carry him through all the Town,
High mounted on Priests shoulders magnified,
Then in a chair vnbottom'd set him down,
Where his humanity is searched and tried,
Because an English wench them once beguild, Platina de vitis Pontific. Roman
etc.

Who in disguise unto the Popedom came,
And with a Friar the holy See defiled:
Having a child to Romes eternal shame.
On solemn days, when he his Mass would make,
Two Cardinals do carry up his train,
The multitude attends him at the back,
Till he be set in state, they throng amain,
And while in pomp he sits in his chair,
They bring him wine and consecrated bread:
Such is, his pride, he will not do it bare,
Lest some mischance befall his mitred head.
Many strange tricks this hell-hound he devises,
Setting his neighbors all at great debate.
To war and Arms all Princes he entices,
That he may live in a more quiet state.
If any Prince this demidiuell offend,
Or wrong his servants in the lightest sort, Witness the two last kings of
France.

Incontinent his bloud-hounds he will send,
Friars disguised, and make his life pay for it.
And then give pardon to the murderer,
And as a Saint him canonise, as right:
Men must adore the bloody furtherer
Of his damned plots, which even his soul Witness the tapistry hangings in his
parlour at Rome, wherein the description of the massacre at Paris is gorgeously
set out.
delight.
What shall we say, but pray the God of peace,
Soon to confound this Antichrist of Rome,
Whose rage and mischief is not like to cease,
Against th'annointed, till he get his doom,
To go to hell with all his company,
There to remain in that abhorred place,
And suffer tortures everlastingly,
Without all future hope of after grace.
CERTAIN VERSES TAKEN OVT OF THE EPISTLES of Francis Petrarch, Archdeacon of
Parma, which were sine titulo, written to his friend whom he might not name for
fear of the Roman Clergy.
MY friend, you crave to understand Epist. 8.

New Romes estate in this our Land:
My pen cannot such skill obtain,
Nor Cicero, if live again,
Of that great Court to express the glory
Unparalleled by any story.
For, what you ere have read of old,
Or by report has been you told,
Of Babylon that Tower of pride,
Where the Caldeans did abide,
Or of the uncouth Labyrinthes four,
Possessed by the Minotaure,
Or of Auernus filthy flood,
Or of the Lake where Sodom stood,
Compared with this, they are but fables,
Reported by some fools at tables.
Here is blaspheming Nimrod seen,
Here is Semyramis the Queen:
Here Minos sits as Judge most fell,
And Radamantus scourge of hell:
Foul Cerberus the gate does keep,
Pasiphae with the Bull must sleep,
Whereof proceeds a monstrous race,
Where Minotaurus keeps the place.
So to be short, in former time,
What Poets have set forth in ryme,
Of monsters which before came out,
In it are seen to go about.
Thy virtue brought thee to renown,
Most happy thou that left'st the Town.
If you suppose the City be
In the same form you did it see,
You are deceived much in that case,
Although it stands in that same place.
Of old it did abound with evils,
But now it is a den of devils,
A sink of sin, a gulf of pain,
For those that still in it remain.
Cease to admire, when as I call
This Babylon the chief of all:
Where can that Tower be placed best, Epist. 10.

But in the quarters of the West,
Inhabited as we now see,
By people full of villainy?
Believe me well, here in it dwells
A Tyrant who in pride excels,
More cruel then Cambyses King,
Or the great Turk, whose wrath does ring.
Here are strange labrinthes in great store,
Men's souls in darkness to deflore.
Here Venus with her wanton toys,
Is honored with base bauds and boys:
Adultrie, whoredom and incest,
Is honored here among the best.
And counted but for sports and plays,
Even with our Prelates of these days.
The wife is ravished from her spouse,
And to the Papal seat she bows.
The poor good man must leave the Town,
Such ordinances are set down:
And when her belly rises hie,
By Cardinals who with her lie,
The husband must not dare complain,
But take his wife with child again.
All virtue is trod under foot,
And out of doors all truth is shut:
Where one man's favor is so sought,
And with such flattery dearly bought:
Where bad men are esteemed best,
And the poor just man sore oppressed:
The God of heaven is chac't away,
And gold and silver bear the sway.
Gold is the salve for every sore,
It makes proud kings to brag no more.
By gold heaven gates are open set,
And who gives most, does pardon get.
Even Christ himself for gold is sold,
And miracles wrought manifold.
Came Judas to this Court most trim, Epist. 17:

Bringing his thirty pence with him,
He Will be more welcome by Saint Steven,
Then all the Saints that are in heaven.
The Church of Christ, which was the place
From whence did flow all health and grace,
To tell the truth my heart it grieves,
Its now become a den of thieves.
Our Epicures with ducking nods,
Do mock Religion, scorn the Gods.
Of heavenly joys when they hear tell,
And of the pains that are in hell,
They think it but a merry jest,
Devised by some idle Priest.
The resurrection of the dead,
And to be judged by Christ our head,
They hold them but as fained visions,
Dreams of old wives or apparitions.
If God of heaven do not prevent Epist. 11 and 13.

The perils which are imminent,
His house shall be in danger brought,
And all his worship turned to naught:
I plainly see, I dare not say,
What trechrous means and subtle way,
This Dionysius has in heart,
Our Syracusa to subvert:
And what a miter made of lead,
Semyramis puts on her head,
For to enchant her lovers so,
That to her vile embracements go,
Whereby all men of honest hearts,
Are fled and banished from these parts.
The Romans used of old t'eschue
Such places where most pleasure grew:
So bent they were in all degree,
To train their youth up virtuously.
Since so it is, who will not then
Fly far from Babylon, that den,
Where mischief and all infamy
Does reign and rage continually.
I speak of things seen with mine eyes,
Not heard by ears, nor tales, nor lies.
Thus far I briefly have set down,
The Court of Rome, state of our Town, Epist. 18.

To you my friend, though not so plain,
As by men's lives that hear remain
You might discern and plainly see
The whole abuse of this City.
Wherefore in end I you exhort,
Take this for truth which I report;
If of thy soul thou have a care,
Let not thy mind think to come there
Where never man could learn or see
True virtue no nor piety.
FINIS.
EPITAPHES AND EPIGRAMS of Popes, Monks, and Friars, translated out of diverse
Authors.
THE EPITAPH OF POPE CLEment the seventh, fixed on his tomb at Rome.
THe fatal sisters now you see, Sylua quae reg no bapistico Thomae Naogeorgi
accessit

Have taken from this life
Pope Clement who by perjury,
Was author of great strife.
Therefore rejoice all living wights, Clementemeripuit nobis cleme^tia fati,
etc.

For this was even the man
Who did deceive the Town by sleights,
And all the world o'reran.
This was the man no word could keep,
To Princes nor to Kings,
Although he had sworn never so deep,
And promised great things.
This was the man who vexed the Land
With taxes, tributes sore,
And gathered up with greedy hand
The Country goods in store.
This was the man who ran about,
And raged with war and blood,
Putting his own estate in doubt,
to gain uncertain good.
This was the man who would not spare
To set his house on fire,
If that by murdering here and there,
He might have his desire.
This was the man that spoiled the Town,
And many widows made,
By shedding blood both up and down,
Of those that in it stayed.
This was the man with sword that chac't
The Duke of Vrbin so,
And took his house, and lands defaced,
And made him hence to go.
This was the man without all cause,
O Rome that brought to thee,
Both sword and plague, and cruel laws,
Such was his courtesy.
This was the man that fostred bauds,
And brothels first set down:
Who brought in boys and handsome lads,
A filthy thing in Town.
Even this was he who in his life,
Into the world brought shame,
And every year did stir up strife,
With ignominious name.
Scorned was God by this vile Lowne,
Who had nor faith nor troth:
All policy he wrested down,
And did all goodness loath.
Whiles he did live all things were dear
throughout all Italy:
Yet for all that he would not hear
The peoples misery.
The famine that in Rome was then,
He counted his best gain:
And seemed pleased (unhappy man)
With his own subjects pain.
Unfortunate he thought himself,
That he could not destroy
The world, and scrape all worldly pelf,
Which was his chiefest joy.
Thus living in a tedious life,
By sickness sore aghast,
He lay with the Physicians strife
To help his days to last.
Often times he wished death to see:
The destinies said no:
They took delight most cruelly
More to torment him so.
For his reward he knew, in hell
A thousand stripes to get:
What he did merit to him fell,
Like end a like life met.
At last the Tyrant left this light,
Now Citizens go cast
His filthy carcass out of sight,
Let Ravens deuour't at last.
Be blithe, the happy day is seen,
Long wished for before:
Make sports and plays both morn and even,
And sorrow now no more.
Let this be counted as a day
most holy every year,
That your posterity may say,
Now we may no more fear.
As Kings were banished of old,
By consuls from this place:
So now we shall no more behold
This cruel Neroes face.
FINIS.
The Epitaph of Alexander the third, by Sanazer.
STay passenger a space, thy wearied limbs to ease, Fortasse nescicuius hic
tumulus fiet, adsta viator, etc.

Perhaps thou know not who lies here entombed, stay if you please:
It Is not great Philips son, that all the world subdued,
But Alexander filthy Pope, in bloodshed all embru'd.
Great Kingdoms he o'rethrew, and Cities turned to naught,
All to advance his bastard brood, a world of mischief brought.
This Land with fire and sword he utterly destroid:
And to subvert Gods Laws and man's, his care he all employed:
That he more freely might (o filthy to be told)
Incestuously enjoy the child his lust begot of old.
Yet he for all this sat and ruled proudly the papal Sea
Eleu'n years, as great Pope and head in sole supremacy.
Speak not of cruel Kings, old tyrants do not name,
Caligula came short of him, and Heliogablus shame.
The rest for modesty I cannot well declare,
Suppose the worst, set on thy way, I wish thee well to fare.
The Epitaph of Paul the fourth.
HEre lies unhappy Carrafa, abhorred of God and Pasquill.
man,
His soul I fear to hell, his corpse to grave fast ran.
No peace on earth he could abide, no honor done to God:
The people and the Clergy both, he vexed at home, abroad.
To enemies he yielded soon, his friends helou'd in jest
What would ye more? he was a Pope as false as all the rest.
Epitaph of Pius the second.
HEre do the bones of talking Pius lie, Kliberius. Frigida membra Pij retinet
lapis iste, etc.

Who by his death brought peace to Italy:
Nations he sold, and many crimes unfit,
He under show of virtue did commit.
10. Sapidus in Sixtum.
HEre Sixtus lies, the bauds lament his fall,
Whores, dice, and wine, have lost a father all. Sixte facet ta^dem deslent tua
busta cynaedi. Hoc iacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re Thais, etc. Papa
Pius quintus moritur, etc.

Epitaph of Lucrece Pontanus.
LVcrece by name, Thais indeed, lies underneath this stone,
Pope Alexanders daughter fair, his sons wife, and his own.
Epitaph of Pius the fifth.
Plus the fifth is dead, how wondrous is it to hear?
That only five amongst such a crew, the Almighty God did fear?
EPIGRAMES. Mantuanus of Sixtus 4. in hell.
BAld pated rescall thou, who liued'st only At tu Impluine caput cui tanta
licentia, etc.

To surfeit in thy filthy lechery,
Think thou thy myter can thy doings cover,
Or make us now to be theirs or thy lover?
Pope Ioane being with child coniuring the devil had this answer.
THou mother of Popes bring forth this popish Papa pater patru^ papisse pandito
partu^, etc.
birth,
And then I Will freely tell thee, when I Will come forth on earth.
Marullus in Innoc. 8.
What need this toil, to try this Pope a man, Quid quaeritu testes sit mas
an faemina, etc.

Behold his offspring clearly if ye can:
Eight sons, as many daughters he begat,
Rome needs not doubt, his sect were but for that.
Pontanus of Alexander 6.
POpe Alexander sold the Altars, Christ and crosses, Vendit Alexander cruces
altarea, etc.

Why not, he bought them all before; it was to make up his losses.
Albericus de Rosata.
THe Court of Rome, disdaines a sheep without the Curia Romana no^ capit ouens
sine lana, etc.
skin,
All they that bring are welcome guests, who bring naught come not in.
Conradus Grebelius of Julius 2.
CAn he be good, that was son to a Genoweys, Genua cui patrem, etc.

Begot upon a Grecian dame, and borne in the raging seas?
Ligurians are all false, Greeks all men liers call,
The Seas inconstant: Iulio, in thee we see them all.
Pasquillus.
With bauds and whores Pope Julius and Sextus both were led,
And Leo with foul Sodomies desil'd his loathed bed.
Clement with furies vexed was, for filthy gotten gain: Clementem furiae
vexant, etc.

What hope of any good in thee? Paul shall with us remain.
Mantuanus of the City.
IF thou would live a godly life, from Rome fly far Viuere qui sancte
cupitis discedit Roma, etc.
away,
All villainy in it is used, here goodness has no sway.
Nothing is here now to be found, but fained lies and mockes,
For which they daily bring in gold, to fill the Churches box.
Virtue is banished from this Town, all honesty is gone:
And wickedness and vices now possess the Roman throne.
Pasquillus of Paul 4.
What fury moves thee to take arms, in thy declining years?
Old Carrafa you are aged now, and age is full of fears.
The camp thou do not know so well, as Cloisters exercise,
Thou wantst the nerves of war, that is gold, to make the soldiers rise.
Why putst thou on thy head and back, such heavy arms as those
Which thy weak body cannot bear, being used to better clothes?
Why troublest thou this woeful land, with wounds yet groaning sore?
And do appall the God of war, to prove his valor more?
Give rest we pray thee to thy flocks, and let us live in peace,
Our holy father if thou be, and from thy battles cease.
Lay off thy weighty load of arms, remember Christ his word,
Which he unto Saint Peter spoke, when he did use his sword.
The Popes answer.
THe words which Christ to Peter spoke, are no ways said to me,
You do mistake (by Peter's leave) you are deceived, I see
For why, I no way do succeed to Peter in that case,
As many in the world have thought, since I usurped his place.
The name of Paul I have taken on, his armor with his name,
And follow him in every thing, ere his co^uersio^ came.
Christ's words I do remember well, to me they nothing are,
I came into the world in peace, but for to stir up war.
Gilberti Ducerij Epigram de Iul. 2.
WHen holy Julius to the field did go, Cum contra Gallos, etc.

Against the Gauls, as old reports do show:
Each day the City sounding loud alarmes,
He mustred forth great troops in glistring arms,
And in a rage before the peoples eyes,
In Tibers streams did throw the holy keys:
Then pulling out his sword, he madly says,
Against the French my foes, since now adays
Saint Peter's keys cannot secure my state,
Paul's sword all controversies shall debate.
Io. Pannomus.
ONce in thy Church, S. Peter, as we read, Foemina Petretua quondam ausa
sedere Cathedra, etc.

A woman ruled, and did possess thy chair,
Until a Friar her holiness did lead
Into the Conclaue to the evening prayer:
But her devotion turned to youthful pleasure,
All are not Saints that outwardly seem holy,
She in the sport did joy beyond all measure,
Till time made up the fruits of loving folly.
Then what a grief procured the great disgrace,
To all who thought her father of the Saints?
She shamefully was hurled from the place,
And ever since Romes policy preuents
The like mishap; they now the Pope do place
In a rich chair, hollow and bottomless,
Where privately (to shun future disgrace)
By natures marks his manhood they express.
But some to clear the doubt and shun suspects,
Before they come to climb the Papal throne,
Give full assurance of their manly sex,
And make themselves first father of a son.
Cordus lib. 2. Epigram in Iul. 2.
WHen Julius ended here this mortal life, Mortuus ad superum, etc.

To heaven (it is said he went) but came too late,
Two keys he had, with which he kept a strife,
To try if those could open the sacred gate:
But all in vain, the lock did it withstand,
Nor would acknowledge his supremacy.
Saint Peter hearing him, came to demand
What sinful mortal knocked so saucily.
The Pope said, Peter, know thou not my name?
Look on my crown and slippers all of gold.
Begone says Peter, you are much too blame,
To claim a title in the thing you sold.
Stigelius in Sylua.
AMonke there was who in a night did bear, Per lunam monachui gradu citato,
etc.

By Moone-shine light a Leman to his bed,
Under his gown, and no suspect did fear,
He thought she was so closely covered.
By chance a Friar meets him in the way,
Whose jealous eyes discries the wenches feet,
He to the Monk in merrinesse did say,
What load is that which makes you so to sweat?
He answers, it is a saddle I did borrow,
From one of my acquaintance dwells hard by,
For I must ride a little way to morrow,
Of some reports the certainty to try.
The Friar hearing what a fine excuse
The youth had forged, straight replies again,
A little of my counsel prethie use
Before thou go, it shall not be in vain.
Let no man see what carriage you have there,
Nor know what furniture you do provide,
Lest some of your companions do prepare
Themselves with you upon your mare to ride.
Cordus lib. 6. Epigram.
Six Monks together sitting on a draught, Sex vna monachi dum considere, etc.

Began to think upon their miseries,
And how the world at all their Orders laughed,
Scoffing their persons, slighting their Decrees.
Mong'st whom was one that seemed to rule the rest,
An aged father, whose old joints did shake,
He from the bottom of his grieved breast,
Fetching a sigh, thus to his brethren spoke.
What though our stubburne flocks do run astray,
And for a time their shepherds do forsake,
Yet let us never cease to God to pray,
That he some pity of our state may take.
For since the Lord does see his servants wrong,
And will provide to keep them free from hurt,
Heel take us up to heaven e're it be long,
And drown the heretics into this dirt.
This having said, the boords began to crack,
The rotten floares fall from the walls and stairs,
The Monks all tumbling down lie on their backs,
And strive in vain, so heaven had heard their prayers.
Cordus lib. 6. Epigram.
A Country wench confessing once her sins,
In time of Lent unto a Cordelier, Funigero peccata fatens virguncula fratri,
etc.

And from a long concealed thought begins,
To speak, but hardly could she speak for fear:
He still exhorted her for to discover
The secret secrecy of all her thought,
Affirming plainly, if she strove to smother
The least offense, it would to light be brought.
The wench amazd, at last begins to say,
Last night, good Sir, at midnight I espied
One of your brothers as asleep he lay,
A bed stretched close down by my mistress side.
The Friar mad to hear her speak so plain,
Says, filthy hypocrite, dare thou this say,
Thy mistress reputation thus to stain,
It was S. Francis t'whom she then did pray,
He that makes all our suits in heaven go right,
Of whom we have our Order and our name,
Who hears our cries by day, and sighs by night,
It Was he that in my brothers habit came.
The wench replied, then be what Saint he will,
He left his hose behind him in the place:
If Saints of heaven wear clothes, I have no skill,
I Am but an ignorant in such a case.
Take heed (the Friar says) thou do not touch
Those holy things, which relickes we do call,
And do pertain but only unto such
As are confirmed in the Orders all.
Tomorrow to the Church they shall be carried,
As sacred relickes still to be adored,
By all such fruitless women as be married,
And have no issue, then they shall be stored.
FINIS.
The Translators farewell to those of the Church of Rome.
THus in the rudeness of our vulgar phrase,
My rural Muse these lines has harshly sung:
Neither for envy, gain, nor hope of praise,
As some perhaps may think, who do me wrong.
For I protest my heart was ever free,
I malice no man nor affect no name,
The heavens that know my thoughts my witness be,
I never hunted so much after fame.
What herein I have said, was said before,
By those who members of your Church did live,
And such whose learning made the times adore
Their worth, and due respects unto them give.
There Is nothing here which you can say I pick
From out the railing libels (as you style them)
Or poisoned writings of an heretic,
Whom you so hate, and furiously revile them.
Then gently pardon, all that I have done
Your Churches dearest nurslings have approved,
Whose eyes enlightened by the truest Sun,
Often wished those clouds of errors were removed.
And that the Church, all darkness swept away,
At length, though late, might clearly see the day.
FINIS.

