A SERMON PREACHED On Monday, the Seventeenth of MARCH, At Westminster: At the
opening of the PARLIAMENT.

By the Bishop of BATHE and WELLS.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD BADGER. 1628.

EPHESIANS. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the band of
peace.
THIS Chapter is a great Scripture for Unity. For, here we find there is but
One Lord whom we serve ver. 5. But One God and Verse 5.
Father, whom we worship and obey: ver. 6. But One Spirit whom Verse 6.
we receive, while he sanctifies us: ver. 4. Verse 4.
One Lord, One God and Father, One Spirit. Three in One, all Three but one God,
blessed for ever. But one Baptism, by which we are cleansed. But one Faith by
which we believe: ver. 5. But one hope upon which Verse 5.
we rely: v. 4. But one knowledge, by which Verse 4.
we are illightened: ver. 13. But One Body of Verse 13.
which we are members: ver. 4. Different Verse 4.
Graces, but all tending to One Edification. Diverse offices, but all
ioint-Ouerseers of the same work; Till the Building be One and we One in it,
ver. 11. Ver. 11, 12.


This Chapter is as pressing a Scripture for Exhortation. And the first
Exhortation is, That men would walk worthy of their Calling: ver. 1. Their
calling to be Christians; Their Ver. 1.
calling in Christianity. And that to show themselves worthy, they would
endeavor to keepethe Unity of the Spirit in the band of peace: ver. 3. Ver. 3.


All for Unity. And let me tell you. We often read of One in the Scripture:
but the word Unity in the Abstract, is no where read either in Old or New
Testament, but only in this Chapter, and here it is twice. For we are exhorted
to keep it: ver. 3. But how Ver. 3.
long? why even till we be made perfect: ver. 13. that is, to the end ofthis
life. Ver. 13.


Why, but what need was there of this Exhortation at Ephesus? What? why sure
Ibid.
very great need. For Saint Anselm tells us, Schisma fuit, there was a Schism
and a rupture there. And Charismata, the eminent Graces which God had given
many of them, was made the cause of the Schism. For Corruption at the heart of
man breeds pride even out of Gods graces. And they which had these gifts
despised them which had them not, and separated from them. This gave occasion
to false teachers to enter in, and lie in wayt to deceive: ver. 14. This Ver.
14.
was the state of the Church of Ephesus. How was it in the City and the
Commonwealth there-while? How? why, the City was then a very famous City in
Ionia, a part of Asia the less. At this time subject to the Roman Empire.
Their Proconsul and other Deputies were over them, Acts 19. But Diana Acts 19.
38.
was goddess there and the City heathen.

Ephesus then was Ethnicke: No Religion but Paganism auowed by the state. And
the City was a stranger to the Church that was in it. A Stranger and without
as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 5. Yet such is the force 1. Cor. 5. 12.
of Christian Religion, that as Herod and Jerusalem were troubled when Christ
was borne S. Math. 2. So here Demetrius and Ephesus S. Mat. 2. 3.
were troubled when the name and Religion of Christ was borne and nursed up
among them. For the word of God did no sooner Act. 19. 20.
grow and prevail at Ephesus: Acts 19. 20. but by and by there arose no small
trouble about it: ver. 23. Ver. 23.


The City and the state Heathen, yet troubled when Religion came in: Therefore,
A City and a state Christian must needs be more troubled when Religion goes
out. And the ready way to out Religion, is to break the Unity of it. And the
breach of the Unity of Religion will be sure to trouble the City first, and
hazard the state after. For the state, whether Pagan or Christian, has ever
smarted more or less, as the Church has crumbled into Divisions.

S. Paul I know wrote this Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, not the City. And
he called for Unity bound up in peace for the Churches good, without any
express mention either of City or state. Yet he well knew that the good both
of the State and the City would follow upon it. For Unity is a binder up; And
Unity of Spirit, (which is religion's unity) is the fastest binder that is. And
lest it should not bind fast enough, it calls in the band of peace. So that no
man can exhort unto, and endeavor for the Unity of the Church, but at the same
time, he labors for the good of the state. And if it were so at Ephesus where
the state was Heathen; much more must it needs be so, where the state is
Christian.

I shall follow my Text therefore both in it self, and in the Consequent which
follows upon it. In it self, and so it is for the Unity of the Church. And a
maine Text it is Ibid.
(says S. Jerome) against Heresy and Schism. In the Consequence it has: And
so it is for the Unity of the State. And a full Consequence it is. For Unity not
kept in the Church is less kept in the state And the Schisms and divisions of
the one, are both Mothers and Nurses of all disobedience and dis-ioynting in
the other. So the Apostles exhortation goes on directly to the Church, by
Consequent to the State. And it will behoue both Bodies that all the several
members of each Endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the band of peace.

The Text has six particulars. For first, Unity. Secondly, Unity of the
Spirit. Thirdly, what is It must be kept. Fourthly, there will be no keeping of
it, strong Endeavor. Fifthly, this in peace. And sixthly, Peace bound up in
Vinculo, in the strongest band that peace has.

I begin with that which is the matter Apostles Exhortation. It Is Unity;

A very charitable tie, but better known loved. A thing so good, that it is
never broken but by the worst men. Nay, so good it is, that the very worst men
pretend best when they break it It Is so in the Church; Never Heretic yet rent
her bowels, but he pretended that he raked them for truth. It Is so in the
state. Seldom any unquiet Spirit diuides her Union, but he pretends some
great abuses, which his integrity would remedy. O that I were made a Judge in
the land, that every man which has any Controversy might come to me, that I
might do him Justice. And yet no worse then David was King, when this Cunning
was used, 2 Samuel 15. Unity then both in Church and 2. Sam. 15. 4.
Common Wealth is so good, that none but the worst willingly break it: And
even they are so far ashamed of the breach, that they must seem holyer then
the rest, that they may be thought to have a just cause to break it.

Now to be one here whether in Church one Body. But One is taken here (says
Paulinus) pro Epist. 5.
multorum vnanimitate, for the unanimity and consent of many in one. And the
Church and Commonwealth, take them severally, or together, they are, they can
be no otherwise One then Union multorum, by the uniting and agreeing of many
in one. And so S. Luke, Acts 4. The Church Acts 4. 32.
was a multitude of Believers, sed co^vnum, but they lived as if they had had
but one heart among them. This Unity then is so Vnin est aliquo^um distinctoru^
Thom. 2. 2. q. 17. ^. 3. c.
One, as that it is the uniting of more then one: yet such a uniting of many,
as that when the Common Faith is endangered, the Church appears for it as One.
And when the common safety is doubted, or the common peace troubled, the state
appears for it as one. As Israel was said to be knit together as One man: Iud.
20. And indeed when One Iud. 20. 11.
Man is not more at Unity in himself for his own defense, then the Church
and state are for public defense, then both are justly said to be at Unity.

You see what Unity is. Will you see Fraction makes uneven reckonings. And it is
hard, very hard, for a man that breaks unity to give either God or man a good
account of so doing. Hard to give account, but that is not all.

For, if Unity be broken, if a Division be made, the parts must be aequall or
unequal. If the parts be aequall, neither of them has more then half its
strength. If they be unequal, one has not so much. And that which has
more, usually has more pride, and so less will to unite. And yet for all this
pride, far weaker it is, then when there was Unity, and altogether. Nay, in
breach of Unity there is not always safety for the greater against the less.
For in that grievous breach in Israel, when the Eleven Tribes came out against
Benjamin four hundred thousand strong, and their quarrel good, yet they fell
twice before them, Judge. 20. Iud. 20. 17.


Nay this is not all, not any almost of the hurt which follows in either
Church or state, when discontents have swallowed up their Unity. For the
Church. Nothing (says S. Ibid.
Chrysostom) does so provoke God to anger as to see diuisam Ecclesiam, his
Church purchased by one blood, to be One Body, made more, made other then One.
And for the Commonwealth. A people is as one City, yet such a one Lib. 2. de
Ord. c. 18.
(says Saint Augustine) cui est periculosa dissentio, as to whom all breach of
Unity is full of danger. For Church and state together; It was a grievous Rent
among the Jews, when Manasses devoured Ephraim, Ephraim Manasses, and both
fell upon Judah, Esaias 9. What followed? was God pleased Esaias 9. 21.
with this, or were the Tribes in safety that were thus divided? No sure. For
it follows. The wrath of the Lord was not turned away, but his hand was
stretched out still.

Still? How long was that? How long? Why, Till Ephraim and Manasses which could
not agree at home, were with the rest of the ten Tribes carried away into
perpetual captivity. And Esaias lived to see his Prophecy fulfilled upon them.
For they were carried away by Salmanasar in the sixth year of Hezekiah, when
Esaias flourished. This wrath of the Lord was fierce, and the people drank deep
of this Cup. Therefore I go a far off both for time and place to fetch this
Instance: And do you take care not to bring it nearer home. And I pray observe
it too: The hand of God was stretched out upon Ephraim and Manasses, but
there is no mention, which was the first, or which the greater offender, Ephraim
or Manasses. What Is the Reason? It Is because the breach of unity scarce leaves
any Innocent; and the hand of God is stretched out upon all.

I press Unity hard upon you (pardon me this Zeal.) O that my thoughts could
speak that to you that they do to God: or that my tongue could express them
but such as they are: Or that there were an open passage that you might see
them, as they pray faster then I can speak for unity.

But what then? will any kind of Unity the Unity of the Spirit.

The learned are not altogether agreed the Unity of the Spirit. Cal^. Bucer.
Lapide. Ibid.
For some think no more is meant by it then, a bare concord and agreement in
mind and will. Lett's keep this, and both Church and state shall have a great
deal of freedom from danger. But others take the Unity Lyra. Hu. Card. Amb.
Cath. Beza. Lapide. Ibid.
of the Spirit to be that spiritual concord, which none does, none can work
in the hearts of men, but the Holy Ghost. And I am apter to follow this sense:
because if you take it but for a bare agreement in judgment, Saint Paul had
said enough by naming Unity, He needed have made no Addition of the Spirit.
And because in the Text it is (...) which for the most, points out the Holy
Spirit. And because else Saint Paul's words (which Bucer calls Ardentia verba,
zealous and burning words) add Ibid.
nothing to any even the Coldest exhortation of the Heathen to Unity.

The Unity then of the Spirit, to which the Apostle exhorts includes both; Both
concord in mind and affections, and love of charitable unity, which comes from
the Spirit of God, and returns to it. And indeed the Grace of Gods Spirit is
that alone, which makes men truly at peace and unity one with another. Ei
tribuendum non Nobis. To him it is to be attributed, not to us, (says Saint
Augustine) Tra. 110. in S. 10.
It Is He that makes men to be of one mind in an house, Psalm. 68. Now one mind
in the Psalm. 68. 6.
Church, and one mind in the state, come from the same fountain with One
mind in an house; All from the Spirit. And so the Apostle cle erely ver. 4.
One Body, and one Verse 4.
Spirit, that is, One Body, by one Spirit. For it is the Spirit that ioynes all
the members of the Church into one Body. And it is the Church that blesses the
state, not simply with unity; but with that unity with which it self is
blessed of God. A state not Christian may have Unity in it. Yes. And so may a
state that has lost all Christianity, save the Name. But Unity of the Spirit,
nor Church nor state can longer hold, then they do in some measure obey the
Spirit, and love the Unity.

This unity of the Spirit is closer then Spirits meet where Bodies cannot; and
nearer then Bodies can. The Reason is given by Saint Chrysostom: Because the
Soul or Spirit Hom. 9. in Ephesians.
of man is more simple and of one sorme. And the Soul apter in it self to
Union is made more apt by the Spirit of God, which is One, and loves nothing
but as it tends to One. Nay, as the Spirit of God is One, and cannot dissent
from it self; no more ought they whom the Spirit has joined in One: and the
Spirit has joined the Church in One; Therefore he that diuides the Unity of
the Church, practices against the Unity of the Spirit.

Now this unity of the Spirit (so called, unity that is good; and the want of
it, the Cause of all defects in unity. The presence of it is the Cause of all
unity that is good: Of all within the Church, no man doubts. But it is of all
without the Church too. For no Heathen men or states did ever agree in any good
thing whatsoever, but their unity proceeded from this Spirit, and was so far
forth at least a unity of the Spirit. And for states that are Christian, and
have mutual relations to the Church that is in them: S. Gregory's Rule is
true. The unity of the state Lib. 4. Ep. 76.
depends much upon the peace and unity of the Church: therefore upon the
guidance of the same Spirit.

And as the presence of the unity of the Spirit is the Cause of all unity that
is good: so the want of it is the Cause of all defects in unity. For as in the
Body of a man the Spirit holds the members together; but if the soul depart
the members fall asunder: So it is in theChurch (says Theophilact) and Ibid.
so in the state. So little unity then in Christendom as is, is a great
Argument, that the Spirit is grieved, and has justly withdrawn much of his
influence. And how is the Spirit grieved? How? why, sure by our neglect, if not
contempt of Him as He is One. Esaias 11. 2.
For as He is the Spirit of fortitude, Esaias 11. there we will have him, he shall
defend us in war. And as he is the Spirit of Wisdom, there we will have him
too, he shall govern us in peace. But as heis One Spirit, and requires that
we keep his unity, there we will none of him; though we know right well, that
without unity peace cannot continue, nor war prosper.

One unity there is (take heed of it) it is a unity of the Spirit, both in
Church and Commonwealth. S, Bafil calls it Concors Odium, unity in hatred
Episl. 63.
to persecute the Church. And to this work their's unity enough; Mentake
counsel together, Psalm. 2. Saint Augustine calls it vnitatem Psalm. 2. 2. ^er.
6. de verb. Dom. c. 12.
contra vnitatem. A unity against unity; when Pagans, Jews, and Heretics, or
any profane crew whatsoever, make a league against the Churches Unity. And
about that work, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance, that
there may be no Church, or no reformed Church, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck,
the Philistines, and they that dwell Psalm. 83. 4. In Psalm. 140.
at Tire are Confederates together, Psalm. 83. S. Hilary will not vouchsafe to
call such union unity; Indeed it deserves not the name. It Is not unity (says
he) be it in Church or be it in state: but it is a Combination. And he gives
his Reason. For unity is in faith (and Obedience:) but Combination is
Consortium factionis, no other, no better, the consenting in a faction. And all
Faction is a Fraction too, and an Enemy to Unity, even while it combines in
one. For while it combines but a part, it destroys the unity of the whole.

Is the spirit in this? Out of question, No. For a Faction to compass it is
end, I will not say, when it sees a thief it consents to him; or that it is
always partaker with the Adulterers: but this it does: It speaks against its
own Brother, and slanders its own Mothers Son, Psalm. 50. Can any man call
Psalm. 50. 19.
this the Unity of the Spirit? Or is this the way to Unity?

And now I cannot but wonder what words S. Paul (were he now alive) would use,
to call back Unity into dismembered Christendom. For my part, Death were
easier to me, then it is to see and consider the face of the Church of Christ
scratched and torn, till it bleeds in every part, as it does this day: And the
Coat of Christ, which was once spared by Soldiers, because it was seamlesse.
S. Ioh. 19. Rent every way and S. Ioh. 19. 23.
which is the misery of it by the hand of the Priest; And the Pope, which
Bellarmine Bellar 3. de Eccles. Mil. c. 2.. Nostra autem.
has put into the Definition of the Church, that there might be one
Ministerial head, to keep all in unity, is as great as any, if not the the
greatest cause of divided Christianity. Good God, what preposterous thrift is
this in men, to sow up every small rent in their own Coat; and not care what
rents they not only suffer, but make in the Coat of Christ? What is it? Is
Christ only thought fit to wear a torn garment? Or can we think that the
Spirit of Unity which is one with Christ, will not depart to seek warmer
clothing? Or if he be not gone already, why is there not unity, which is where
ere he is? Or if he be but yet gone from other parts of Christendom, in any
case (for the passion and in the bowels of Jesus Christ I beg it) make stay of
him here in our parts.

For so the Apostle goes on. Keep the

This Exhortation requires too things Jerome:) the one, that they which Ibid.
have this unity of the Spirit keep it: the other that they which have it not,
labor to get it. And certainly nothing can be more beneficial, or more
honorable either for Church or state, then to get it when they have it not, or
to keep it when they have it And this is employed in the very word, which the
Apostle uses, Keep. For no wise man will advise the treasuring up and keeping
of any thing, but that which is of use and benefit. And the word (...) does not
barely signify to Keep, but Tueri, to defend too, which is the stoutest
keeping. Now all wise men are for unity: And all good men for the unity of the
Spirit. Yes (says Saint Isidore) Boni servant, Good men keep it. In Genesis c. 7.


Wise and good men keep it; why then none but fools, and bad men break it.
Sly and cunning men perhaps may have their hands in Divisions, but wise or
good men they are not. For are they not all without understanding that work
wickedness? Psalm. 53. And a greater wickedness men Psalm. 53. 5.
can hardly work, then to dissolve the unity of the Spirit in either Church
orCommonwealth. For they do as much as in them lies to bring profaneness into
the Church, and desolation upon the state. Keep therefore the unity of the
Spirit.

Keep Unity: why, but what needs that? unity keep it self? It Is true; unity
is very apt to hang together. It proceeds from Charity, which is the glue of
the Spirit, not severed without violence. Yea, but for all this, it needs
keeping. In the Church it needs keeping: And therefore the Prophets and
Governors of the Church are called Custodes; Keepers, Watchmen and Overseers,
Ezekiel. 3. and Acts 20. And they must Ezekiel. 3. 17. Acts 20. 28.
watch as well over her peace, as her Truth. And yet there are so many that
scatter the tares of Schism and Heresy, that her unity is not kept.

In the Common wealth it needs keeping too. For her Governors are Custodes
Ciuitatis: Keepers of the City. But there also, there are not few that trouble
the waters for their own fishing. And many times a Commonwealth is in danger
to loose her Unity, just as Ephesus did, Act. 19: At which Acts 19. 32.
time all the City was troubled, but the greater part knew not why. And the
true Cause of the Division was no more but this Demetrius and his fellows were
afraid they should loose their gain, if Diana and her Temple kept not up their
greatness.

Now this noise at Ephesus does not keeping, but it informs us farther of the
way to keep it. The way to keep unity both in Church and state is for the
Governors to carry a watchful eye over all such as are discovered, or feared,
to have private ends. For there is no private end, but in something or other it
will be lead to run cross the public: And if gain come in, though it be
by making shrines for Diana, it is no matter with them though Ephesus be in an
vproare for it.

And certainly there is no keeping of Unity in either Church or state, unless
men will be so temperate (when it comes to a lump at least) as to lay down
the private for the publique's sake, and persuade others to do the like: Else
(says Saint Chrysostom) Hom. 9. in Ephesians.
Quicquid ducit ad amorem sui, diuidit vnitatem: whatsoever leads men to any
love of themselves and their own ends, helps to divide the unity. And the
School Tho. 2 2. 9. 183. A. 2. ad 3.
applies it both to Church and state. For in the Church they which seek their
own, and not that which is Christ's (who is publicum Ecclesiae, the public
interest of the Church) depart from the Unity of the Spirit. And in an earthly
City, the unity of that is gone, when the Citizens studdie their own, not
the public good.

Why, but when then is Unity to be kept? kept, when Enemies are banded together
against Church or state. Then above all other times look well to the keeping
of Unity. Am I deceived? or is not this your Case now? Are not many and great
Enemies joined against you? Are they not joined both against the Church and
against the state? Are they joined, and are you divided? God forbid. It cannot
be that you should so forget the Church of Christ, or the Bowels of your own
Country, and your own. Join then and keep the Unity of the Spirit, and I Will
fear no danger though Mars were Lord of the Ascendent, in the very instant of
this Session of Parliament, and in the second house, or joined, or in aspect
with the Lord of the second, which yet Ptolomey thought Aphoris. 84.
brought much hurt to Commonwealths.

But suppose all danger over (I would it keep Unity at all times. For Enemies
are as Cunning as malice can make them: And if Unity be not kept at all times,
at that time when it is not kept they will make their breach. And they will make it
certainly. For if the Unity of the Spirit be gone, the Spirit is gone with it;
And if the Spirit be gone, Christ is gone with him: And if they be gone, God
the Father is gone with them. And what misery will not follow when an Enemy
shall come upon a state, and find the whole blessed Trinity, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost gone from it, to accompany that Unity which is banished out of
it?

Yea but you will say; If Unity be lost, we First it is more wisdom to keep it
then to be driven to fetch it back. Secondly, before Unity be thrust off, it
would be well thought upon, whether it be in your power to bring it back when
you will. The Spirit, I am sure, is not, and it is His Unity. And, loose it when
you will, it is like the loss of health in the natural body; Just like. For
there every Disease is with some breach of Unity; either by Inflammation in
some noble or vital part: or by strife in the humors: or Luxations in the
loynts: or by breaking veins or sinews; still with some breach ofVnity. Well.
What says the Patient therewhile? What? Why, He says he will recover his
health, and then take care to keep it. Yea, but what if Death seize upon Him
before health be recovered? What then? Had it not been better and safer a
great deal to keep health while he had it? And is not death a just reward of
his distempering his humors? I will not apply, to either Church or
Commonwealth: but certainly it is better for both to keep the Unity of the
Spirit; then trust to the Recovery of it when it is lost.

Keep then the Unity of the Spirit; but Text) that if you will keep it, you
must Endeavor to keep it.

For it is not so easy a thing to keep Unity endeavor to it. The word is
(...) study, be careful to keep it. Saint Augustine reads it Satagentes do
In Psalm, 99.
enough to keep it: And he that does enough, gives not over doing till it be
kept.

Nay, the Apostle comes so home, that he uses two words, and both of singular
care for Unity. For He does not simply say keep it: Nor simply endeavor it,
but studdie and endeavor to keep it. Now no man can keep that is not
careful; And no man will endeavor that is not studious. Neither is it (says
Saint Chrysostom) every man's sufficiency Hom. 9. in Ephesians.
to be able to keep Unity: And the word implies such an endeavor as makes
haste to keep: And indeed no time is to be lost at this work.

Why, but if there be need of such endeavoring, Unity does is so hard to
keep? Whence? why I Will tell you: I presume you will endeavor the more to keep
it.

First, then it is hard to be kept, in regard Unity. For be it in Church, or be
it in Commonwealth it is Vnum aggregatum, One by Collection and Conjunction of
many. And the School teaches us, that this Unity is Minima Vnitas, Tho. p. 1.
q. 31. ^. 1. 2.
A Unity that is least One: And therefore aptest to fall asunder. Both because
many are not easily kept at One; And because every one of the many by reason of
the contrary thoughts and affections which divide him, is not long together one
in himself. Which is the Reason (as I conceive) of that in Philo. That a
little difference is able to Philo apud Tho. ^. 2. q. 183. d. 2 3
divide a City.

Secondly, it is hard to keep in regard of Opposers against it, and sly
practicers upon it. And they are many. David complained of them in his time,
Psalm. 120. My soul has Psalm. 120. 5.
long dwelt with them that are Enemies to peace. And there is no Church, nor no
state, but has some of these. And since the plotting and studdie of these is
to break, you must endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit. And you will
find the work hard enough.

But as to keep Unity is a work of Difficulty, endeavor of the best: so
it is a glorious work, and worth their endeavor. It is a pitiful thing to see
a man but reputed wise, and his Endeavor, vain: But beside the comfort that
is within, there is a great deal of honor to see a wisemans endeavor like
himself. And nothing is more like wisdom then Unity. For wise Counsels, are
seldom better known by any thing then this; That as they are in themselves
One and vary not; so they tend to One and distract not. That One end is verity
in the Church; Safety in the state; and Unity in both. Notwithstanding this,
Good God, what spending their is of great endeauours, about vanity, and things
of naught? Half that endeavor spent in keeping Unity, would do what all our
hearts desire, and more too.

Why, but then how shall we be able to Endeavor right to the keeping of this
Unity of the Spirit? How? why the Apostle tells you that too, ver. 2. And the
way he Verse 2
proposes is so direct, that I dare say, if you endeavor, you shall keep the
Unity of the Spirit, both in Church and state.

First, then all Endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit is void, if it be
not virtuous. For the Spirit will neither be kept, nor keep men together in
vice. Next, Among all virtues four are most necessary to preserve Unity. The
Apostle names them; and I Will do no more. They are Humility at the heart.
Meekness in the Carriage. Patience in point of forbearance. And Charity,
whose work is supportation of the weak that scandal be not taken, and Unity
broken.

And Concerning this last great virtue whose work is supportation of the
weak, it is an Excellent passage which Saint Augustine ^n Psalm. 99.
has. Art thou so perfect that there is nothing in thee which an other need
support? I wonder if it be so: It Is rare perfection. But be it so. Why then thou
art the stronger to support others. Is unity like to be broken, and do thou
say thou can not support others? Ergo habes quod in te alij sustineant.
Therefore thou art not yet so perfect as thou thoughtest, but thou have
somewhat that others may support and bear in thee.

Endeavor then to keep the Unity of the Spirit, Unity best preserved? In
what? why that follows next. It Is in peace, says the Apostle.

Now Peace in this place is not taken as War. But it is that Peace, which
opposes all iarring and falling out, especially falling off one from another.
It is not considered here as opposite to war. For that Peace and War cannot
possibly stand together. But this Peace in which Unity is kept, is most
useful, most necessary, when War is either threatened or begun. For as
there is most need of Unity against United Enemies: so is there most need of
peaceable dispositions to Unite at home, against forces from abroad: Therefore
the Learned agree here, That Peace stands for a Calm, and quiet dispose of
the hearts of men, and of their carriage too, that the Unity of the Spirit may
be preserved. And certainly without this peaceable disposition, it is in vain
to say we endeavor for Unity; either to get, or to keep it.

The Peace then here spoken of, differs meekness. Only it adds above
meekness toward others, quietness with them. As it agrees with meekness,
so it is the way to Unity: As it adds above it, so it is the Treasury in which
Unity is kept. It Is an ancient Rule for kingdoms and a good. Iisdem Artibus
Salust. in Coniur. Ca^^l.
quibus parta sunt facile retinentur. They are kept in subjection, order, and
obedience, by the same virtues by which they were first gotten. Now the unity
of the Spirit is a great part of the Kingdom of grace; Therefore this Kingdom
too, if it be gotten, as it is, by peace, then in peace it must be kept For you
shall never see the Unity of the Spirit dwell in a froward heart, that is
enemy to peace.

That affection of which Saint Bernard Epist. 252.
was, is the great keeper of Unity. And sure he dwelt in peace. Adhaerebo vobis
etsi nolitis, etsi nolim ipse. I will stick and be one with you, though you
would not have me do it: nay, though any tentation in my self would not have
me do it. And therefore they are quite out of the way, in the Church (says
Saint Jerome) that think Ibid.
they can hold the unity of the Spirit, Disfipata pace, when they have shaken
peace asunder. And they are as far mistaken in the Commonwealth, that steep
all their humors in gall, and yet would entitle themselves Patrons of unity.
And surely such, in what state soever they live, know not of what Spirit they
are, though all other men see, it is fire they call for, S. Luke 9. S. Luke 9. 55.


Why? but what need is there of this Exhortation Peace? this Endeavor for
Unity? what need in regard of the times, the time it self preaches, I may hold
my peace. But what need there is in regard of men's persons and conditions,
which are to comply with the times, that I Will tell you. The best peace that is,
and the fairest calm, that the Soul of man has, is imperfect in this life.
What then? What? why therefore says the School, though the Soul be at Tho.
2. 2 q. 29. A. 2. 4.
rest and peace with God and consequently in it self and with others, yet
there is still some repugnancy, both within, and without, which disturbes this
peace. For whatsoever is imperfect is under perturbation. And the more a Man is
troubled, the less perfect is his peace. Out of which it follows again, that
all Exhortation to recall a man's passions to peace is very needful for the
keeping of unity: And he that is offended at S. Paul's Exhortation to peace, is
not at peace in Himself.

Will you say farther, that this peace which keeps, and this unity of the
Spirit which is kept, is the blessing and the gift of God? It shall ever be
far from me to deny that. But what then? Because they are Gods blessings,
must not you endeavor to get them? And because they are Gods gifts, must not
you be careful to keep them? Nay, ought not you be the more careful to
keep, when God himself is so free to give? It Is true, You cannot endeavor
till God give grace; But it is true too, that you are bound to endeavor, when
he has given it. Bound certainly; and therefore Saint Jerome expounds Ibid.
this, which is but Council and Exhortation in Saint Paul, by a Precipitur.
There Is Gods command upon you, that you endeavor for unity in peace.

And now, what if God have given suffciencie, nay abundance of Grace, and yet
there be no Endeavor, can any be blamed then for want of unity but your
selves? It Is true, that except the Lord keep the City, your Watchmen wake in
vain, Psalm. 127. But is it Psalm. 127. 2.
any where said in Scripture, that if you will set no watch, take no care, that
yet God will keep the City? No sure. And this will ever be found certain,
when and wheresoever the Unity of the Spirit is not kept, then and there was
want of man's endeavor to keep it in peace. And whenever God lays that
punishment which follows Disunion upon a Nation, the Sin upon which the
punishment falls is committed by man's misendeauouring, or want of Endeavoring.

But Peace it self cannot hold Unity long, peace. And this brings in the end
of the Text, the keeping of Unity in Vinculo Pacis, in the band of peace.

First, then if you will keep a settled unity, a firm peace. The reason is,
because in this Unity many are brought together. And many will not be held
together without a band. Saint Augustine discovered this. Vnitas fine nodo
facile dissoluitur. Lib. 1. De Doct. Christiana prolo.
That Unity ( says he) which has no knot, is easily dissolved. This Unity is
so comfortable, so beneficial both to Church and state, that it cannot be too
fast bound. But if it be not fast bound, both it and the benefit will soon be
lost.

Now in vinculo, in that which binds knot. So that which is bound is held
close within the Imbracings of the band. And the band is not of one substance,
and the knot of another, but both of one and the same substance. So it is here.
For the unity of the Spirit is contained and compassed, as it were by peace:
Peace goes before it, to bring it in: And Peace goes with it when it is in: And
Peace goes round about it, to keep it in. And where the two ends of Peace
meet, there unity is fast and knit up. And the knot is of the same substance
with the band, Peace too. And therefore where the ancient reading of the Text
is To keep Unity in the band of peace, there some will have it, to keep Unity
in vinculo Lapide. Ibid.
quod est pax, In that band which is peace.

This band as it is the band of unity; so it is unity it binds. For if you mark
it, it binds unity, and the band is but One. In vinculo pacis: in the band of
peace; One band. And yet that which is vnum is not vnius, that which is but
One, is not only of One. For it binds many, whole Churches, whole Kingdoms.
And both bodies are ever safest, when the band is One; and that One able to
hold them. For when this One band of peace cannot bind close, it is a shrewd
Argument, either that some ill humor swells, and will not endure the band; or
that the band it self is strained and made weak. And in both these cases,
timely help must be applied, or the unity of the Body is in Danger.

You may see this plain in the Natural body. The out-band of the body is the
skin. If the body be too full of humors, and they foul and in Motion, the
body swells till the skin breaks. So it is in the Church, and so it is in the
state, when the Body is too full of humors.

The inner-band of the body is the Sinewe. It Is (...) the very word which the
Apostle uses; The band or the sinew of peace. If the sinew be broken or
ouer-strained, there is much pain and weakness in the body, and the members
hang as loose, as if they were falling one from another. And so it is in the
Ecclesiastical; And no other then so, in the Civil Body. If there be but a
straining in the band, though perhaps the sinew be not yet broken, it is high
time to look to the Unity of the body. Well. What Remedy then? What? Why,
sure there is none but Vinculum Vinculi: The sinew must have a swathe: And that
which was wont to bind the body, must be bound up it self. And if the Cure
light not into honest and good Chirurgions hands, it may prove a lame Church,
and a weak state ever after. God bless the body therefore, and direct the
Chirurgions.

Now as the Band of these great Bodies, the Church, and the state, may be
broken: so the knot, which has ever been hard to untie, may be cut. And both
Church and state have ever had Cause to fear both, both breaking and cutting.
Saint Ignatius was afraid of this in the Church, by and by after the Apostles
times. And therefore Epist. ad philedelph.
He writes to the Church of Philadelphia, In any case to fly and to shun
(...) the partition or cutting off this knot. And indeed it is not fit for any
man employed about this band of peace, to have his Rasor about him. And David
was afraid of this in the state; and he had Cause, great cause. For some wild
unruly men cried out then. Lett's break their bands in sunder, and cast their
cords from us, Psalm. 2. What bands? Why, Psalm. 2. 3.
All the bands of peace, and all the bands of allegiance too. For the
Consultation then was (says Calvin) to depose David. But he that In Psalm 2.
dwells in heaven, laughed them to scorn, ver. 4. Verse 4.
And then brake them in pieces like a Potters vessel, ver. 9. Now the Breakers
of the band Verse 9.
of peace both in Church and Commonwealth are pride and disobedience. For these
two cry one to another. Thatis, Pride to disobedience, Come lett's break the
band.

And this is very obseruable, and with disobedient man, but he is proud. For
he would Obey, if he did not think himself fitter to govern. Nor shall you
ever see a proud man stoop to bind up any thing: But if you see him stoop,
take heed of him, it is, doubtless, to break the band of peace. The Reason's
plain; If he stoop to bind up, He knows he shall be but one of the
bundle; which his pride cannot endure. But if he stoop to loose the band, then
he may be free, and show his virtue (as he calls it) that is, hope To run
foremost in the head of a Faction. Fond men, that can be thus bewitched with
pride against themselves. For when they are bound up, though but as one of the
Bundle, yet therein, under God, they are strong and safe: But when the Band is
broken, and they perhaps, as they wish, in the Head, headlong they run upon
their own Ruin.

Thus you have seen the Apostles care for Unity: For Unity, but feign would he
have it of the Spirit. This Unity he desires you should keep; yea studdy and
endeavor to keep, as the Spirit is ready to prevent and assist, that you may
be able to keep it. This Unity must be kept in peace: And if you will have it
sure, in the band of peace.

That which remains is: that you obey and follow the Apostles Exhortation.
That all of you in your selves, and with others, endeavor to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the band of peace, both in Church and Commonwealth. For good
Counsel, such as here our Apostles is, does not make Church or state happy,
when it is given, but when it is followed. And to the danger that may come, it
adds guilt, to all such as will not obey the counsel, that they may prevent
the danger.

And let me say thus much for the Unity of the Spirit; It Is that which ties us
one to another, and all to God, and God to all. Without God we cannot be safe,
either in this life, or that to come. And without this Unity, no man is sure of
his Neighbors assistance, nor any man of Gods. But by this Unity, GOD himself
is content to be bound to you. And that which is bound, is sure, and ready at
need. Et fortis cum Hom. 9. in Ephesians.
debili ligatus, and illum portat and se (says Saint Chrysostom.) And
strength bound to weakness, bears up both it self, and weakness. And in
this sense I can admit of Scaligers Subtilty. That Unity is Omnipotent. Exerc.
365.. 1.


Keep Unity then, and be sour (it is honorable Justice) upon any that shall
endeavor to break it. He deserves not to live, that would dissolve that band,
by which God has bound himself to assist the Church, and the Commonwealth.
Our Adversaries make Unity a Note of the Church, and they persuade such as will
believe them, that we have no Unity, and so no Church. I would not have
Occasion given them to enlarge their doctrine; lest in the next place they take
upon them to prove, that we have no Commonwealth neithor, for want of Unity.

Now to Keep Unity, I have made bold to direct you one way already; and here is
an other. It Is necessary that the Governors have a good and a quick eye to
discover the cunning of them that would break the Unity first, and the whole
Body after. You shall give a guess at them by this. They Will speak as much for
Unity as any men; but yet, if you mark them; you shall still find them busy
about the knot, that binds up Unity in peace: somewhat there is that wrings
them there. They will pretend perhaps, it is very good there should be Vinculum,
A Band to bind men to Obedience, o God forbid else: but they would not have
the knot too hard. Take heed. Their aim is; They would have a little more
liberty, that have too much already. Or perhaps they will pretend, they would not
untie the knot, no, there may be danger in that, but they would only turn it
to the other side, because this way it lies uneasily. But this is but a shift
neither. For turn the knot which way you will, all binding to Obedience will
be grievous to some. It may be they will protest, that though they should untie
it, yet they would not leave it loose. They would perhaps tie it otherwise, but
they would be sure to knit it as fast. Trust not this pretext neither. Out of
Question, their meaning is to tie up Unity in a Bow-knot, which they might slip
at One End when they list. Indeed, whatsoever they pretend, if they be curious
about the knot, I pray look to their fingers, and to the Band of peace too.
For whatsoever the pretenses be, they would be at the dissoluing of Unity.

Well. Provide for the keeping of Unity; And what then? Why, then God bless
you with the Success of this Day. For this Day, the seventeenth of March, I.
Caesar overthrew Sex. Pompeius. And that Victory was in Spain; and Spain
which had long been troublesome, settled, and came quietly in, by that one
Action. And this very Day too, Frederick the Second entered Jerusalem, and
recovered whatsoever Saladine had taken from the Christians. But I must tell
you, These Emperors and their forces were great keepers of Unity.

The first Lesson at this Days Evening prayer, is Judge. 4. There Sisera,
Captain of Iabins Judge. 4.
Army, fell before Israel. But I must tell you; The two Tribes, Zabulon and
Nepthali, went up in great both Unity, and courage against them, Judge. 5. And I
make no doubt, but this Judge. 5. 8.
Day may be a Day of happy success to this Church and state, if S. Paul may be
heard, and that yet (before it be too to late) there be a hearty Endeavor to
keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Band of peace.

And now, to conclude. I beseech you Remember, That all this Unity and Peace,
what ere it be, and when it is at the best, is but Vestigium, a track, and a
footing of that everlasting peace which is to come. And I would not have you so
love this peace of grace, that you should at any time forget the infinite peace
ofGlory: The band whereof nor Earth, nor Hell can break. For it is not folly
only, but madness (says Saint Gregory) to love this Peace, this Unity, which
Par. 3. pastor. curae. Ad. 23.
is but a foot-step, a print in the dust, soon worn out, soon defaced: and
not love God and his Peace, A quo impressum est: whose very foot made this so
safe, so happy, so pleasant as it is. But I cannot but hope better things of
you, and such as accompany safety here, and Salvation hereafter. For you have
not so learned Christ, as that you can prefer any Unity before his, Or
neglect the safe keeping of that which is his footstep in this world; The Unity
of the Spirit.

Let us therefore all pray unto GOD: That he will evermore give both the King
and his People, the comfort of his Spirit: That that Spirit of his may so
direct all your Counsels, that they may be for Unity. That following the
direction of this Spirit of Grace, we may enjoy the Unity of the same Spirit,
both in Church and Commonwealth. That all our Endeauours, public and private,
may tend to the keeping of this Unity. That our keeping of Unity may be such
as it ought, In Peace, in the very band of Peace.

I began with Saint Paul's Exhortation. I end with his Prayer and Benediction.
^. Thessalonians. 3. 16.
2 Thessalonians. 3. It Is the prayer of this Day. For it is the second Lesson at Evening
Service. The God of Peace give you peace always, and by all means: Peace in
concord, and Peace in Charity: Peace on Earth, and Peace in Heaven: Peace of
Grace, and Peace in Glory. To all which Christ for his infinite mercies sal^e
bring us all. To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all
might, Majesty, and Dominion, this day and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

