A NOTABLE HISTORY containing four voyages made by certain French Captains
unto FLORIDA: Wherein the great riches and fruitefulnes of the country with
the manners of the people hitherto concealed are brought to light, written all,
saving the last, by Monsieur Laudonniere, who remained there himself as the
French Kings Lieuetenant a year and a quarter: Newly translated out of French
into English by R. H. In the end is added a large table for the better finding
out the principal matters contained in this work.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Dawson 1587.

AMORE ET VIRTVTE.


TO THE RIGHT Worthy and Honorable Gentleman, Sir Walter Ralegh knight,
seneschal of the Duchies of Cornwall and Exeter, and L. Warden of the
stannaries in Deuon and Cornwall. R. H. wishes true felicity.
SIR, after that this history, which had been conceled many years, was lately
committed to print and published in France under your name by my learned
friend M. Mar^ine Basanier of Paris, I was easily enduced to turn it into
English, understanding that the same was no less grateful to you here, then I
know it to be acceptable to many great and worthy persons there. And no
marvel though it were very welcome unto you, and that you liked of the
translation thereof, since no history hitherto set forth has more affinity,
resemblance or conformity with yours of Virginea, then this of Florida. But
calling to mind that you had spent more years in France then I, and
understand the french better then my self, I forth with perceived that you
approved mine endeavor, not for any private ease or commodity that thereby
might redounde unto you, but that it argued a singular and especial care you
had of those, which are to be employed in your own like enterprise, whom, by
the reading of this my translation, you would have forewarned and admonished
as well to beware of the gross negligence in providing sufficiency of
victuals, the security, disorders, and mutinies that fell out among the
french, with the great inconveniences that thereupon ensued, that by others
mishaps Other men^ misfortune ought to be our warning.
they might learn to prevent and avoid the like, as also might be put in
mind, by the reading of the manifold commodities and great fertility of the
places herein at large described and so nere neighbors unto our colonies, that
they might generally be awaked and stirred up unto the diligent observation of
every thing that might turn to the advancement of the action, whereinto they
are so cheerfully entered. Many special points concerning the commodities of
these parts, the accidents of the French-mens government therein, the causes
of their good or bad success, with the occasions of their abandoning one of
their fortes, and the surprise of the other by the enemies are herein truly
and faithfully recorded: Which because they be quoted by me in the margents,
and reduced into a large alphabeticall table, which I have annexed to the end
of the work, it shall be needless to reckon up again. And that the rather,
because the same with diverse other things of chiefest importance are lively
drawn in colors at your no small charges by the skillful painter James
Morgues, yet living in the Blacke-fryers in London (whom The chief things
worthy observation in Florida are drawn in colors by la^es Morgues painter
yet living in the Black Friars in London.
Monsieur Chastillon then admiral of France sent thither with Laudonniere for
that purpose) which was an eyewitness of the goodness and fertility of those
regions, and has put down in writing many singularities which are not
mentioned in this treatise: which he means to publish together with the
purtraitures before it be long, if it may stand with your good pleasure and
liking. These four voiages I knew not to whom I might better offer the^ to
your self, and that for diverse just considerations. First, for that as I have
said before, they were dedicated unto you in french: secondly because now four
times also you have attempted the like upon the self same cost near
adjoining: thirdly in that you have persed as far up into the maine and
discovered no less secrets in the parts of your abode, then the french did in
the places of their inhabiting: lastly considering you are now also ready
(upon the late return of Captain Stafforde and good news which he brought
you of the safe arrival of your last colonie in their wished haven) to
prosecute this action more thoroughly then ever. And here to speak somewhat of
this your enterprise, I affirm, that if the same may speedily and effectually
be pursued, it will prove far more beneficial in diverse respects unto this
our relme, then the world, yea many of the wiser sort, have hitherto
imagined: The particular commodities whereof are well known unto A collection
of the commodities of Virginea.
your self and some few others, and are faithfully and with great judgment
committed to writing, as you are not ignorant, by one of your followers, which
remained there a full tweluemonth with your worshipfully lieutenant M. Raph
Lane in the diligent search of the secrets of those countries. Touching the
speedy and effectual pursuing of your action, though I wot well it would
demanude a a princes purse to have it thoroughly followed without lingering, yet
am I of opinion, that you shall draw the same before it be long to be
profitable and gamefull as well to those of our nation there remaining ^^s to
the merchants of England that shall trade hereafter thither, partly by certain
secret commodities already discovered by Means to raise benefit in new
discoueries used by the Spaniards and Portugals.
your servants, and partly by breeding of diverse sorts of beasts in those large
and ample regions, and plainting of such things in that warm climat as will
best prosper there, and our realm stands most in need of. And this I find to
have been the course that both the Spaniards and Portugals took in the
beginnings of their discoueries and conquestes. For the Sp^niards at their
first entrance into Hispaniola found neither suger-canes nor ginger growing
there, nor any kind of our cattle: But finding the place fit for pasture they
sent kine and bulls and sundry sorts of other profitable bestes thither, and
transported the plants of suger-canes, and set the roots of ginger: the hides
of which oxen, with sugar and ginger are now the chief merchandise of that
Island. The Portugals also at their first footing in Madera, as John Barros
writes in his first Decade, found nothing there but mighty woods for timber,
whereupon they called the Island by that name. Howbeit the climate being
favorable, they enriched it by their own industry with the best wines and
sugers of the world. The like manner of proceeding they used in the Isles of the
Assores by sowing therein great quantity of Woad. So dealt they in S. Thomas
under the Equinoctial, and in Brasil and sundry other places. And if our men
will follow their steps, by your wise direction I doubt not but in due time
they shall reap no less commodity and benefit. Moreover there is none other
likelihoode but that her Majesty, which has Christened and given the name to
your Virginea, if need require, will deal after the manner of honorable
godmothers, which, seeing their gossops not fully able to bring up their
children themselves, are wont to contribute to their honest education, the
rather if they find any towardlines or reasonable hope of goodness in them. And
if Elizabeth The great ^eale of Elizabeth queen of Castile and Arragon in
aduansing of new discoueries tending to Gods glory.
Queen of Castile and Arragon, after her husband Ferdinando and she had
emptied their cofers and exhausted their treasures in subdueing the kingdom of
Granada and rooting the Mores, a wicked weed, out of Spain, was nevertheless
so zealous of Gods honor, that (as Fernandus Columbus the Son of Christopher
Columbus records in the history of the deeds of his Father) she laid part
of her own Jewels, which she had in great account, to gage, to furnish his
Father forth upon his first voyage, before any foot of land of all the West
Indies was discovered, what may we expect of our most magnificent and gracious
prince ELIZABETH of England, into whose lap the Lord has most plentifully
thrown his treasuries, what may we, I say, hope of her forwardnes and bounty
in advancing of this your most honorable enterprise being far more certain
then that of Columbus, at that time especially, and tending no less to the
glory of God then that action of the Spaniards. For as you may read in the
very last words of the relation of New Mexico extant now in english, the
maine land, where your last colonie mean to seat themselves, is replenished
with many thousands of Indians, Which are of better wits then those of Mexico
The aptnes of the people in the main of Virginea to embrace Christianity.
and Peru, as has been found by those that have had some trial of them:
whereby it may be gathered that they will easily embrace the Gospel,
forsaking their idolatry, wherein at this present for the most part they are
wrapped and entangled. A wise Philosopher noting the sundry desires of diverse
men, writes, that if an ox be put into a meadow he will seek to fill his
belly with grass, if a storke be cast in she will seek for snakes, if ye
turn in a hound he will seek to start an hare: So sondrie men entering into
these discoueries propose unto themselves several ends. Some seek authority
and places of commandment, others experience by seeing of the world, the most
part worldly and transitory gain, and that often times by dishonest and
unlawful means, the fewest number the glory of God and the saving of the
souls of the poor and blinded infidels. Yet because diverse honest and well
disposed persons are entered already into this your business, and that I know
you mean hereafter to send some such good Churchmen thither, as may truly
say with the Apostle to the Savages, We seek not yours but 2. Cor. 12. 14.
you: I conceive great comfort of the success of this your action, hoping that
the Lord, whose power is wont to be perfected in weakness, will bless the
feeble foundations of your building. Only be you of a valiant courage and
faint not, as the Lord said unto Iosue, I^sne 1. 6.
exhorting him to proceed on forward in the conquest of the land of promise,
and remember that private men have happily wilded and waded through as great
enterprises as this, with lesser means then those which God in his mercy has
bountifully bestowed upon you, to the singular good, as I assure my self, of
this our common wealth wherein you live. Hereof we have examples domestical
and foreign. Remember I pray you, what you find in the beginning of the
Chronicle of the conquest of Ir^^^de newly dedicated unto yourselfe. The good
success in Ireland of Richard Strangbowe exle of Chepstowe.
Read you not that Richard Strangbowe the decayed earl of Chepstowe in
Monmuthshire, being in no great favor of his Sovereign, passed over into that
Island in the year 1171. and accompanied only with certain of his private
friends had in short space such prosperous success, that he opened the way
for king Henry the second to the speedy subjection of all that warlike nation
to this crown of England: which so continues to this present day? The like
conqueste of Brasilia and annexing the same to the kingdom of Portugal was
first begun by mean and private men, as Don Antonio de Castillio,
Ambassador here for that realm, and by his office keeper of all the records
and monuments of their discoueries, assured me in this city within these six
years. Now if the greatness of the maine of Virginea, and the large extension
thereof, especially to the West, should make you think that the subduing of
it, were a matter of more difficulty then the conquest of Irelande, first I
answer, that, as the fresh experience of that happy and singular The happy
l^te discovery to the northwest of captain Dauies.
skillful pil^tte and Captain M. John Dauis to the northwest* (toward which
his discovery your self have thrice contributed with the forwardest) has
showed a great part to be maine Sea, where before was thought to be main
land, so for my part I am fully persuaded by Or^elius late reformation of
Culuacan and the gulf of California that the land on the back part of
Virginea extends nothing so far westward as is put down in the mappes of
those parts, and that before two years come to an end, God blessing the
foresaid Captain Dauis endeavors, he will put us out of that doubt and many
others. Moreover it is not to be denied, but that one hundred men will do
more now among the naked and unarmed people in Virginea, then one thousand
were able then to do in Irelande against that armed and warrelike nation in
those days. I say further, that these two years last experience has plainly
showed that we may spare ten thousand able men without any miss. And these
are as many as the kingdom of Portugal had ever in all their garrisons of the
Assores, Madera, Cape verde, Guinea, Brasill, Mozambique, Melinde, Zocotora,
Ormus, Diu, Goa, Mallacca, the Moluccoes, Amacan, and Macao upon the cost of
China. Yea this I say by the confession of singular expert men of Th^kings of
Portugal had never above ten thousand of their natural subjects in all their
n^w conquered dom^^^s.
their own nation (whose names I suppress for certain causes) which have
been personally in the East Indies, and have assured me that their kings had
never above ten thousand natural borne Portugals (their slaves excepted) out of
their kingdom remaining in all the aforesaid territories. Which also this
present year I saw confirmed in a secret extract of the particular estate of
that kingdom and of every government and office subject to the same, with the
several pensions thereunto belonging. Seeing therefore we are so far from
want of people, that retyring daily home out of the Low Countries they go idle
up and downein swarms for lack of honest intertainme^t, I see no fitter place
to employ some part of the better sort of them trained up thus long iu service,
the^ in the inward parts of the firm of Virginea against such stubborn
Savages as shall refuse obedience to her Majesty. And doubtless many of our
men will be glade and feign to accept this condition, when as by the reading of
this present treaty they shall understand the fertility and riches of the
regions confining so near upon yours, the great commodities and goodness
whereof I trust you will suffer to come shortly to light. In the mean season I
humbly commend my self and this my translation unto you, and your self, and
all those which under you have taken this enterprise in hand to the grace and
good blessing of the Almighty, which is able to build further, and to finish
the good work which in these our days he has begun by your most Christian
and charitable endeavor.

Your L. humble at commandment R. H.

The preface.
THere are two things, which according to mine opinio^^ have been the
principal causes in consideration whereof as well they of ancient times, as
those of our age have been enduced to travel into far and remote regions.
The first has been the natural desire which we have to search out the
commodities to live happily, plentifully, and at ease: be it whether one
abandon his natural cuntrie altogether, to dwell in a better, or be it that
men make voiages thither, there to search out and bring from thence such things
as are there to be found, and are in greatest estimation and in most request
in our cuntries. The second cause has been the multitude of people too
fruitful in generation, which, being no longer able to dwell in their native
soyles, have entered upon their neighbors limits, and oftentimes passing
further have pierced even unto the uttermost regions. After this sort the
north climate, a fruitful father of so many nations, has oftentimes sent
forth this way and that way his valiant people, and by this mean has peopled
infinite countries: so that most of the nations of Europe draw their original
from these parts. Contrariwise the more southern regions, because they be too
barraine by reason of their insupportable heat which reigns in them, need
not any such sending forth of their in habitances, and have been oftentimes
constrained to receive other people more often by force ofarmes then willingly.
All Afric, Spain, and Italy, can also testify the same, which never so
abounded with people that they had need to send them abroode to inhabit else
where: as on the contrary Scythia, Norway, Gotland, and France have done. The
posterite of which nations remains yet not only in Italy, Spain and
Affricke, but also in fruitful and fair Asia. Nevertheless I find that the
Romans proceeding farther, or rather adding unto these two chief causes
aforesaid, (as being most curious to plant not only their ensigns and
victories, but also their laws, customs, and religion in those provinces
which they had conquered by force Planting of colonies.
ofarmes) have oftentimes by the decree of their sovereign Senate sent forth
inhabitants, which they called colonies, (thinking by this way to make their
name immotall), even to the vnfurnishing of their own country of the forces
which should have perserued the same in her perfection: a thing which hindered
them much more, then advanced them to the possession of the universal
monarchy, where unto their intention did aspyre. For it came to pass that
their colonies here and there being miserably sacked by strange people did
utterly ruin and overthrow their empire. The brinkes of the river of Rine are
yet red, those of Danubius are noe less bloody, and our France be came fat
with their blood which they lost. These are the effects and rewards of al
such as being pricked forward with this Roman and tirannicall ambition will
go about thus to subdue strange people: effects, I say, contrary to the
profitte which those shall receive, which only are affectioned to the common
benefitte, that is to say, to the general policy of all men, and endeavor to
unite them one with another as well by trasicke and foreign conuersations, as
also by military virtues, and force of arms, whenas the savages will not yield
unto their endeavors so much tending unto their profit.

For this cause princes have sent forth out of their dominions certain men of
good actiuitie, to plant themselves in strange countries, there to make their
profit to bring the country to civility, and, if it might be, to reduce the
inhabitants to the true knowledge of our God: an end so much more commedable,
as it is far from all tiranicall and cruel government: and so they have
always thriued in their enterprises, and by little and little gained the
hearts of them which they have conquered or won unto them by any means. Here
of we may gather that sometimes it is good, yea very expedient to send forth
men to discover the pleasure and commodity of strange countries: But so, that
the country out of which these companies are to pass remain Two condition
required in co^quests of countries new discovered. Nota.
not weakened, nor deprived of her forces: And again in such sort that the
company sent forth be of so just and sufficient number, that it may not be
defeited by strangers, which every foot endeavor nothing else but to surprise
the same upon the sudden. As within these few days past the french have
proved to my great grief, being able by no means possible to withstand the
same, considering that the elements, men, and all the favors which might be
hoped for of a faithful and Christian alliance fought against us: which thing I
purpose to discover in this present history with so evident truth, that the
kings majesty my souerainge prince shall in part be satisfied of the
diligence which I have used in his service, and mine adversaries shall find
themselves so discovered in their false reports, that they shall have no place
of refuge. But before I begin, I will brefely set down the situation and
description of the land where unto we have failed and where we have inhabited
from the year 1561 unto sixty five, to the end that those things may the
more easily be borne a way, which I mean to describe in this discourse.

The description of the West Indies in general, but chiefly and particularly
of Florida.
THat part of the earth which at this day we call the fourth part of the world
or America, or the America unknown to all antiquity.
West India, was unknowen unto our ancestors by reason of the great distance
thereof. In like manner all the Western Islands and fortunate Isles were not
discovered but by those of our age. Howbeit there have been some which have
said that they were discovered in the time of Augustus Caesar, and that Virgil
has made mention thereof in the sixth book of his Aeneidos, when he says,
That there is a land beyond the stars, and the course of the year and of
the sun, where Atlas the Porter of heaven sustaineth the pole upon his
shoulders: nevertheless it is easy to judge that he means not to speak of
this land, whereof no man is found to have written before his time, neither
yet above a thousand years after. Christopher Colon did first light upon this
Christopher Colon or Columbe.
land in the year 1492. And five years after Americus went thither by the
commandment of the king of Castile, and gave unto it his own name, whereupon
afterward it was called America. Americus Vespucius of whom America took the
name.
This man was very well seen in the Art of Navigations and in Astronomy:
whereby be discovered in his time many lands unknown unto the ancient
Geographers. This country is named by some, the land of Bresill, and the land
of Parots. It stretches it self according unto Postel from the one pole to
the other, saving at the straight of Magelan, whereunto it reaches, three and
The first general part of America.
fifty degrees beyond the equator. I will divide it for the better
understanding into three principal parts. That which is toward the pole
Articke or the North, is called new France, because that in the year 1524,
John Verarsana a Florentine was sent by king Frauncis the first, and by Madam
the Regent his mother unto these new regions, where he went on land, and
discovered all the Cost which is from the tropicke of Cancer, to wit, from
the eight and twentieth unto the fiftith degree, and farther to the North. He
planted in this Country the ensigns and arms of the king of France: so that
the Spaniardes themselves, which were there afterward, have named this Country
Terra Francesca. The same then extends it self in Latitude from the 25.
degree unto the 54, toward the North: and in Longitude from 210. unto 330. The
Eastern part thereof is called by the late Writers the land of Norumbega,
which begins at the Bay of Gama, which separateth it from the Isle of
Canada, whither Roberuall and Jacques Carter sailed the year 1535. About the
which there are many Islands, among which is that which is named Terra de
Labrador stretching toward Groneland. In the Western part there are many
known countries, as the Region of Quiuira, Ceuola, Astatlan, and
Terlichichimici. The Southern part is called Florida, because it was
discovered on Palmesunday, which the Spaniards call Pascha Florida. The
Northern part is altogether unknown.

The second part of all America is called New Spaigne. It The 2. general part
of America.
extends from the tropic of Cancer in the 23. degrees and a half, unto the
nienth degree. In the same is situated the city of Themistitan, and it has
many regions, and many Islands adjoined unto it, which are called the Antilles,
whereof the most famous and renounced are Hispaniola and Isabella, with an
infinite number of others. All this land together with the Bay of Mexico, and
all the Islandes aforesaid have not in longitude past seventy degrees, to
wit, from the 240. unto three hundredth and ten: it is also long and narrow as
Italy. The third part of America is called Peru, it is The 3. general part of
America.
very great, and extends it self in latitude from the tenth degree unto the
53. beyond the equator, to wit, as I have said before unto the strait of
Magelan. It is made in fashion like to an egg, and is very well known upon
all sides. The part where it is largest has threescore degrees, and from
thence it waxes narrower and narrower toward both the ends. In one part of
this land Villegagnon planted right under the tropicke of Capricorn, and he
called it France Antarticke, because it draws toward the pole Antarticke, as
our France does toward the Articke.

New France is almost as great as all our Europe. Howbeit Florida with an
ample description thereof.
the most known and inhabited part thereof is Florida, whether many Frenchman
have made diverse voyages at sundry times, in so much that now it is the best
known country, which is in all this part of new France. The Cape thereof is
as it were a long head of land streatching out into the Sea an hundred leagues,
and runs directly toward the South, it has right over against it 25.
leagues distant the Isle of Cuba otherwise called Isabella, toward the East the
Isles of Bahama and Lucaya, and toward the West the Bay of Mexico. The Country
is flat, and divided with diverse rivers, and therefore moist, and is sandy
toward the Sea shore. There grows in those parts great quantity of
Pynetrees which The trees of Florida,
have no kernels in the Aples which they bear. Their Woods are full of Oaks,
Walnuttrees, black Cherietrees, Mulbury trees, Lentiskes, and Chestnut trees,
which are not natural as those in France. There is great store of Ceders,
Cypresses, Bays, Palm trees, Hollies, and wild Uines, which clime up along
the trees and bear good Grapes. There is there a kind of Medlers, the fruit
whereof is better then that of France, and bigger. There are also Plum trees,
which bear very fair fruit, but such as is not very good. There are
Raspisses, and a little bearie which we call among us Blues, which are very
good to eat. There grow in that Country a kind of Roots which they call in
their language Hatseh whereof in necessity they make bread. There is also
there the tree called Esquiue which is very good against the Pocks and The
beasts of Florida.
other co^tagious diseases. The Beasts best known in this Country are Stags,
Hinds, Goats, Dear, Bears, Leopards, Owneces, Luserns, diverse sorts of
Wolves, wild Dogs, Hares, Cunnies, and a cretaine kind of beast that differs
little from the Lion of Africa. The Fowls are Turkeycockes, Partridges,
Parrots, The foul of Florida.
Pigions, Ringdoues, Turtles, Blackbirds, Crows, Tarcels, Faulcons, Laynerds,
Herons, Cranes, Storkes, wild Geese, Malards, Cormorans, Egrepts white, red,
black and gray, and an infinite sort of all wild foul. There is such
abundance of Crocodiles Crocodiles.
that often times in swimming men are assailed by them, of Serpents there are
many sorts. There is found among the Savages good quantity of Gold and
Silver, which is gotten out of Gold and silver.
the Ships that are lost upon the cost, as I have understood by the savages
themselves. They use traffic thereof one with another. And that which makes me
the rather believe it, is, that on the cost toward the Cape, where commonly the
Ships are cast away, there is more store of silver, then toward the North.
Nevertheless they say that in the Mountains of Appalatcy there are mines of
Copper, which I think to be gold. There is also in this Country great The
mountains of Appalatcy. Store of dies and colors. The disposition and manners
of the Floridians.
store of graynes and herbs, whereof might be made excellent good dies and
paintings of all kind of colors. And in truth the Indians which take great
pleasure in painting of their skins know very well how to use the same. The men
are of an Olive color, of great stature, fair without any deformity, and
well proportioned. They cover their priuities with the skin of a stagge well
dressed. The most part of them have their bodies, arms, and thighs painted
with very fair devises: the paynting whereof can never be taken away, because
the same is pricked into their flesh. Their hair is very black and reaches
even down to their hippes, The wearing of their hair.
howbeit they trusse it up after a fashion that becomes them very well. They
are great dissemblers and traitors, valiant of their persons and fight very
well. They have none other weapons but their Bows and Arrows. They make the
string of their bow of a gutte of a stagge or of a stagges skin, which they
know how to dress as well as any man in France and with as many different
sorts of colors. They head their arrows with the teeth of Fishes and stone
which they work very fine and handsomely. They exercise their young men to run
well, and they make a game, among themselves Their exercise and pastime* runnig
for games. Shooting. Playing at the Ball. Hunting Fishing. Their form of war.
which he wins yt has the longest breath. They also exercise themselves
much in shooting. They play at the ball in this manner. They set up a tree in
the midst of a place which is eight or nine fathom high, in the top whereof
there is set a square matte made of reeds or Bulrushes which whosoever hitteth
in playing thereat, wins the game. They take great pleasure in hunting and
fishing. The kings of the Country make great war one against the other,
which is not executed but by surprise, and they kill all the men that they can
take: afterward they cut of their heads to have their hair, which returning
home they carry away, to make thereof their triumph when they come to their
houses. They save the women and children and nourish them and keep them
always with them. Being returned home from the war they assemble all their
subjects, and for joy three days and three nights they make good cheer, they
dance and sing, likewise they make the most ancient Their triumphs after the
victory.
women of the Country to dance holding the hairs of their enemies in their
hands: and in dancing they sing praises to the Sun, ascribing unto him the
honor of the victory. They have no knowledge they worship the Sun and Moon.
Their pristes are both Magicions and Physicians.
of GOD, nor of any religion, saving of that which they see, as the Sun and
the Moon. They have their Priests to whom they give great credit because
they are great Magicia^s great southsayers, and callers upon Devils. These
Pristes serve them in steed of Physicians and Chirurgions. They carry always
about them a bag full of herbs and drugs to cure the sick diseased which
for the most part are sick of the Pocks, for they love women and maidens
exceedingly which they call the daughters of the Sun: and Their marriages.
some of them are Sodomites. They mary, and every one has his wife: and it is
lawful for the king to have two or three: yet none but the first is honored
and acknowledged for Queen: and none The painefulnes of the women.
but the children of the first wife inherit the goods and authority of the
father. The women do all the business at home. They keep not house with them
after they know they be with child. And they eat not of yt which they touch as
long as they have their flowers. There are in all this Country many
Hermaphrodites, which take all Many Hermophodites which have the nature of both
sexes. Their food and provision for war. Their dressing their flesh and fish
over the smoke. Their order in marching to the war. Their consultations.
the greatest pain and bear the victuals when they go to war. They paint
their faces much, and stick their hair full of feathers or down that they
may seem more terrible. The victuals which they carry with them, are of bread,
of honey, and of meale^ ^ade maiz parched in the fire, which they keep without
being marred a long while. They carry also sometimes fish, which they cause
to be dressed in the smoke. In necessity they eat a thousand rifraffes, even
to the swallowing down of coals, and putting sand into the pottage which they
make of this meal. When they go to war their king marches first, with a
clubbe in the one hand, and his bow in the other, with his quiver full of
arrows. All his men follow him, which have likewise their bows and arrows.
While they fight they make great cries and exclamations. They take no
enterprise in hand but first they assemble oftentimes their council together,
and they take very good aduisement in any matter before they grow Their
assemblies.
to a resolution. They meet together every morning in a great common house,
whither their king repayreth and sets him down upon a seat which is
higher than the seats of the other: where all of them one after another come
and salute him: Their saluting of their kings.
and the most ancient begin their salutations lifting up both their hands
twice as high as their face, saying, ha, he, ya, and the rest answer ha, ha.
As Soon as they have done their salutation every man sits him down upon
the seats which are round about in the house. If there be any thing to
entreat of, the king calls the Iawas, that is to say, their Priests, and
the most ancient men, and asks them their advise. Afterward he commands
Cassine The drinking of Cassine before they go to battle.
to be brewed, which is a drink made of the leaves of a certain tree: They
drink this Cassine very hot, he drinks first, then he causes to be given
thereof to all of them one after another in the self same boule, which holds
well a quart measure of Paris. They make so great account of this drink, that
no man may taste thereof The honor exhibited unto men of valor above other.
The excellency of Cassine.
in this assembly, unless he has made proof of his valor in the war.
Moreover this drink has such a virtue, that as soon as they have drunk it,
they become all in a sweat, which sweat being past, it takes away hunger and
thirst for 24. hours after. When a king dies they bury him very solemnly,
and upon his grave they set the cup wherein he was wont to drink: and round
Their manner of the burial of kings. Their fasts at the burial of their
kings. Their cutting of more than half their hair.
about the said grave, they stick many arrows, and weep and fast three
days and three nights together without ceassing. All the kings which were
his friends make the like mourning: and in token of the love which they bare
him, they cut of more than the one half of their hair as well men as women.
During the space of six moons (so they reckon their months) there are
certain women appointed which bewail the death of this king, crying with a
loud voice thrice a day, to wit, in the morning, at noone, and at Evening. All
the goods of this king are put into his house, and afterward they set it one
fire, so that no thing is ever more after to be seen. The like is done with
the goods of the pristes, and besides The burial of their Priests. Sowing
twice in 6. months Their corn is ripe in three months.
they burrie the bodies of the pristes in their houses, and then they set them
on fire. They sow their maise twice a year, to wit, in March and in June,
and all in one and the same soil. The said maise from the time that it is
sowed until the time that it be ready to be gathered is but three months on
the ground. The other six months they let the earth rest. They have also
fair Pumpions, Fair pumpio^s Goodly beans Instruments wherewith they til
their ground.
and very good beans. They never doung their land, only when they would sow,
they set the weeds on fire, which grew up during the six months, and burn
them all. They dig their ground with an instrument of wood which is fashioned
like a broad mattocke wherewith they dig their Vines in France, they put two
grains of maise together. When the land is to be sowed the king commands
one of his men to assemble his subjects every day to come to labor, during
which labor the king causes store of that drink to be made for them, whereof
we have spoken. At the time The bringing of all the crop into a common house.
Their provision of corn for 6. months only Their manner of living in the
Winter.
when the maise is gathered it is al carried into a common house, where it is
distributed to every man according to his quality. They sow no more but that
which they think will serve their turns for six months, and that very
scarcely. For during the Winter, they retire themselves for three or four
months in the year into the woods, where they make little cottages of palm
boughs for their retraite, and live there of maste, of fish which they catch,
of Oisters, of Stagges, of Turkiecockes, and other beasts which they take.
They eat all their meat broyled on the coals, and dressed in The dressing of
their meat in the smoke.
the smoke, which in their language they call Boucaned. They eat willingly
the flesh of y^ Crocodil: and in deed it is fair and white: and were it not
that it sauoureth too much like musk we would oftentimes have eaten thereof.
They have a custom among them, Their manner of curing discases.
that when they find themselves sick, where they feel the pain, whereas we
cause our selves to be let blood, their Physicians suck them until they make
the blood follow.

The women are of the like disposition, and great, and of the same color Their
women's disposition and manners.
that the men be of, painted as the men be: Howbeit when they are borne they be
not so much of an olive color, and are far whiter. For the chief cause that
makes them to be of this color, proceeds of annointings of oil which they
use among them: and Oil in Florida Women great swimmers.
they do it for a certain ceremony which I could not learn, and because of
the sun which shines hot upon their bodies. The agilitie of the women is so
great that they can swin^ne over the great rivers bearing their children upon
one of their arms. They climb up also very nimbly upon the highest trees in
the Country.

Behold in brief the description of the Country, with the nature and
customs of the inhabitants: which I was very willing to write, before I
entered any further into the discourse of my history, to the end that the
Readers might the better be prepared to understand that which I mean hereafter
to entreat of.

MY Lord Admiral of Chastillion, a noble man more destrous of the public than
of his private benefit, understanding the pleasure of the king his prince,
which was to discover new and strange countries, caused vessels fit for this
purpose to be made ready with all diligence, and men to be levied meet for
such an enterprise: Among whom he chose Captain John Ribault, a man in truth
expert in Sea causes: which having received his charge set himself The first
voyage of John Ribault to Florida 1561.
to Sea the year 1561. the eighteenth of February accompanied only with two
of the kings ships, but so well furnished with Gentlemen, (of whose number I
my self was one) and with old Soldiers, that he had means to a^chieue some
notable thing and worthy of eternal memory. Having therefore sailed two
months, never holding the usual course of the Spaniardes, he arrived in
Florida, landing near a Cape or Promontorie, which is no high land, because
the cost is all flat, but only rising by reason of the high woods, which
at his arrival he called Cape Francois in honor of our France. This Cape is
distant from the equator Cape Fra^cois in 30. degrees.
about 30. degrees. Coasting from this place toward the North, he discovered
a very fair and great river, which gave him occasion to cast anchor that he
might search the same the next day very early in the morning: which being done,
by the break of day, accompanied with Captain Fiquinuille and diverse other
soldiers of his ship, he was no sooner arrived on the brinke of the shore,
but straight he perceived many Indians men and women, which came of purpose to
that place to receive the Frenchmen with all gentleues and amity, as they well
declared by the Oration which their king made, and the presents of Chamoys
skins wherewith he honored our A pillar ser up.
captain, which the day following caused a pillar of hard stone to be planted
within the said river, and not far from the mouth of the same upon a little
sandy knappe, in which Pillar the arms of France were carved and engraued.
This being done he embarked himself again to the end always to discover the
cost toward the North which was his chief desire. After he had sailed a certain
time he crossed over to the other side of the river, and then in the presence
of certain Indians which of purpose did attend him, he commanded his men to
make their prayers, to give thanks to Prayer and thanks to God.
GOD, for that of his grace he had conducted the French nation into these
strange places, without any peril or danger at all. The prayers being
ended, the Indians which were very attentive to harken unto them, thinking, in
my judgment, that we worshipped the sun, because we always had our eyes
lifted up toward heaven, rose all up and came to salute the Captain John
Ribault, promising to show him their king, which rose not up as they did, but
remained still sitting upon green leaves of bays and Palmetrees: toward whom
the Captain went and sat down by him, and heard him make a long discourse,
but with no great pleasure, because he could not understand his language, and
much less Presents given to Ribault.
his meaning. The king gave our Captain at his departure a plume or fan of
Egrepthes feathers died in red, and a basket made of palm boughs after the
Indian fashion, and wrote very artificially, with a great skin painted and
drawn throughout with the Pictures of diverse wild beasts so lively drawn
and portraide that nothing lacked but life. The Captain to show himself not
unthankful gave him pretty tin braselets, a cutting hook, a looking glass,
and certain knives: wherevpo^ the king showed himself to be very glad, and
fully contented. Having spent the most part of the day with these Indians, the
captain embarked himself to pass over to the other side of the river,
whereat the king seemed to be very sorry. Nevertheless being not able to stay
us, he commanded, that with all diligence they should take fish for us: which
they did with all speed. For being entered into their parkes or enclosures made
of Their fish^ parkes.
reeds and framed in the fashion of a labyrinth or maise, they loaded us with
troutes, great mullets, plaise, turbuts, and marvelous store of other sorts
of fishes altogether different from ours. This They pass over the river.
done, we entered into our Barks and went toward the other shore. But before
we came to the shore we were saluted with a number of other Indians, which
entering into the water to their armepittes, brought us many little baskets
full of maise, and goodly Mulberies both read and white: Others offered
Goodly mulberies white and read.
them selves to bear us on shore, where being landed we perceived their king
sitting upon a place dressed with boughs and under a little arbor of Cedars
and Bay trees somewhat distant from the waters side. He was accompanied with two
of his sons which were e^ceeding fair and strong, and with a troop of
Indians who had all their bows and quiuers full of arrows in marvelous good
order. His 2. sons received our Captain very graciously: but the king their
father, representing I w^tte not what kind of gravity, did nothing but shake
his head a little: then the Captain went forward to salute him, and without
any other moving of himself he retained so constant a kind of gravity, that
he made it seem unto us that by good and lawful right he bare the title of a
king. Our Captain knowing not what to judge of this man's behavior thought he
was ielous because we went first unto the other king, or else, that he was not
well pleased with the pillar or colume which he had planted. While thus he knew
not what hereof to think, our captain showed him by signs, that he was come
from a far country of purpose to seek him, to let him understand the amity
which he was desirous to have with him: for the better confirmation whereof, he
drew out of a butchet certain trifles, as certain braselets covered as it
were with silver and guilt, which he presented him withal, and gave his sons
certain other trifles. Whereupon the king began very lovingly to entreat both
our Captain and us. And after these gentle intertainments, we went our selves
into the woods, hoping there to discover some singularities: where were great
store of mulbeary trees white and read, on the coppes whereof there was an
infinite number Great store of silkewormes.
of silk worms. Following our way we discovered a fair and great medowe,
divided notwithstanding with diverse marshes, which constrained us, by reason
of the water which environed it about to return back again toward the rivers
side. Finding not the king there, which by this time was gone home to his
house, we entered into our boats and sailed toward our ships: where after we
arrived, we called this River the river of May, because we The river of May.
discovered it the first day of the said month. Soon after we were
returned to our ships, we weighed our ankers and hoysed our sails to
discover the cost farther forward, along the which we discovered another fair
River, which the Captain himself was minded to search out, and having
searched it out with the king and inhabitants thereof, he named it Seine,
because it is very like unto The river of Seine.
the River of Seine in France. From this river we retired toward our ships,
where being arrived, we trimmed our sails to sail further toward the North,
and to descry the singularities of the cost. But we had not sailed any great
way before we discovered another very fair River, which caused us to cast
anchor over against it, and to trim out two Boats to go to search it out.
We found there an I Will and a king no less affable then the rest, The River of
Sum. The River of Loyre. The Rivers of Cherente, Garonne, Gironde, Belle,
Grande.
afterward we named this River Sum. From thence we sailed about six
leagues, after we discovered another River, which after we had vewed was
baptized by us by y^ name of Loyre. And consequently we there discovered five
others: whereof the first was named Cherente, the second Garonne, the third
Gironde, the fourth Belle, the fifte Grande: which being very well discovered
with such things as were in them, by this time in less then y^ space of
threescoare leagues we had found out many singularites a long nine rivers.
Nevertheless not fully satisfied we sailed yet farther toward the North,
following the course that might bring us to the River of Jordan, one of the
fairest Rivers of the North, and holding our wonted course, great fogs and
tempests came upon us which constrained us to leave the cost to bear toward
the main Sea, which was the cause that we lost the sight of our Pinisses a
whole day and a night, until the next day in the morning, what tune the
weather waxing fair and the Sea calm we discovered The river Belle a veoir.
a River which we called Belle a veoir. After we had sailed three or four
leagues, we began to epsy our Pinisses which came straight toward us, and at
their ariuall they reported to the Captain, that, while the foul weather and
fogges endured, they harbored themselves in a mighty River which in bigness
and beauty exceeded the former: wherewithal the Captain was exceeding
joyful, for his chief desire was to find out an Haven to harbor his
Ships, and there to refresh our selves for a while. Thus making thitherwarde
we arrived a thwarte the said River The River of Port Royal in 32 degrees of
latitude.
(which because of the fayrenesse and largenes thereof we named Port Royal) we
struck out sails and cast Anchor at ten fathom of water: for the depth is
such, namely when the Sea begins to flow, that the greatest Ships of
France, yea, the Arguesses of Venice may enter in there. Having cast Anchor the
Captain with his Soldiers went on shore, and he himself went first on land:
where we found the place as pleasant as was possible, for it was all covered
over with mighty high Oaks and infinite store of Cedars, and with Lentisques
growing underneath them, smelling so sweetly that the very fragrant odor only
made the place to seem exceeding Turkey cocks Partridges gray and read.
pleasant. As we passed throw these woods we saw nothing but Turkeycockes
flying in the forests, Partridges gray and read, little different from ours,
but chiefly in bigness. We heard also within the Woods, the voices of
Stagges, of Bears, of Luserns, of Leopards and of diverse other sorts of Beasts
unknown unto us. Being delighted with this place we set our selves to fishing
with Fish in abundance.
net^es, and we caught such a number of fish, that it was wonderful. And
amongst other we took a certain kind of fish which we call Sallicoques, which
were no less then Creuises, so that two draughts of the net were sufficient
sometimes to feed all the company of our two Ships for a whole day. The
River at the mouth The River 3. leagues at the mouth.
thereof from Cape to Cape is no less then three french leagues broad: it is
divided into two great arms, whereof the one runs toward the West, the
other toward the North. And I believe in my judgment that the arm which
stretches toward the North runs up into the Country as far as the river
of Jordan, the other A passage by a river into the South Sea.
arm runs into the South Sea, as it was known and understood by those of
our company, which were left behind to dwell in this place. These two arms are
two great leagues broad: and in the midst of them there is an I Will, which is
poynted toward the opening of the great river, in which Island there are
infinite numbers of all sorts of strange beasts, There are Simples growing
Store of rare simples.
there of so rare proprieties, and in so great quantity, that it is an
excellent thing to behold them. On every side there is nothing to be seen but
Palmetrees and other sorts of trees bearing blossoms and fruit of very rare
shape and very good smell. But seeing the evening approach, and that the Captain
determined to return unto the ships, we prayed him to suffer us to pass the
night in this place. In our absence the Pilots and chief mariners advertised
the Captain that it was needful to bring the Ships farther vpwithin the
River, to avoid the dangers of the winds which might anoy us by reason of
our being so near to the mouth of the River: and for this cause the Captain
sent for us. Being come to our Ships we sailed three great leagues farther
up within the River, and there we cast Anchor. A little while after, John
Ribault accompanied with a good number of Ribault sayleth 12. leagues up the
river.
soldiers embarked himself desirous to sail further up into the arm that
runs toward the west, and to search the commodities of the place. Having
sailed twelve leagues at the least we perceived a troop of Indians, which as
soon as ever they espied the Pinnisles, were so afraid that they fled into
the woods, leaving behind them a young Lucerne which they were a turning upon a
spitte: for which cause the place was called Lucerne Cape: proceeding Lucerne
cape.
foorthon our way, we found an other arm of the river, which ran toward the
East, up which, the Captain determined to sail and to leave the great current.
A little while after they began to epsy diverse other Indians both men and
women half hidden within y^ woods: whoknowing not y^ we were such as desired
their friendship, were dismayed at the first, but soon after were embouldned,
for the Captain caused store of merchandise to be showed the^ openly, whereby
they knew y^ we meant nothing but well unto the^: and then they made a sign y^
we should come on land, which we would not refuse. At our coming on shore
diverse of the^ came to salute our General according to their barbarouse
fashion. Some of them gave him skins of Chamoyes.
Chamoys, others little baskets made of Palm leaves, some presented him with
perles, but no great number. Afterward they went Perles.
about to make an arbor to defend us in y^ place from the parching heat of
the sun. But we would not stay as then. Wherefore the Captayn thanked them
much for their good will, and gave presents to each of them: where with he
pleased them so well before he went thence, that his sudden departure was
nothing pleasant unto them. For knowing him to be so liberal they would have
wished him to have stayed a little longer, seking by all means, to give him
occasion to stay, showing him by signs that he should stay but that day only,
and that they desired to advertise a great Indian Lord which had perles in
great abundance, and silver also, all Store of perles and silver.
which things should be given unto him at y^ kings ariual: saying far there y^
in the mean while y^ this great Lord came thither they would lead him to their
houses, and show him there a thousand pleasures in shooting and seeing the Stag
killed, therefore they prayed him not to deny the^ their request.
Notwithstanding we returned to our ships, where after we had been but one night
the captain in the morning commanded to put into y^ Pinnisse a pillour of
hard stone fashioned like a column wherein y^ arms of the king of France were
graue^, to plant the same in the fairest place that he could find. This done
we embarked our selves and sailed three leagues toward the west: where we
discovered a little river, up which we sailed so long, that in the end we found
it returned into the great current, and in his return to make a little Island
separated from the firm land, where we went on shore: and by commandment of
the Captain, because it was exceeding fair and plea^^^^t, there we planted
the Pillour upon a hillocke open round about to the view, and A Pillour of free
stone wherein the arms of France were graven, set up in an Island in the river
of Port Royal. The River of Liborne.
environed with a lake half a fathom deep of very good and sweet water. In
which Island we saw two Stagges of exceeding bigness, in respect of those
which we had seen before, which we might easily have killed with our
harguebuses, if the Captain had not forbidden us. moved with the singular
fayrenes and bigness of them. But before our departure we named the little
River which environed this I Will the River of Liborne. Afterward we embarked our
selves to search another I Will not far distant from the former: wherein after
we had gone a land we found nothing but tall Ceders, the fairest that were seen
i^ this Country. For this cause we called it the I Will of Ceders: so we returned
The I Will of Ceders.
into our Pinnisse to go toward our Ships. A few days afterward John
Ribault determined to return once again toward the Indians which inhabited
that arm of the River which runs toward the West, and to carry with him
good store of soldiers. For his meaning was to take two Indians of this place
to bring them into France, as the Queen had commanded him. With this
deliberation again we took our former course, so far forth that at the
last we came to the selfsame place where at the first we Two Indians taken
away.
found the Indians, from thence we took two Indians by the permission of the
king, which thinking that they were more favored then the rest thought
themselves very happy to stay with us. But these two Indians seeing we made no
show at all that we would go on land, but rather that we followed the midst
of the courrant, began to be somewhat offended, and would by force have lepte
into the water, for they are so good swimmers that immediately they would have
gotten into the forrestes. Nevertheless being acquainted with their humor,
we watched them narrowly and sought by all means to appease them: which we
could not by any means do for that time, though we offered them things
which they much esteemed, which things they disdayned to take, and gave back
again whatsoever was given them, thinking that such gifts should have
altogether bound them, and that in restoring them they should be restored
unto their liberty. In fine, perceiving that all that they did auayled them
The doleful songs of the Indians.
nothing, they ^^^yed us to give them those things which they had restored,
which we did incontinent: then they approached one toward the other, and
began to singe, agreeing so sweetly together, that in hearing their song it
seemed that they lamented for the absence of their friends. They continued
their songs all night without ceassing: al which time we were constrained to
lie at anchor by reason of the tide which was against us, but we hoysed sail
the next day very early in the morning, and returned to our ships. As Soon as
we were come to our ships every one sought to gratify these two Indians, and
to show the^ the best countenance that was possible: to the intent that by
such courtesies they might perceive the good desire and affection which we had
to remain their friends in time to come. Then we offered them meat to eat,
but they refused it, and made us understand that they were accustomed to wash
their face, and to stay until the sun were set before The Indians eat not
before the sun be set.
they did eat, which is a ceremony common to all the Indians of new France.
Nevertheless in the end they were constrained to forget their superstitions,
and to apply themselves to our nature, which was somewhat strange unto them at
the first. They became therefore more ioconde, and every hour made us a
thousand discourses, being marvelous sorry that we could not understand the^.
A few days after they began to bear good will toward me, so hearty good will
I say, that, as I think, they would rather have perished with hunger and
thirst then have taken their refection at any man's hand but mine. Seeing this
their great good will, I sought to learn some Indian words, and began to ask
them questions, showing them the thing whereof I desired to know the name, how
they called it. They were very glad to tell it me, and knowing the desire that
I had to learn their language, they encouraged me afterward to ask them
every thing. So that putting down in writing the Laudonniers putting down in
writing the words and phrases of the India^s speech.
words and phrases of the Indian speech, I was able to understand the greatest
part of their discourses. Every day they did nothing but speak unto me of the
desire that they had to use me well, if we returned unto their houses, and
cause me to receive all the pleasures that they could devise, as well in
hunting as in seeing their very strange and superstitious ceremonies at a
certain feast which they The feast of Toya.
call Toya. Which feast they observe as straightly as we observe the sunday.
They gave me to understand, that they would bring me to see the greatest Lord
of this country which they called Chiquola, Chiquola or Chiquora a king of
great stature.
which exceeds them in height (as they told me) a good foot and a half.
They said unto me that he dwelt within the land in a very large place and
enclosed exceeding high, but I could not not learn wherewith. And as far as
I can judge, this place, The first proof that Chiquola should be a very fair
city.
whereof they spoke unto me, was a very fair city. For they said unto me
that within the enclosure there was great store of houses which were built
very high, wherein there was an infinite number of men like unto themselves,
which made none account of gold, of Gold, silver, and pearls in abundance.
The rich city of king Chiquola is toward the North of ^ort royal. This
history is recorded in the second and third chapters of the seventh Decade of
Pet^r Martyr.
silver, nor of pearls, seeing they had thereof in abundance. I began then to
show them all the parts of heaven, to the intent to learn in which quarter they
dwelt. And straightway one of them stretching forth his hand showed me that
they dwelt toward the North, which makes me think that it was in the river
of Jordan. And now I remember, that in the reign of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, certain Spaniardes inhabitants of Saint Domingo, (which made a voyage to
get certain slaves to work in their mines) stole away by suttletie the
inhabitants of this river, to the number of forty thinking to carry them into
their new Spain. But they lost their labor: for in despite they died all for
hunger, saving one that was brought to the Emperor, which a little while after
he caused to be baptized, and gave him his own name and called him Charles of
Chiquola, because he spoke so much of this Lord of Chiquola, whose subject he
was. Also, (as men worthy credit have assured The second proof. The third
proof.
me) he reported continually, that Chiquola made his abode within a very great
enclosed city. Besides this proof, those which were left there in the first
voyage have certified me, that the Indians showed them by evident signs, that
farther within the land on y^ foresaid part toward the North, there was a
great enclosure or City, and within the same many fair houses, wherein
Chiquola dwelt. But not to digress from my matter, I will return to the
Indian, which took so great delight in speaking to me of this Chiquola, that
there never passed any one day, wherein he did not discourse of some rare
thing concerning the same. After they had stayed a while in our ships, they
began to be sorry, and still demanded of me when they should return. I
made them understand that the Captains will was to send them home again,
but that first he would bestow apparel of them, which few days after was
delivered unto them. But seeing he would not give them license to depart, they
resolved with themselves to steal away by night, and to get a little boat
which we had, and by the help of the tide, to sail homeward toward their
dwellinges, and by this means The 2. Indians escape away.
to save themselves. Which thing they failed not to do, and put their
enterprise in execution, yet leaving behind them the apparel which the Captain
had given them, and carrying away nothing but that which was their own,
showing well hereby that they were not void of reason. The Captain cared not
greatly for their departure, considering they had not been used otherwise then
well: and that therefore they would not estrange themselves from the
Frenchmen. Captain Ribault therefore knowing the singular fairness of this
river desired by all means to encourage some of his men to dwell there, well
foreseeing that this thing might be of The benefit of planting.
great importance for the Kings service, and the relief of the common
wealth of France. Therefore proceeding on with his intent, he commanded the
ankers to be weighed and to set things in order to return unto the opening of
the river, to the end that if the wind came fair he might pass out to
accomplish the rest of his meaning. When therefore we were come to the mouth of
the river, he made them cast anchor, whereupon we stayed without discovering any
thing all the rest of the day. The next day he commanded that all the men of
his ship should come up upon the deck, saying that he had somewhat to say
unto them. They all came came up, and immediately the Caytaine began to
speak unto them in this manner. I think there is none of you that is
ignorant of how The oration of Ioh. Ribault to his company.
great consequence this our enterprise is, and also how acceptable it is to
our young king. Therefore, my friends, as one desiring your honor and
benefit, I would not fail to advertise you all of the exceeding great good
hap which should fall to them, which, as men of valor and worthy courage,
would make trial in this our first discovery of the benefits and commodities
of this new land: which should be, as I assure my self, the greatest
occasion that ever could happen unto them, to arise unto the title and degree
of honor. And for this cause I was desirous to propose unto you and set down
before your eyes the eternal memory which of right they deserve, which
forgetting both their parents and their country have had the courage to
enterprise a thing of such importance, which even kings themselves
understanding to be men aspiring to so high degree of magnanimity and increase
of their majesty's, do not disdain so well to regard, that afterward
employing them in matters of weight and of high enterprise, they make their
names immortal for ever. How beit, I would not have you persuade your selves,
as many do, that you shall never have such good fortune, as not being known,
neither to the king nor the Princes of the Realm, and besides descending of so
poor a stock, that few or none of your parents, having ever made profession of
arms, have been known unto the great estates. For albeit that from my tender
years I my self have applied al my industry to follow them, and have hazarded
my life in so many dangers for the service of my Prince, yet could I never
attain thereunto, (not that I did not deserve this title and degree of
government,) as I have seen it happen to many others, only because they
descended of a noble race, since more regard is had of their birth than of
their virtue. For well I know that if virtue were regarded, there would more
be found better to deserve the title, and by good right to be named noble and
valiant. I will therefore make sufficient answer to such propositions and
such things as you may object against me, laying before you the infinite
examples which we have of the Romans: which concerning the point of honor
were the first that triu^phed over the world. For how many find we among them,
which for their so valiant enterprises, not for the greatness of their
parentage, have obtained the honor to triumph. If we have recourse unto their
auncesters, we shall find that their parents were of so mean condition,
that by laboring with their hands they lived very basely. As the father of
Aelius Aelius Pertinax descending from base pare^tage became Emperor of Rome
Pertinax, which was a poor artisant, his Grandfather likewise was a bond man,
as the historiographers do wituesse: and nevertheless, being moved with a
valiant courage, he was nothing dismayed for all this, but rather desirous to
aspire unto high things, he began with a brave stomach to learn feats of
arms and profited so well therein, that from step to step he became at
length to be Emperor of the Romans For all this dignity he despised not his
parents: but contrariwise, and in remembrance of them, he caused his fathers
shop to be covered with a fine wrought marble, to serve for an example to
men descended of base and poor linages, and to give them occasion to aspire
unto high things, not withstanding the meannes of their auncesters. I will not
pass over in silence the excellency and prowes of the valiant and renoumed
Agathocles the son of a simple potter, and yet forgeting the co^temptible
Agathocles a potters son became king of Sicilie.
estate of his father, he so applied himself to virtue in his tender years,
that by the favor of arms he came to be king of Sicilie: and for all this
title he refused not to be counted the son of a Potter. But the more to
eternise the memory of his parents and to make his name renowned, he
commanded that he should be served at the Table in Vessels of gold and silver
and others of earth: declaring thereby, that the dignity wherein he was placed
came not unto him by his parents, but by his own virtue only. If I shall speak
of our time, I will lay before you only Rusten Bassha, which may be a
sufficient example to all men: which Rusten Bassha of an heardmans son
through his valor became the great Turks son in law.
though he were the son of a poor heardman, did so apply his youth in all
virtue, that being brought up in the service of the great Turk he seemed so to
aspire to great and high matters, in such sort that growing in years he
increased also in courage, so far forth, that in fine for his excellent
virtues he married the daughter of the great Turk his Prince. How much then
ought so many worthy examples to move you to plant here? Considering also that
hereby you shall be registered for ever as the first that inhabited this strange
country. I pray you therefore all to advise your selves thereof* and to declare
your minds freely unto me, protesting that I will so well imprint your names in
the kings ears, and the other princes, that your renown shall hereafter shine
unquenchable through our Realm of France. He had scarcely ended his Oration,
but the greatest part of our soldiers replied, that a greater pleasure could
never betide them, perceiving well the acceptable The ^^^^diers au^^^^re to
Riba^ts Orations.
service which by this mean they should do unto their prince: besides that
this thing should be for the increase of their honors: therefore they besought
the Captain before he departed out of the place to begin to build them a
Fort, which they hoped afterward to finish, and to leave them munition
necessary for their defense, showing as it seemed that they were displeased,
that it was so long* in doing, Whereupon John Ribault being as glad as might be
to see his men so well willing, determined the nextday to search the most fit
and convenient place to be inhabited. Wherefore he embarked himself very early
in the morning and commanded them to follow him that were desirous to inhabit
there, to the intent that they might like the better of the place. Having
sailed up the great river on the north side, in costing an I Will which ends
with a sharp point toward the mouth of the river, and having sailed a while,
he discovered a small river, which entered into the Island, which he would not
fail to search out. Which done, and finding the same deep enough to harbor
therein Galleys and Galliots in good number, proceeding further, he found a
very open place, joining upon the brinke thereof, where he went on land, and
seeing the place fit to build a fortress in, and commodious for them that
were willing to plant there, he resolved incontinent to cause the bigness of the
fortification to be measured out. And considering that there stayed but six
The length and breadth of the Forte, taken by Laudonnier and Captain Salles.
and twenty there, he caused the Forte to be made in length but sixteen
fathom, and thirteen in breadth, with flanks according to the proportion
thereof. The measure being taken by me and Captain Salles, we sent unto the
Ships for men, and to bring Shouels, Pickaxes and other instruments necessary
to make the fortification. We traueiled so diligently that A Fort builte in
port Roy all by Ribault.
in a short space the Fort was made in some sort defensible. In which mean
time John Ribault caused victualles and warrelike munition to be brought for
the defense of the place. After he had furnished them with all such things as
they had need of, he determined to take his leave of them. But before his
departure Rabaults speech to Captain Albert.
he used this speech unto Captain Albert, which he left in this place:
Captain Albert, I have to request you in the presence of all men, that you
would quite your self so wisely in your charge, and govern so modestly your
small company which I leave you, which with so good cheer remains under your
obedience, that I never have occasion but to commend you, and to recount unto
the king, as I am desirous, the faithful service His speech to the soldiers.
which before us all you undertake to do him in his new Frauuce: And you
companions, quoth he to the the Soldiers, I beseech you also to esteem of
Captain Albert as if it were my self that stayed here with you, yielding him
that obedience which a soldier owes unto his General and Captain, living as
brethren one with another, without all dissension: and in so doing God will
assist you and bless your enterprises. Having cnded his exhortation we took
our leaves of each of them, and sailed toward our Sippcs, calling the Forte by
the name of Charles The foresaid Fort was called Charles Fort.
Forte, and the River by the name of Chenonceau. The next day we determined to
depart from this place being as well contented as was possible that we had so
happily ended our business, with good hope, if occasion would permit, to
discover perfectely the River of Jordan. For this cause we hoysed our sails
about ten of the clock in the morning: after we were ready to depart Captain
Ribault commanded to shoot of our Ordinance to give a farewell unto our
Frenchmen, which failed not to do the like on their part. This being done we
sailed toward the North: and then we named this River Port Port Royal.
Royal, because of the largeness and excellent fayrenesse of the same. After
that we had sailed about fifteen leagues from thence we espied a River,
whereupon we sent our Piunesse thither to discover it. At their return they
brought us word that they found not past half a fathom water in the mouth
thereof. The River Base. 15. legue^ Northward of Port Royal*
Which when we understood, without doing any thing else, we continued our
way, and called it the Base or Shallowe River. As we still went on sounding,
we found not past five or six fathom water, although we were six good
leagues from the Shore: at length we found not past three fathoms, which gave
us occasion greatly to muse. And without making any farther way we stroke our
sails, partly because we wanted water, and partly because the night
approached: during which time Captain John Ribault bethought with himself,
whether it were best for him to pass any farther, because of the eminent
dangers which every hour we saw before our eyes: or whether he should
content himself with that which he had certaynely discovered, and also left
men to inhabit the Country. Being not able for that time to resolve with
himself, he referred it over until the next day. The morning being come he
proposed to all the company what was best to be done, to the end that with
good aduisement every man might deliver his opinion. Some made aunsweare, that
according to their judgment he had occasion fully to content himself,
considering that he cold do no more: laying before his eyes, that he had
discovered more in six weeks, then the Spaniardes had done in two years in
the conquestes of their new Spain: and that he should do the king very great
service, if he did bring him news in so short a time of his happy discovery.
Other showed unto him the loss and spoil of his victualles, and on the other
side the inconvenience that might happen by the shallow water that they found
continually along the cost. which things being well and at large debated, we
resolved to leave the cost, forsaking the North, to take our way toward the
East, which is the right way and course for our France, where Their ariual in
France 1561. the 20. of July.
we happily arived the twenteth day of July the year a thousand five hundred
sixty and one.

The state and condition of those which were left behind in Charles Forte.
OUr men after our departure never rested, but night and day did fortify
themselves, being in good hope that after their fort was finished, they would
begin to discover farther up within the River. It happened one day, as
certain of them were in cutting of roots in the Coppises, that they espied on
the sudden an Indian that hu^ted the Dear, which finding himself so near
upon them, was much dismayed, but our men began to draw near unto him and to
use him so courteously, that he became assured and followed them to Charles
Fort, where every man sought to do him pleasure. Captain Albert was very
joyful of his coming, which after he had given him a shert and some other
trifles, he asked him of his dwelliug: the Indian answered him that it was
farther up within King Audusta.
the River, and that he was vassel of king Audusta: he also showed him with his
hand the limits of his habitation. After much other talk the Indian desired
leave to depart, because it drew toward night, which Captain Albert granted
him very willingly. Certain days after the Captain determined to sail
toward Audusta, where being arrived, by reason of the honest intertaynment Note.
which he had given to the Indian, he was so courteously received, that the
king talked with him of nothing else, but of the desire which he had to become
his friend: giving him besides to understand that he being his friend and
allie, he should have the amity of four other kings, which in might and
authority were able to do much for his sake: Besides all this, in his
necessity they might be able to succor him with victualles: One of these
kings was called Mayon, another Hoya, the third Touppa, and the fourth Mayon.
Hoya. Touppa. Stalame.
Stalame. He told him moreover, that they would be very glad, when they
should understand the news of his coming, and therefore he prayed him to
vouchsafe to visit them. The Captain willingly consented unto him for the
desire that he had to purchase friends in that place. Therefore they departed
the next day very early in the morning, and first arrived at the house of king
Touppa, and afterward went unto the other kings houses, except the house of
king Stalame. He received of each of them all the amiable courtesies that might
be: they showed themselves to be as affectioned friends unto him as was
possible, and offered unto him a thousand small presents. After that he had
remained by the space of certain days with these strange kings, he
determined to take his leave, and being come back to the house of Audusta, he
commanded al his men to go abord of their Pinnesse: for he was minded to go
toward the countries of king Stalame, which dwelt The Country of king Stalame
15. leagues Northward of Charles Fort.
toward the North the distance of fifteen great leagues from Charles Fort.
Therefore as they sailed up the river they entered into a great Courrant, which
they followed so far till they came at the last to the house of Stalame: which
brought him into his lodging, where he sought to make them the best cheer he
cold devise. He presented immediately unto Captain Albert his bow and
arrows, which is a sign and confirmation of aliance between Chamoys skins.
them. He presented him also with Chamoys skins. The Captain seeing the best
part of the day was now past took his leave of king Stalame to return to
Charles Fort, where he arrived the day following. By this time the friendship
was grown so great between our men and king Audusta, that in a manner all
things were commen between him and them: in such sort that this good Indian
king did nothing of importance, but he called our men thereunto. For when the
time drew near of the celebrating their feasts of Toya, which are ceremonies
most strange to recite, he sent The feast of Toya largely described.
Ambassadors unto our men to request them on his behalf to be there
present. Whereunto they agreed most willingly for the desire that they had to
understand what this might be. They embarked themselves therefore and sailed
toward the kings house, which was already come forth on the way toward them
to receive them courteously, to bid them welcome and bring them to his house,
where he sought to entreat them the best he might. In the mean while the
Indians prepared themselves to celebrate the feast the morrow after, and the
king brought them to see the place, wherein the feast should be kept: where they
saw many women round about which labored by all means to make the place
clean and neat. This place was a great circuit of ground with open prospecte
and round in figure. On the morrow therefore early in the morning, all they
which were chosen to celebrate the feast, being painted and trimmed with rich
feathers of diverse colors, The Indians trimming of themselves with rich feathers
put themselves on the way to go from the kings house toward the place of
Toya: whereunto when they were come they set themselves in order, and
followed three Indians, which in painting and in gesture were differing from
the rest: each of them bare a Tabret in their hand, daunsing and singing in a
lameutable tune when they began to enter into the midst of the round
circuit, being followed of others which answered them again. After that they
had song, daunsed, and turned three times, they fell on running like unbridled
horses, through the midst of the thickest woods. And then the Indian women
continued all the rest of the day in tears as sad and woeful as was possible:
and in such a rage they cut the arms of the young gerles, which they lanced
crutlly with sharp shelles of muskels, that the blood followed, which they
flang into the air, crying out three times, He Toya. The king Audusta had
gathered all our men into his house, while the feast was celebrated, and was
exceedingly offended when he saw them laugh. This he did because the Indians
are very angry when they are seen in their ceremonies. Notwithstanding one of
our men made such shifte that by subtle means he gatte out of the house of
Audusta, and secretly went and hid himself behind a very thick bush, where
at his pleasure, he might easily discry the ceremonies of the feast. They three
that began the feast are named Iawas: and they are as it were three Priests of
the Indian law: to whom they give credit and belief, partly because Iawas
are their Priests.
that by kindred they are ordained to be over their Sacrifices, and partly
also because they be so subtle Magicians that any Maigicians.
thing* that is lost is straightway recovered by their means. Again they are
not only reuereuced for these things, but also because Physicians.
they heal diseases by I wotte not what kind of knoweledge and skill they
have. Those that ran so through the woods returned two days after: after their
return they began to dance with a cheerful courage in the midst of the
fair place, and to cheer up their good old Indian fathers, which either by
reason of their too great age, or by reason of their natural indisposition and
feebleness were not called unto the feast. When all these daunces were ended,
they fell on eating with such a greediness, that they seemed rather to devour
their meat then to eat it, for they had neither eaten nor drunk the day of
the feast nor the two days following. Our men were not forgotten at this good
cheer, for the Indians sent for them all thither, showing themselves very
glad of their presence. While they remained certain time with the Indians a
man of ours got a young boy for certain trifles, and enquired of him what the
Indians Inuocations of the Iawas or Pristes unto Toya.
did in the wood during their absence: which boy made him understand by signs
that the Iawas had made inuocations to Toya, and that by Magical Characters
they had made him come that they might speak with him and demand diverse
strange things of him, which for fear of the Iawas he durst not utter. They
have also many other ceremonies, which I will not here rehearse for fear of
molesting the reader with a matter of so small importance. When the feast
therefore was finished our men returned unto Charles Forte: where having
remained but a Their victuals fail them.
while their victualles began to wax short, which forced them to have
recourse unto their neighbors, and to pray them to succor the^ in that their
necessity: which gave them part of all the victuals which they had and kept no
more unto them selves then would The Indians manner of living in the Winter
time of Mast and roots. King Couexis mighty and reuowmed.
serve to sow their fields. They told them farther that for this cause it
was needful for them to retire themselves into the woods, to live of Mast
and roots until the time of Harvest, being as sorry as might be that they
were not able any farther to aid them. They gave them also counsel to go
toward the countries of king Couexis a man of might and renown in this
preuince, which makes his abode toward the South abounding at all seasons and
replenished with such quantitic of mill, corn, and beans that by his only
succor they might be able to live a very long King Ouade.
time. But before they should come into his territories, they were to repair
unto a king called Ouade the brother of Couexis, which in Mill, Beans, and
corn was no less welthy, and withal is very liberal, and which would be
very joyful if he might but once see them. Our men perceauing the good
relation which the Indians made them of those two kings resolved to go
thither; for they felt already the necessity which oppressed them. Therefore
they made request unto king Maccou, that it would please him to give them one
of his subjects to guide them the right way thither: King Maccou.
whereunto he condiscended very willingly, knowing that without his favor they
should have much ado to bring their enterprise to pass. Wherefore after they
had given order for all things necessary for the voyage, they put themselves
to Sea, and sailed so far that in the end they came into the country of
Ouade, which they found to be in the River Belle. Being Ouades country in
the river Belle.
there arrived they perceived a company of Indians which as soon as they knew of
their being there came before them. As Soon as they were come near them, their
guides showed them by signs that Ouade was in this company, wherefore our men
set forward to salute him. And then two of his sons which were with him,
being goodly and strong men saluted them again in very good sort, and used
very friendly intertainment on their part. The king immediately beganue to
make an Oration in his Indian language of the great pleasure and contentment
which he had to see them in that place, protesting that he would become so
loyal a friend of theirs hereafter, that he would be their faithful
defendour against all them that would offer to be their enemies. After these
speeches he led them toward his house, where he sought to entreat them
very courteously. His house was hanged about with Tapistrie of feathers of
diverse Tapistrie of feathers. White couerlets edged with red fringe.
colors the height of a pike. Moreover the place where the king took his
rest was covered with white Couerlettes embroydered with devises of very
witty and fine workemanshippe, and fringed round about with a Fringe dyed in
the color of Skarlate. They advertised the king by one of the guides which
they brought with them, how that (having heard of his great liberality) they
had put to the Sea to come to beseech him to succor them with victuals in
their great want and necessity: and that in so doing, he should bind them all
hereafter to remain his faithful friends and loyal defenders against all
his enemies. This good Indian as soon ready to do them pleasure, as they were
to demand it, commanded his subjects that they should fill our Pinnesse with
mil and beans. Afterward The liberality of king Ouade
he caused them to bring him six pieces of his tapistry made like little
couerlets, and gave them to our men with so liberal a mind, as they easily
perceived the desire which he had to become their friend. In recompense of all
these gifts our men gave him two cutting hooks and certain other trisses,
wherewith he held himself greatly satisfied. This being done, our men took
their leave of the king, which for their farewell, said nothing else but that
they should return if they wanted victuals, and that they might assure
themselves of him, that they should never want any thing that was in his power.
Wherefore they embarked themselves, and sailed toward. Charlesfort, which from
this place might be some five and Ouades country 25. leagues Southward from
Charlesfort.
twenty leagues distant. But as our men thought themselves at their ease, and
free from the dangers whereinto they had exposed themselves night and day in
gathering together of victuals here and there: Lo, even as they were asleep,
the fire caught in their lodgings with such fury, being increased by the wind,
that the great room The fort set on fire by casualtie.
that was built for them before our men's departure, was consumed in an instant,
without being able to save any thing saving a very little of their munition.
Whereupon our men being far from all succors, found themselves in such
extremity, that without the aid of almighty God, the only searcher of the
hearts and thoughts of men, which never forsakes those that seek him in
their afflictions, they had been quite and clean out of all hope. For the next
day betimes in the morning the king Audusta and king Maccou came thither,
accompanied with a very good company of Indians, which knowing the misfortune,
were very* sorry for it. And then they uttered unto their subjects the speedy
diligence which they were to use in building another house, showing unto them
that the Frenchmen were their loving friends, and that they had made it
evident unto them by the gifts and presents which they had received:
protesting that whosoever put not his helping h^d unto the work withal his
might, should be esteemed as unprofitable, and as one that had no good part
in him, which the Savages fear above all things. This was the occasion that
every man began to endeavor himself in such sort, that in less than
twelve hours, they had begun and The fort reedified* by the Savages in the
space of 12* hours.
finished a house which was very near as great as the former. Which being
ended, they returned home fully contented with a few cutting hooks, and
hatc^ets which they received of our men. Within a small while after this
mischance, their victuals began to wax short: and after our men had taken good
deliberation, thought and bethought them selves again, they found that there
was no better way for them then to return again unto King Ouade and Couexis
his brother. Wherefore they resolved to send thither some of their company the
next day following: which with an Indian Canoa sailed up into the country
about ten leagues: afterward they found a very fair and great river of
fresh water, which they failed not to search out: they found therein a great
number of Crocodils, which in greatness pass those of the Crocodiles.
river Nilus: moreover, all along the banks thereof, there grow mighty high
Cypresses. After they had stayed a small while in this Cypresses.
place, they purposed to follow their journey, helping themselves so well with
the tides, that without putting themselves in danger of the continual peril
of the Sea, they came into the Country of Ouade, of whom they were most
courteously received. Their second journey to the country of Ouade.
They advertised him of the occasion, wherefore they came again to visit him,
and told him of the mischance, which happened unto them since their last
voyage: how they had not only lost their household stuff by casualtie of
fire, but also their victuals which he had given them so bountifully: that for
this cause they were so bold as to come once again unto him, to beseech him
to vouchsafe to succor them in such need and necessity. After that the king
had understood their case, he sent messengers unto his brother Couexis, to
request him upon his behalf to send him some of his mill and beans: which
thing he did: and the next day early in the morning, they were come again with
victualles, which the king caused to be borne into their Canoa. Our men would
have taken their leave of him finding themselves more than satisfied with this
liberality. But for that day he would not suffer them, but retained them, and
sought to make them the best cheer he could devise. The next day very early
in the morning, he took them with him to show them the place where his corn
grew, and said unto them that they should not want as long as all that mill
did last. Afterward he gave them a certain number of exceeding fair pearls,
and two stones of fine Exceeding fair pearls fine Crystal, silver oar. The
place where crystal grows in very good quantity ten days journey from the
river Belle. Note.
Crystal, and certain silver oar. Our men forgot not to give him certain
trifles in recompense of these presents, and inquired of him the place whence
the silver ^are and the crystal came. He made them aunsweare, that it came
ten great days journey from his habitation up within the country: and that
the Inhabitauntes of the Country did dig the same at the foot of certain
high mountains, where they found of it in very good quantity. Being joyful
to understand so good news, and to have come to the knowledge of that which
they most desired, they took their leave of the king, and returned by the same
way, by which they came. Behold therefore how our men behaved themselves very
well hitherto, although they had endured many great mishaps. But misfortune or
rather the just judgment of God would have it, that those which could not be
overcome by fire nor water, should be undone by their own selves. This is the
common fashion of me^, which cannot continue in one estate, and had rather to
overthrow themselves, than not to attempt some new thing daily. We have
infinite examples in the ancient histories, especially of the Romans unto
which number, this little handful of men, being far from their country, and
absent from their countriemen, have also added this present example. They
entered therefore into partialities and dissentions which began about a soldier
named Guernache, which was a dru^mer Mutinye against the captain, and the
causes thereof.
of the Frenchbands: which, as it was told me, was very cruelly handged by his
own Captain, and for a small fault: which Captain also using to threaten the
rest of his soldiers which stayed behind under his obedience, and
peradventure, as it is to be presumed, were not so obedient unto him as they
should have bin, was the cause that they fell into a mutiny, because that many
times he put his threatenings in execution: whereupon they so chased him, that
at the last they put him to death. And the principal occasion that moved them
thereunto, was because he degraded another soldier named La chere, (which he
had banished) and because he had not performed his promise: for he had promised
to send him victuals from eight days to eight days, which thing he did not,
but said on the contrary, that he would be glad to hear of his death. He
said moreover that he would chastise others also, and used so evil sounding
speeches, that honesty forbids me to repeat them. The soldiers seeing his
madness to increase from day to day, and fearing to fall Captain Albert slain
by his own soldiers.
into the dangers of the other, resolved to kill him. Having executed their
purpose, they went to seek the Soldier that was banished, which was in a
small Island distant from Charlesfort about three leagues, where they found him
almost half dead for hunger. When they were come home again, they assembled
themselves together to choose one to be governor over them, whose name was
Nicolas Nicolas Bar chosen Captain.
Bar, a man worthy of commendation, and one which knew so well to quite
himself of his charge, that all rancour and dissension ceased among them, and
they lived peaceably one with another, During this time, they began to build
a small Pinnesse, with hope to return into France, if no succors came unto
them as they expected from day to day. And though there were not a man among
them that had any skill, notwithstanding necessity, which is the maistresse of
all sciences, taught them the ways to build it. After A new Briga^tine built
in Florida.
that it was finished, they thought of nothing else saving how to furnish it
with all things necessary to undertake the voyage. But they wanted those
things that of all other were most needful, as cordage and sails, without
which the enterprise could not come to effect. Having no means to recover
these things, they were in worse case then at the first, and almost ready to
fall into despair. But that good God, which never forsakes the afflicted, did
succor them in this necessity. As they were in these perplerities, king
Audusta and Maccou came to them, accompanied with two hundred Indians at the
least, whom our Frenchmen went forth to meet withal, and showed the king in
what neeede of cordage they stood, who promised them to return within two
days, and to bring so much as should suffice to furnish the Pinnesse with
tackling. Our men being pleased with these good news and promises bestowed
upon them certain cutting hooks and shirtes. After their departure our men
sought all means to recover rosen in the woods, wherein they cut the Pine
trees round about, out of which they drew sufficirut reasonable quantity to
bray the vessel. Also they gathered Rosen to bray ships. Moss to calke ships.
a kind of moss which grows on the trees of this country, to serve to calke
the same withal. There now wanted nothing but sails, which they made of their
own shirtes and of their sheets. Within few days after, the Indian kings
returned to Charlesfort Cordage for tackle.
with so good store of cordage, that there was found sufficient for tackling of
the small Pinnesse. Our men as glad as might be, used great liberality toward
them, and at their leaving of the country, left them all their merchandise
that remained, leaving them thereby so fully satisfied that they departed from
them with all the contentation of the world. They went forward therefore to
finishe the Brigandine, and used so speedy diligence, that within a short
time afterward they made it ready furnished with all things. In the mean
season the wind came so fit for their purpose that it seemed to inuit them to
put to ehe Sea: which they did without delay after they had set all their
things in order. But before they departed they embarked their artillarie,
their forge, and other munitions of war which Captain Ribault had left them,
and then as much mill as they could gather together. But being drunken with
the too excessive joy, which they had conceived for their returning into
France, or rather deprived of all foresight and consideration, without
regarding the inconstancy of the winds, which They put to the sea without
sufficient victuals.
change in a moment, they put themselves to sea, and with so slender
victualles, that the end of their enterprise became unlucky and unfortunate.
For after they had sailed the third part of their way, they were surprised
with calmes which did so much hinder them, that in three weeks they sailed not
above five and twenty leagues. During this time their victuals consumed, and
became so short, that every man was constrained to eat not past twelve grains
of mill by the day, which may be in value as much as twelve peason. Yea Their
victuals utterly consumed.
and this felicity lasted not long: for their victuals failed them altogether
at once: and they had nothing for their more assured refuge but their shoes and
leather ierkins which they did eat. Touching their beuerage, some of them
drank the Sea water, others did They drink their urine for want of fresh
water.
drink their own urine: and they remained in such desperate necessity a very
long space, during the which, part of them died for hunger: besides this
extreme famine, which did so grievously oppress them, they fell every minute
of an hour out of all hope ever to see France again, in so much that they
were constrained to cast the water continually out that on all sides entered
into their Bark. And every day they fared worse and worse: for after they had
eaten up their sho^es and their letherne Ierkins, there arose so boisterous a
wind and so contrary to their course, that in the turning of a hand the waves
filled their vessel half full of water and bruised it upon the one side. Being
now more out of hope then ever to escape out of so extreme peril they cared
not for casting out of the water which now was almost ready to drown them.
And as men resolved to die, every one fell down backward, and gave themselves
over altogether unto the will of the waves. When as one of them a little having
taken heart unto him declared unto them how little way they had to sail,
assuring them that, if the wind held, they should see land within three days.
This man did so encourage them, that after they had thrown the water out of
the Pinnesse they remained three days without eating or drinking, except it
were of the Sea water. When the time of his promise was expired they were more
troubled then they were before, seeing they could not discry any land.
Wherefore in this extreme despair certain among them made this motion, that
it was better that one man only should dye, then that so many men should
perish: they agreed therefore that one should dye to sustain the others. Which
thing was executed in the person of La Chere, Extreme famine.
of whom we have spoken heretofore, whose flesh was divided equally amongst
his fellows: a thing so pitiful to recite, that my pen is loath to write it.
After so long time and tedious travels God of his goodness using his
accustomed favor changed their sorrow into joy, and showed unto them the sight
of land. Whereof they were so exceeding glad y^ the pleasure caused the^ to
remain a long time as men without sense: whereby they let the Pinnesse flote
this and that way without holding any right way or course. But a small The
French succored by an English Bark.
English bark boarded y^ vessel, in which there was a Frenchman which had been
in the first voyage into Florida, who easily knew them, and spoke unto them,
and afterward gave them meat and drink. Incontinently they recovered their
natural courages, and declared unto him at large al their navigations. The
English men consulted a long while what were best to be done: and in fine they
resolved to put on land those that were most feeble, and to carry the rest unto
the Queen of England, which purposed at that time to send into It seems he
means the ^ voyage intended by Stukley
Florida. Thus you see in brief that which happened unto them which Captain
John Ribault had left in Florida* And now will I go forward with the
discourse of mine own voyage.

The end of the first voyage of John Ribault into Florida.
The second voyage unto Florida, made and written by Captain Laudonniere,
which fortified and inhabited there two Summers and one whole VVinter.
AFter our arrival at Diepe, at our coming home, from our first voyage (which
was the twentieth of July a thousand five hundred sixty and one) we The civil
wars the cause why the Frenchmen were not supplied, which were left behind in
their first voyage.
found the civil wars begun, which was in part the cause why our men were
not succored, as Captain John Ribault had promised them: whereof it followed
that Captain Albert was killed by his soldiers, and the country aba^doned,
as heretofore we have sufficiently discoursed, and as it may more at large be
understood by those men which were there in person. After the peace was made in
France, my Lord Admiral de Chastillon, showed unto the king, that he heard no
news at all of y^ men which Captain John Ribault had left in Florida, and
that it were pity to suffer them to perish. In which respect the king was
content he should cause three ships to be furnished, y^ one of six score tuns,
the other of a 100. and the third of 60. to seek them out, and to succor
them. My Lord Admiral therefore, being well informed of the faithful service
which I had done, as well unto his majesty as to his predecessors kings of
France, advertised the king how able I was to do him service in this voyage,
which was the cause that he made me chief captain over these 3* ships, and
charged me to depart with diligence to perform his commandment, which for mine
own part I would not gainsay, but rather thinking my self happy to have been
chose^ out among such an infinite number of others, which in my judgment
Laudonniers second voyage to Florida with 3. ships the 22. of April 1564.
were very well able to have quited themselves in this charge, I embarked my
self at new haue^ the 22. of April 1564. and sailed so, y^ we fell near unto
the coast of England: And then I turned toward the South, to sail directly to
the fortunate Islands, at this present called the Canaries, one of which called
the I Will Savage (because as I think it is altogether without inhabitants) was
the first that The I Will of Teneriffe or the Pike.
our ships passed. Sailing therefore on forward, we landed the next day in
the Isle of Teneriffe, otherwise called the Pike, because that in the midst
thereof there is an exceeding high mountain, near as high as that of Etna,
which rises up right like a pike, into the top whereof no man can go up but
from the midst of May until the midst of August, by reason of the over
great cold which is there all the rest of the year: which is a wonderful
strange thing, considering that it is not past seven and twenty degrees and a
half distaunt from the Equator. We saw it all covered over with snow,
although it were then but the fifte of May. The inhabitants in this Isle being
heretofore pursued by the Spaniardes, retired themselves into this mountain,
where for a space they made war with them, and would not submit themselves
unto their obedience, neither by foul nor fair means, they disdayned so much
y^ loss of their Island. For those which went thither on the Spaniards behalf,
left their carkases there, so that not so much as one of them returned home to
bring news. Notwithstanding in the end, the inhabitants, not able to live in
that place according to their nature, or for want of such things, as were
necessary for the commodity of their liuelihoode, did all die there. After I
had furnished my self with some fresh water, very good and excellent, which
sprang out of a rock at the fo^t of this mountain, I continued my course
toward the West, wherein the winds favored me so well, that fifteen days
after our ships arrived safe and sound at the Antilles: and going on land at
the Isle of Martinica one of the first of them, the next day we arrived The
Isle of Martinica. Dominica an Island.
at Dominica, twelve leagues distant from the former. Dominica is one of the
fairest Islands of the West, full of hills, and of very good smell. Whose
singularities desiring to know as we passed by, and seeking also to refresh our
selves with fresh water I made y^ mariners cast anchor, after we had sailed about
half along y^ cost thereof. As soon as we had cast Anchor, two Indians
inhabitants of that place sailed toward us in two Canoaes full of a fruit of
great excellency which they call Ananas. As they approached unto our Ananas a
fruit of great excellency.
bark, there was one of them which being in some misdoubt of us, went back
again on land, and fled his way with as much speed as he could possibly.
Which our men perceived, and entered with diligence into the other Canoa,
wherein they caught the poor Indian and brought him unto me. But the poor
fellow became so astonished in beholding us, that he knew not which way to behave
himself, because that (as afterward I understood) he feared that he was
fallen into the Spaniard hands, of whom he had been taken once before, and
which, as he showed us, had cut of his stones. At length this poor Indian was
assured of us, and discoursed unto us of many things, whereof we received very
small pleasure, because we vnderderstood not his mind but by his signs. The^ he
desired me to give him leave to depart, and promised me y^ he would bring me a
thousand presents, whereunto I agreed on condition that he would have patience
until the next day when I purposed to go on land, where I suffered him to
depart after I had given him a shirte, and certain small trifles, wherewith he
departed very well content with us. The place where we went on shore was hard
by a very hie Rock out of which there ran a little river of sweet and excellent
good water: by which river we stayed certain days to discover the things
which were worthy to be seen, and traficked daily with the Indians: which
above all things besought us that none of our men should come near their
lodgings nor their Gardens, otherwise that we should give them great cause of
ielosie, and that in so doing we should not want of their fruit which they
call Ananas, whereof they offered us very liberally, receiving in recompense
certain things of small value. This notwithstanding it happened on a day that
certain of my men, desirous to see some new things in these strange countries,
walked through the woods: and following still the little rivers side, they
espied two Serpents of exceeding bigness, which went side by side ouerthwarte
the way my soldiers went before them, thinking to let them from going into the
woods: but the serpents nothing at all astonished with these gestures glaunced
into the bushes with fearful hissings, for all which my men drew their
swords and killed them, and found them afterward nine great foot long, and as
big as a man's leg. During this combat, certain others more indiscreet
went and gathered their Ananas in the Indians Gardens, trampling through them
without any discretion: and not therewithal contented they went toward their
dwellings, whereat the Indians were so much offended, that without regarding
any thing they rushed upon them and discharged their shot so that they hit one
of my men named Martin Chaueau, which remained behind. We could not know
whether he were killed on the place, or whether he were taken prisoner: for
those of his company had enough to do to save themselves without thinking of
their companion. Whereof Monsur de Ottigni my Lieuetenant being advertised,
sent unto me to know whether I thought good that he should lay an ambush for the
Indians which had either taken or killed our man, or whether he should go
directly to their dwellinges to know the truth. I sent unto him, after good
delebration hereupon, that he should not attempt any thing and that for diverse
occasions: but contrariwise that he should embarke himself with all diligence,
and consequently all they that were on land: which he did with speed. But as
he sailed toward our ships he perceived a long the shore a great number of
Indians which began to charge them with their Arrows: he for his part
discharged store of shot against them, yet was not able to hurt them, or by
any means to surprise them: for which cause he quite forsook them, and came
unto our ship. Where staying until the next day morning we set sail
following our wonted course, and keeping the same, we discovered diverse Isles
conquered by the Spaniards, as the Isles of S. Christopher, and of ye Saints,
of Monserrada, and la Rotonda: Afterward we passed between Languilla aad la
Negada, sailing toward New France, His ariuall in Florida the 22 of June 1564.
where we arrived fifteen days afterward, to wit on a Thurseday the two and
twenteth of June about three or four of the clock in the morning, and landed
near unto a little River which is thirty degrees distant from the Equator,
and ten leagues above Cape Cape Francois being between the river of Dolphins
and the river of May makes the distance thirty leagues about, which is but ten
leagues over land.
Francois drawing toward the South, and about thirty leagues above the River
of May. After we had strooken sail and cast Anchor a thwart the River, I
determined to go on shore to discover y^ same. Therefore beiug accompanied
with Monsur de Ottigny, with Monsur de Arlac mine Ensign, and a certain
number of Gentlemen and soldiers I embarked my self about three or four of
the clock in the evening. And being arrived at the mouth of the River I caused
the Channel to be sounded, which was found to be very shallow, although that
farther within the same y^ water was there found reasonable deep, which
separateth it self into two great arms, whereof one runs toward the South
and the other toward the North. Having thus searched the River I went on land
to speak with the Indians which waited for us upon the shore which at our
coming on land, came before us, crying with a loud voice in their Indian
language, Antipola, Bonassou, which is as much to say, as, brother, friend, or
some such like thing. After they had made very much of us, they showed us their
Paracoussy, that is to say, their king and governor, to whom I presented
certain toys wherewith he was well pleased. And for mine own part I praise God
continually, for the great love which I have found in The great love and
courtesy of the Floridians*
these Savages, which were sorry for nothing, but that the night approached, and
made us retire unto our ships. For though they endeavored by all means to
make us tarry with them, and that they showed by signs the desire they had to
present us with some rare things, yet nevertheless for many just and
reasonable occasions I would not stay on shore all night: but excusing my self
for all their offers, I embarked my self again and returned toward my ships,
Howbeit, before my departure, I named this river, the river of The river of
Dolphins, called Seloy by the Savages* June 23.
Dolphines, because that at mine arrival, I saw there a great number of
dolphines which were playing in the mouth thereof. The next day the three and
twentieth of this month (because that toward the South I had not found any
commodious place for us to inhabit, and to build a fort) I gave commandment
to weigh anchor, Their arrival at the river of May, the 22* of June.
and to hoyse our sails to sail toward the river of May, where we arrived
two days after, and cast anchor, afterward going on land, with some number of
Gentlemen and Soldiers to know for a certainty the singularities of this
place, we espied the Paracoussy of the country, which came toward us (this
was y^ very same y we saw in the voyage of Captain Iohu Ribault) which having
espied us, cried very far of, Antipola, Antipola, and being so joyful that he
could not contain himself, he came to meet us accompanied then with two of
his sons, as fair and mighty persons as might be found in all the world,
which had nothing in their mouths but this word, Amy, Amy: that is to say,
friend, friend: yea and knowing those which were there in the first voyage,
they went principally to them to use this speech unto them. There was in their
train a great number of men and women, which still made very much of us, and
by evident signs made us to understand how glad they were of our ariual. This
good entertainment past, ye Paracoussy prayed me to go to see the pillar which
we had erected in the voyage of John Ribault (as we have declared heretofore)
as a thing which they made great account of. Having yielded unto him and being
come to the place where it was set up we found the same crowned with crowns of
Bay, and at the foot thereof many The pillar set up before by Ribault crowned
with garlands of Laurel and environed with small paniers full of corn
worshipped by the savages. Paracoussy Satourioua.
little baskets full of Myl which they call in their language Tapaga Tapola. Then
when they came thither they kissed the same with great reverence and besought us
to do the like, which we would not deny the^, to ye end we might draw them to
be more in friendship with us. This done ye Paracoussy took me by the hand, as
if he had desire to make me understand some great secret, and by signs showed
me very well up within the river the limits of his dominion, and said that he
was called Paracussy Satorioua, which is as much as king Satourioua. His
children have the self same title of Paracoussy* The eldest is named Athore, a
man, I dare say, perfect in beauty, wisdom, and honest sobriety, showing by
his modest gravity that he deserves the name which he bears besides that he
is gentle and tractable. After we we had soiourned a certain space with them,
the Paracoussy prayed one of his sons to present unto me a wedge of A Wedge
of silver.
silver, which he did and that with a good will: in recompense whereof I gave
him a cutting hook and some other better present: wherewith he seemed to be
very well pleased. Afterward we took our leave of them, because the night
approached, and then returned to lodge in our ships. Being allured with this
good entertainment I failed not the next day to embarke my self again with my
Lieuetenaunt Ottigni and a number of soldiers to return toward the Paracoussy
of the River of May, which of purpose waited for us in the same place, where
the day before we conferred with him. We found him under the shadow of an
Arbor accompanied with fourscore Indians at the least, and apparelled at that
time after the Indian fashion, to wit, with a great Hearts skin dressed like
Chamoys and painted with devises of strange and diverse colors, but of so lively
a portrature and representing antiquity with rules so justly compassed, that
there is no painter so exquisite that could find fault therewith: the natural
disposition of this strange people is so perfect and well guided, that without
any aid and favor of arts, they are able by the help of nature only to
content the eye of artizans, yea even of those which by their industry are
able to aspire unto things most absolute. Then I advertised Paracoussy
Satourioua, that my desire was to discover farther up into the river, but that
this should be with such diligence that I would come again unto him very
speedily: wherewith he was content, promising to stay for me in the place where
he was: and for an earnest of his promise, he offered me his goodly skin,
which I refused then, and promised to receive it of him at my return. For my
part I gave him certain small trifles, to the intent, to retain him in our
friendship. Departing from thence, I had not sailed three leagues up the river,
still being followed by ye Indians, which costed me along the river, crying
still, Amy, Amy, that is to say, friend, friend: but I discovered an hill of
mean height, near which I went on land, hard by the fields that were sowed
with mil, at one corner whereof there was an house builte for their lodging,
which keep and guard the mill: for there are such numbers of Cornishe Grosle^.
thoughts in this country, which continually devour and spoil the mill, that
the Indians are constrained to keep and watch it, otherwise they should be
deceived of their harvest. I rested my self in this place for certain hours,
and commanded Monsur De* Otignie and Monsur de Ottigni.
my sergeant to enter into the woods to search out the dwellings of the
Indians: where, after they had gone a while, they came unto a Marish of Reeds,
where finding their way to be stopped, they rested under the shadow of a migtie
Bay tree to refresh themselves a little, and to resolve which way to take. Then
they discovered, as it were on the sudden, five Indians half hidden in the
woods, which seemed somewhat to distrust our men, until they said unto them in
y^ Indian language Antipola Bonassou, to the end that understanding their
speech, they might come unto us more boldly, which they did incontinently, But
because they saw, that the four that went last bare up the train of the skin
wherewith he that went foremost was apparelled, our men imagined that the
foremost must needs be some man of greater quality then the rest, seeing that
withal they called him Paracoussy, Paracoussy, wherefore some of our company
went toward him, and using him courteously showed him Monsur De Ottigny
their lieuetena^t, for whom they had made an arbor with Bay and Palm boughs
after y^ India^ fashion, to ye end y^ by such signs y^ savages might think yt
the Frenchmen had co^panied The courtesy of the Floridians to the French.
with such as they at other times. The India^ Paracoussy drew near to y^ French,
and began to make him a long oration, which tended to no other end, but y^ he
besought y^ Frenchmen very earnestly to come and see his dwelling and his
parents, which they granted him, and straight for pledge of better amity, he
gave unto lieuetenant Ottigni, the very skin, that he was clad withal. Then
he took him by the hand, leading him right toward the marshes, over which
the Paracoussy, Monsieur Ottigni, and certain other of our men were borne upon
the Indians shoulders: and the rest which could not pass because of the mire
and reeds, went through the woods, and followed still a narrow path which led
them forth until they came unto the Paracoussyes dwelling: out of which there
came about fifty Indians to receive our men gallantly, and to feast them after
their manner. After which they brought at their entrance a great vessel of
earth, made after a strange fashion full of fountain water clear and very
excellent. This vessel was borne by an Indian, and there was another younger
which bare of this water in another little vessel of wood, and presented
thereof to every one to drink, observing in doing the same, a certain order
and reverence, which he made to each of them, to whom he gave drink. Our
thirst well quenched by this mean, and our men being sufficiently refreshed,
the Paracoussy brought them to his fathers lodging, one of the oldest men that
lived on the earth. Our men regarding his age, began to make much of him, using
this speech, Amy, Amy, that is to say, friend, friend, whereat y^ old fire
showed himself very glad. Afterward they questioned with him concerning the
course of his age, whereunto he made answer, showing y^ he was the first
living original, from whence 5. generations were descended, as he showed unto
the^ by another old man that sat directly over against him, which far exceeded
him in age. And this man was his father, which seemed to be rather a dead
carcass then a living body. For he had his sinews, his veins his artiers, his
bones, and other parts, appearing so clearly through his skin, that a man might
easily tell the^, and discern them one from another. Also his age was so great,
that y^ good man had lost his sight, and could not speak one only word but with
exceeding great pain. Monsieur de Ottigni having seen so strange a thing,
turned to the you^ger of these 2. old men, praying him to vouchsafe to answer
him to that which he demanded touching his age. Then the old man called a
company of Indians, and striking twice upon his thigh, and laying his hand
upon two of them, he showed him by signs, that these two were his sons: again
smiting upon their thighs, he showed him of others not so old, which were yt
children of the 2. first, which he continued in the same manner until the fifte
generation. But though this old man had his father alive more old than
himself, and that both of them did wear their hair very long and as white as
was possible: yet it was told them, that they might yet live thirty or forty
years more by the course of nature: although the younger of them both was not
less then two hundred and fifty years old. After Savages in Florida of 250.
years old. Eagles in Florida.
he had ended his communication, he commanded two young Egles to be given to
our men, which he had bred up for his pleasure, in his house. He caused also
little Paniers made of Palm leaves full of gourds red and blew to be delivered
unto them. For recompense of which presents he was satisfied with French toys.
The two old men caused our men to be guided back again to the place from
whence they came, by the young Parracoussy which had brought them thither. And
having taken leave of the Paracoussy they came and sought me out in the place
where I stayed, and rehearsed unto me all that they had seen, praying me also
that I would reward their guide, which so frankly and heartily had received
them into his house, which I would not fail to do by any means. Now was I
determined to search out the qualities of the Hill. Therefore I went right to
the top thereof, where we found nothing Ceders, Palms, bays exceeding sweet.
else but Cedars, Palm, and Baytrees of so sovereign odor, y^ Baulme smells
nothing like in comparison. The trees were environed round about with Vines
bearing Grapes in such quantity that the number would suffice to make the place
habitable. Besides this fertility of the soil for vines, a man may see Esquine
wreathed about the shrubbes in great quantity. Touching the pleasure of
Esquine drugge excellent against the pocket.
the place, the Sea may be seen plain and open from it, and more then six
great leagues of, near the river Belle a man may behold the meadows, divided
asunder into Isles and Islets enterlacing one another: briefly the place is so
pleasant, that those which are melancholic would be enforced to change their
humor. After I had stayed there a while, I embarked again my people to sail
toward the mouth of the River, where we found the Paracoussy which according
to his promise waited for us. Wherefore to content him we went on shore and did
him that reverence that on our part was requisite: Then he gave me the skin so
richly painted, and I recompensed him with somewhat of our merchandise. I
forgot not to demand of him the place whence the wedge of silver came which he
had given me before: whereunto he made me a very suddayne aunsweare, which
notwithstanding I understood not, which he well perceived. And then he showed
me by evident signs that Silver certain days journey up within the river of
May.
all of it came from a place more within the river by certain days iournies
from this place, and declared unto us that al y^ which they had thereof they
gat it by force of arms of the inhabitants of this place named by them
Thimogoua, their most ancient and n^turall Thimogoua mortal enemies to
Satourioua.
enemies, as he largely declared. Whereupon when I saw with what affection he
spoke, when he pronounced Thimogoua, I understood what he would say. And to
bring my self more into his favor I promised him to accompany him with all my
force, if he would fight against them: which thing pleased him in such sort
that from thence forth, he promised himself the victory of them, and assured
me that he would make a voyage thither within a short space, would cause store
of Mill to be prepared, and would command his men to make ready their bows,
and furnish themselves with such store of arrows, that nothing should be
wanting to give battle to Thimogoua. In fine he prayed me very earnestly not
to fail of my promise, and in so doing, he hoped to procure me gold and
silver in such good quantity that my affairs should take effect according to
mine own and his desire. The matter thus fully resolved upon, I took my leave
of him to return unto my ships, where after we had rested our selves all the
night following we hoysed sails the next day very early in the morning, and
sailed toward the River of Seine, distant from the River of The river of Seine.
The river of Some.
May about four leagues: and there continuing our course toward the North, we
arrived at the mouth of Some, which is not past six leagues distant from the
River of Seine: where we cast Anchor, and went on shore to discover that place,
as we had done the rest. There The courtesy of the Paracoussi of the river of
Some.
we were graciously and courteously received of the Paracoussy of the country,
which is one of the tallest men and best proportioned that may be found. His
wife sat by him, which besides her Indian beauty, wherewith she was greatly
endewed, had so virtuous a countenance and modest gravity, that there was not
one amongst us but did greatly commend her, she had in her train five of her
daughters of so good grace and so well brought up, that I easily persuaded my
self that their mother was their Mistress, and had taught them well and
straightly to preserve their honesty. After that ye Paracoussy had received
us, as I have said, he commanded his wife to present me with a certain number
of bullets of silver, Bullets of silver.
for his own part he presented me with his Bow and his Arrows, as he had
done unto Captain John Ribault in our first voyage, which is a sign of
perpetual amity and aliance with those which they honor with such a kind of
present. In our discoursing with one another we entered into speech as touching
the exercise of arms. Then the Paracoussy caused a Corselet to be set on end,
and prayed me to make a proof of our Harkubusies and their bows: but this
proof pleased him very little, for as soon as he knew that our Harkubuses did
easily perce that which all the force of their bows could not hurt, he seemed
to be sorry, musing with himself how this thing might be done. Nevertheless
going about to dissemble in his mind, that which his countenance could not do
by any means, he began to fall into another matter, and prayed us very
earnestly to stay with him that night in his house or lodging, affirming that
no greater happiness could come unto him then our long abode, which he desired
to recompense with a thousand presents. Nevertheless we cold not grant him
this point, but took our leave of him, to return to our ships: Where
Laudonieres consultation with his company where it might be best for them to
plant.
soon after I caused al my company to be assembled with the masters and
Pilots of my ships to consult together of the place whereof we should make
choice to plant our habitation. First I let them understand, how none of them
were ignorant, that the part which was toward the Cape of Florida, was
altogether a marish Country, and therefore unprofitable for our inhabitation:
A thing which cold yield neither profit to the king nor any contentment or
pleasure to us, if peradventure we would inhabit there. On the other side if
we passed farther toward the North to seek out Port Royal, it would be
neither very profitable nor convenient: at the least if we would give credit
to the report of them which remained there a long time, although the Haven
were one of the fairest of the West Indies: but that in this case the question
was not so much of the beauty of the place, as of things necessary to
sustain life. And that at our first inhabiting it was much more needful for
us to plant in places plentiful of victualle, then in goodly Havens, fair
deep and pleasant to the vewe, In consideration whereof that I was of opinion,
if it seemed good unto them to seat our selves about the river of May: seeing
also that in our first voyage we found the same only among all the rest to
abound in Maiz and corn, besides the gold and silver that was found there: a
thing that put Gold and silver found at the river of May.
me in hope of some happy discovery in time to come. After that I had proposed
these things every one gave his opinion thereof: and in five all resolved,
namely those which had been with me in the first voyage, that it was expedient
to seat themselves rather on the river of May, then on any other, until they
might hear news out of France. This point thus being agreed upon we sailed
toward the river, and used such diligence, that with the favor of the winds
we arrived there the morrow after about the break of day, which was on a
Thurseday the 29. of the month of June the 29.
June. Having cast Anchor, I embarked al my stuff and the soldiers of my
company, to sail right toward the opening of the river: wherein we entered a
good way up, and found a creake of a reasonable vignesse, which invited us to
refresh our selves a little, while we reposed our selves there. Afterward we
went on shore to seek out a place plain without trees, which we perceived
from the creek. But because we found it not very commodious for us to inhabit
there: we determined to return unto the place which we had discovered before,
when we had sailed up the River. This place is joining to a mountain, and it
seemed unto us more fit and commodious to build a fortress, then that where
we were last. Therefore we took our way toward the forests being guided
therein by the young Paracoussy which had led us before unto his fathers
lodging. Afterward we found a large plain covered with high pinetrees distant
a little one from ye other: under which we perceived an infinite number of
Stagges which braied amidst the plain, a thwarte the which we passed: then we
discovered a little hill adjoining unto a great vale very green and in form
flat: wherein were the fairest meadows of the world and grass to feed cattle.
Moreover it is environed with an infinite number of brooks The vale of
Laudonniere.
of fresh water, and high woods, which make the vale more delectable to the
eye. After I had taken the vewe thereof at mine ease* I named it at the request
of our soldiers the val^^of Laudonniere. An Hermophrodite.
Thus we went forward. Anon having gone a little forward, we met an Indian
woman of tall stature, which also was an Hermophrodite who came before us with
a great vessel full of clear fountain water, wherewith she greatly refreshed
us. For we were exceeding fainte by reason of the ardent heat which molested
us as we passed through those high woods. And I believe that without the
succor of that Indian Hermaphrodite, or rather if it had not been for the
great desire which we had to make us resolute of our selves we had taken up our
lodging all night in ye wood. Being therefore refreshed by this mean, we
gathered our sprites together, and marching with a cheerful courage, we came
to the place which we had chosen to make our habitation in: whereon at that
instant near the Rivers brinke we strowed a number of boughs and leaves to
take our rest on them the night following, which we found exceeding sweet,
because of the pain which the day before we had taken in our travel. On the
morrow about the break of day I commanded a trumpet to be sounded, that being
assembled we They began their planting with prayer to God.
might give God thanks for our favorable and happy arrival. There we sange a
Psalm of thanksgiving unto God, beseeching him that it would please him of his
grace to continue his accustomed goodness toward us his poor servants, and
aid us in all our enterprises, that all might turn to his glory, and the
advancement of our king. The prayers ended every man began to take courage.
Afterward having measured out a piece of ground in form of a triangle we
endeavored our selves of all sides, some to bring earth some to cut Fagots, and
others to raise and make the rampyre, for there was not a man that had not
either a shouel, or cutting hook, or hatchet as well to make the ground plain by
cutting down the trees, as for the building of the Fort, which we did hasten
with such cheerfulness that within few days the effect of our diligence was
apparent: In which mean space the Paracoussy Satourioua our nearest neighbor,
and on whose ground we built our fort, came usually accompanied with his two
sons and a great number of Indians to offer to do us al courtesy. And I
likewise for my part bestowed diverse of our trifles fra^kly on him to thend he
might know ye goodwil which we bare him, and thereby make him more desirous of
our frie^dship, in such sort y^ as ye days increased so our amity and
frie^dship increased also: After yt our fort was brought into form, I began In
Florida they cover their house with palm leaves.
to build a grange to retire my munition, and things necessary for y^ de fence
of y^ fort: praying y^ Paracoussy yt it would please him to commannd his
subjects, to make us a covering of palm leaves, and this to thend y^ when that
was done I might vnfreight my ships, and put under couerture those things that
were in them. Suddenly the Parracoussy commanded in my presence all the
Indians* of his company to dress the next day morning so good a number of
Palm leaves, that the grange was covered in less then two days: so that
business was finished. For in the space of those two days, the Indians never
ceased from working, some in fetching Palm leaves, others in enterlacing of
them: in such sort that their kings commandment was executed as he desired.
Our fort was built in The form of the Fort Caroline The West side.
form of a triangle* The side toward the West, which was toward the land, was
encl^sed with a little trench and raised with turues made in form of a
Battlement of nine foot high: the other side which* was toward the River was
enclosed with a Pallisado of planckes of timber after the manner that Gabions
are made. On ye south side there was a kind of bastion within which I caused an
The South side.
house for the munition to be built: it was all builded with Fagots and sand,
saving about two or three foot high with turues whereof the battlements were
made. In the midst I caused a great court to be made of eighteen pases long
and broad, in the midst whereof on the one side drawing toward the South I
builded a Corpse de guard, and an house on the other side toward the North,
which I caused to be raised somewhat to high: for within a shore High building
is not good for this country.
while after the wind beat it downr: and experience taught me, that we may not
build with high stages in this country, by reason of the winds whereunto it is
subject. One of the sides that enclosed my court, which I made very fair and
large, reached unto the grange of my munitions: and on the otherside toward
the River was mine own lodging, round about the which were galleries all
covered. The principal door of my lodging was in the midest of the great
place, and the other was toward the River. A good distance from the Fort I
built an Oven, to avoid the danger of fire, because the houses are of Palm
leaves, which will soon be Nota.
burnt, after the fire catches hold of them, so that with much ado a man
shall have leisure to quench them. Lo here in brief the description of our
Fortress, which I named Caroline in the honor Caroline.
of our Prince king Charles. After we were furnished with yt which was most
necessary, I would not lose a minute of an hour, without employing of the same
in some virtuous exercise: therefore I charged Monsieur de Ottigni my
Lieuetenant, a man in truth worthy all honor for his honesty and virtue, to
search up within the river what this Thimogoua might be, whereof the Paracoussy
Satourioua had spoken to us so often at our coming on shore. For execution
hereof the Paratoussy gave him two Indians for his guides, which taking upon
them to lead him in this voyage seemed to go unto a wedding, so desirous they
were to fight with their enemies. Being embarked they hoysed sail and having
sailed about The first voyage twenty leagues
twenty leagues, the Indians which still looked on this side and that side to
epsy some of their enemies, discovered three Canoes. And immediately they
began to cry Thimogoua, Thimogoua, and spoke of nothing else but to hasten
forward to go to fight with them: which the Captain seemed to be willing to
do, to content them. When they came to boorde them, one of the Indians gat
hold of an Halbert, another of a Coutelas in such a rage that he would have
lept into the water to have fought with them alone. Nevertheless Ottigny would
not let them do it, for while he differed to abord them he gave the others
respit to turn the prooes of their Canoes toward the shore and so to escape
into the woods. Again the meaning of Ottigny was not to make war upon them
of Thimogoua* but rather to make them friends; and to make them thencefoorth
to live in peace one with another if it were possible, hoping by this mean to
discover daily some new thing, and especially the certain course of the River.
For this purpose he caused the bark to retire wherein were the two Indians
his guides, and went with his toward the Canoes which were on the Rivers side.
Being come unto them, he put certain trifles into them, and then retired a
goodway from them, which thing caused the Indians which were fled away to
rerurne to their Boats, and to understand by this sign, that those of our
bark were none of their enemies, but rather come only to traffic with them.
Wherefore being thus assured of us they called to our men to come near unto
them: which they did incontinently and set foot on land, and spoke freely
with them, with diverse ceremonies over long to recount. In the end Ottigni
demanded of them by signs if they had gold or silver among them. But they
told him they had none as then: and that if he would send one of his men with
the^, they would bring him without danger into a place where they might have
some. Ottigni seeing them so willing, delivered them one of his men which
seemed very resolute to undertake this voyage: this fellow stayed with the^
until ten of the clock the next day morning, so that Captain Ottigny
somewhat offended with his long stay, sailed ten great Ten leagues farther.
leagues farther up the river: although he knew not what way he should go,
yet he went so far up that he espied the boat wherein his soldier was:
which reported unto him that the Indians would have carried him three great
days journey farther, and told him that a king named Mayrra rich in gold and
silver dwelt in those quarters, Mayrra a king rich in gold and silver.
and that for small quantity of merchandise enough might be had of him: yet
that he would not hazard himself without his leave, and that he brought but a
very little gold. This being done our men returned toward our fort Caroline
after they had left the soldier with the Indians to inform himself more and
more of such things as he might discover more at leisure. Fifteen days after
this voyage to Thimogoua, I dispatched Captain Vasseur and my sergeant The
second voyage.
also, to return again into this country and to seek out the soldier which
remained there in y^ former voyage. Being therefore embarked they sailed two
whole days: and before they came to the dwelling of the Indians, they found
two of them on the rivers side, which were expressly sent unto that place to
discry whether any of their enemies were come to that part, with intention to
surprise them, as they did usually. When they perceived Captain Valseur they
knew incontinently that he was none of their enemies, and therefore made no
difficulty to come near unto the bark, and showed him by signs that the
soldier which they sought was not in that place, but was at that present in
the house of king Molloua King molloua.
which was vassell unto another great king named by them Olata Ouae Vtina: and
that if the Captain would sail thytherward, Olata Ouae Vtina a great king.
he should come thither very quickly, wherewith he was content, and caused his
men to row to that part which the Indians showed him: whereat they were so glad
that they ran quickly before by land to declare his arrival, which was at the
lodging of king Molloua, after that he had rowed not past half a league. While
king Molloua had ended intertayning Captain Vasseur and his men, the soldier
came in with f^ue or six pounds weight of silver which he had trucked and
traffiked with the Indians. This king caused bread to be made, and fish to be
dressed after the Indian fashion Five or six pound weight of silver.
to feast our men: to whom, while they were at meat, he made a discourse of
diverse other kings his friends and allies reckoning up to the number of nine
of them by name, to wit Cadecha, Chilili, Eclauou, Enacappe, Calany,
Anacharaqua, Omittaqua, Aequera, Moquoso: al which with him unto the number of
more then forty, he assured us to be the vassals of the most renowned Forty
kings vassals to Vtina.
Olata Ouae Vtina. This done, he went about likewise to discover the enemies of
Ouae Vtina, in which number he placed as the first the Paracoussy Satourioua
monarch of the confines of the river of May, which has under his obeysace
thirty other Paracoussies, whereof there were ten which were al his brethren,
and that therefore he was greatly esteemed in those parties: then he named
three others no less puissant than Satourioua, whereof the first dwelt two
days journey from his Lord Olate Our Vtina, and ordinarily made war upon
him, whose name was Potanou, a man King Potanou.
cruel in war, but pitiful in the execution of his fury. For he took the
prisoners to mercy, being content to mark them on the left arm, with a great
mark like unto a seal, and so imprinted as if it had been touched with an
hoate iron, then he let them go without doing them any other hurt. The two
others were named Onatheaqua, An exceeding rich place.
and Houstaqua, being great Lords, and abounding in riches, and principally
Onatheaqua, which dwelt near unto the high mountains, wherein there was
abundance of many rare things, and infinite quantity of a kind of slate
stone, wherewith they made wedges to cleave their wood. The occasion which (as
he said) moved Potanou to wage war against Olata Ouae Vtina, was the fear
that he had, least he and his companions should get of that hard stone in
his country, wherewith they headed their arrows, and could not get it in any
nearer place. Besides all this, Molloua recited to Captain Vasseur, that the
kings alies the vassals of great Olata, armed their breasts, arms, thighs,
legs, and Large plats of gold and filuer.
foreheades with large plates of gold and silver: and that by this means the
arrows that were discharged upon them could do them no manner of hurt at all,
but rather were broken against them. Heerevpon Captain Vasseur inquired
whether the kings Onatheaqua and Honstaqua were like unto us. For by the
description that they made of them, he began t^ doubt whether they Some
paint their faces with black, and some with^ed.
were Spaniards or no: but Molloua told him that they were not, but that they
were Indians like the rest, saving that they painted their faces with black,
and that the rest as Moloua painted it with read. Then my Lieuetenaunt
Vasseur, and my sergeant promised him that one day I should march with my foroes
into those countries, and that joining my self with his Lord Olata, I would
subdue the inhabitants of the highest of those mountains. He was very glad of
this speech, and answered that the least of these kings which he had named,
should present unto the general of these succors the height of two foot of
gold and silver, which by force of arms they had already gotten of those two
kings, Onatheaqua, and Houstaqua. The good cheer being done, and the
discourses ended, my men embarked themselves again with intention to bring me
those good news unto the fort Caroline. But after they had sailed a very long
while down the river, and were come within three leagues of us, the tide was
so strong against them, that they were constrained to go on land, and to
retire themselves because of the night unto the dwelling of a certain
Paracoussy named Molona, which showed King Molona.
himself very glad of their arriual: for he desired to know some news of
Thimogoua, and thought that the French men went thither for none other occasion
but for to invade them. Which captain Vasseur perceiving dissembled so well,
that he made him believe y^ he went to Thimogoua, with none other intention, but
to subdue them, and to destroy them with the edge of y^ sword without mercy,
but that their purpose had not such success as they desired, because y^ the
people of Thimogoua being advertised of this enterprise, retired into y^ woods,
and saved themselves by flight: y^ nevertheless they had taken some as they
were flying away which carried no news thereof unto their fellows. The
Paracoussy was so glad of this relation, that he enterrupted him, and asked
Vasseur of the beginning and manner of his execution, and prayed him that he
would show him by signs how all things passed. Immediately Frauncis la Caille
the sergeant of my band took his sword in his hand, saying that with the point
thereof he had thrust through two India^s which ran into the woods, and y^ his
co^panio^s had done no less for their parts. And that if fortune had so
favored them, that they had not bin discovered by the me^ of Thimogoua, they
had had a victory most glorious and worthy of eternal memory. Hereupon the
Paracoussy showed himself so well satisfied, that he could not devise how to
gratify our men, which he caused t^ come into his house to feast the^ more
honorably: and having made captain Vasseur to sit next him, and in his own
chair (which the Indians esteem for the chiefest honor) and then underneath
him two of his sons, goodly and mighty fellows, he commanded all the rest to
place themselves as they thought good. This done, y^ Indians came according to
their good custom, to present their drink Cassine to the Paracoussy, and then
to certain of his chiefest friends, and the Frenchmen. Then he which brought
it set the cup aside, and drew out a little dagger which hung stuck up in the
roof of the house, and like a mad man he lift his head aloft, and ran apace,
and went and smote an Indian which sat alone in one of the corners of the
hall, crying with a loud voice, Hyou, the poor Indian stirring not at al for
the blow, which he seemed to eudure pacie^tly. He which held the dagger went
quickly to put the same in his former place, and began again to give us drink,
as he did before: but he had not long continued, and had scarcely given 3. or
4. thereof, but he left his bowl again, took the dagger in his hand, and
quickly returned unto him which he had stricken before, to whom he gave a very
sore blow on the side, crying Hyou, as he had done before: then he went to put
the dagger in his place, and set him self down among the rest. A little while
after, he y^ had bin stricken fell down backwards, stretching out his arms and
legs as if he had bin ready to yield up the latter gasp. And then the younger
son of the Paracoussy apparrelled in a long white skin, fell down at the feet
of him that was fallen backward, weeping bitterly half a quarter of an hour:
after two other of his brethren clad in like apparel, came about him that was
so stricken, and began to sigh pitifully. Their mother bearing a little infant
in her arms came from another part, and going to the place where her sons
were, at the first she used infinite numbers of outcries, then one while lifting
up her eyes to heaven, an other while falling down unto the ground, she cried
so dolefully, that her lamentable mournings would have moved the most hard and
stony heart in the world with pity. Yet this sufficed not, for there came in a
company of young gyrles which did never lyn weeping for a long while in the
place where the Indian was fallen down, who^ afterward they took, and with the
saddest gestures they could devise, carried him away into another house a little
way of from the great hal of the Paracoussy, and continued their weepings and
mournings by the space of two long hours: in which mean while the Indians
ceased not to drink Cassine, but with such silence that one word was not heard
in the parler. Vasseur being grieved that he understood not these ceremonies,
demanded of the Paracoussy what these things meant: which answered him
slowly, Thimogoua, Thimogoua, with out saying any more. Being more displeased
then he was before with so slight an answer, he turned unto another Indian
the Paracoussyes brother, who was a Paracoussy as well as his brother, called
Malica, which made him a like answer as he did at the first, King Malica.
praying him to ask no more of these matters, and to have patience for that
time. The subtle old Paracoussy prayed him within a while after to show him
his sword, which he would not deny him, thinking that he would have beheld
the fashion of his weapons: but he soon perceived that it was to another end:
for the old man holding it in his hand, beheld it a long while on every place
to see if he could find any blood upon it which might show that any of their
enemies had bin killed: (for the Indians are wont to bring their weapons
wherewith their enemies have bin defeated with some blood upon the^, for a token
of their victories.) But seeing no sign thereof upon it, he was upon the point
to say unto him, that he had killed none of the me^ of Thimogoua, when as
Vasseur preue^ting that which he might object, declared and showed to him by
signs y^ manner of his enterprise, adding that by reason of the 2. India^s
which he had stain, his sw^r^ was so bloody, that he was enforced to wash and
make it clean a long while in the river: which the old man believed to be like
to be true, and made no manner of reply thereunto. Vasseur, la Caille, and their
other companions went out of the hall to go into the room whither Tapistry
made of small reeds.
they had carried the Indian: there they found the Paracoussy sitting upon
tapistries made of small reeds, which was at meat after y^ Indian fashion, and
the Indian that was smitten hard by him, lying upon the selfsame tapistry,
about whom stood the wife of the Paracoussy, with all the young damsels which
before bewailed him in the hall: which did nothing else but warm a great deal
of moss in steed of They lap moss about their wounds and use it instead
of napkins. A ceremony to call to mind the death of their ancesters slain by
their enemies.
napkins to rub the Indians side. Herevpo^ our men asked the Paracoussy again,
for what occasion the Indian was so persecuted in his presence: he answered, y^
this was nothing else but a kind of ceremony whereby they would call to mind y^
death and persecutions of y^ Paracoussies their ancestors executed by their
enemy Thimogoua: alleging moreover, that as often as he himself, or any of his
friends and alies returned from the country, without they brought the heads of
their enemies, or without bringing home some prisoner, he used for a perpetual
memory of al his predecessors, to beat the best beloved of all his children,
with the selfsame weapons, wherewith they had bin killed in times past: to the
end that by renewing of the wound their death should be lamented afresh. Now
when they were thus informed of those ceremonies they thanked the Paracoussy
for their good entertainment which they had received, and so setting sail
came to me unto the fort: where they declared all unto me as I have recited it
heretofore. The eight and tweentieth of Iulie The return of their ships toward
France the 28. of July
our ships departed to return into France. And with in a while, about two
months after our arrival in Florida, the Paracoussy Satourioua sent certain
Indians unto me to know whether I would stand to my promise which I had made
him at my first arrival in that country, which was that I would show my self
friend to his friends and enemy unto his enemies, and also to accompany him
with a good number of Hargabushes, when he should see it expedient, and should
find a fit occasion to go to war: now seeing he rested upon this promise,
he prayed me not to defer the same: seeing also that making account thereof
he had taken such good order for the execution of his enterprise, that he was
ready, and was furnished with all things that were necessary for the voyage.
I made him answer that for his amity I would not purchase the enmity of the
other, and that albeit I would, yet notwithstanding I wanted means to do it.
For it behooued me at that present to make provision of victuals and munitio^
for the defense of my fort. On the otherside that my Barks were nothing
ready, and that this enterprise would require time: moreover that the
Paracoussy Satourioua might hold himself ready to depart within two
months, and that then I would think of fulfilling my promise to him. The
Indians carried this answer to their Paracoussy, which was little pleased
withit, because he could not defer his execution or expedition, as well
because all his victuals were ready, as also because ten other Paracoussies
were assembled with him for the performance of this enterprise. The ceremony
which this The ceremony which they use before they go to war.
savage used before he embarked his army deserves not to be forgotten. For
when he was set down by the rivers side, being compassed about with ten
other Paracoussies he commanded water to be brought him speedily. This done,
looking up into heaven he fell to discourse of diverse things with gestures
that showed him to be in exceeding great cholere, which made him one while
shake his head hither and thither, and by and by with I wot not what fury to
turn his face toward the country of his enemies, and to threaten to kill
them. He often times looked upon the son praying him to grant him a glorious
victory of his enemies: Which when he had done by the space of half an hour,
he sprinkled with his hand a little of the water which he held in a vessel
upon the heads of the Paracoussies, and cast the rest as it were in a rage and
despite into a fire which was there prepared for the purpose. This done he
cried out thrice, He Thimogoua, and was followed with five hundred Indians
Satourioua followed with five hundred Indians.
at the least, which were there assembled, which cried all with one voice, He
Thimogoua. This ceremony, as a certain Indian told me familiarly, signified
nothing else, but that Satourioua besought the son to grant unto him so
happy a victory that he might shed his enemies blood, as he had shed that
water at his pleasure: moreover that the Paracoussies which were sprinkled with
a part of that water, might return with the heads of their enemies, which is
the only and chief triumph of their victories. The Paracoussy Satourioua had
no sooner ended his ceremonies and had taken a view of all his company, but
he embarked himself, and used such diligence with his Almadies or boats, that
the next day two hours before the sons set, he arrived on the territories
of his enemies about eight or ten leages from their villages: Afterward
causing them all to go on land he assembled his counsel, wherein it was
agreed that five of the Paracoussies should sail up the river with half of
the Consultation before they assault their enemies.
troops and by the break of day should approach unto the dwelling of their
enemy: for his own part that he would take his journey through the woods
and forests as secretly as he could: that when they were come thither, as well
they that went by water as he which went by land should not fail by the
break of the day to enter into the village, and cut them all in pieces except
the women and little children. These things which were thus agreed upon were
executed with as great fury as was possible: which How they use their enemies
which they take in war.
when they had done they took the heads of their enemies which they had slain
and cut of their heir round about with a piece of their skuls: they took also
four and twenty prisoners, which they led away, and retired themselves
immediatlye unto their boats which waited for them: being come thither they
began to sing praises unto the sun to whom they attributed their victory.
And afterward put the skins of their heads on the end of their iauelinges,
and went altogether toward the territories of Paracoussy Omoloa, one of them
which was in the company: King Omoloa
being come thither they divided their prisoners equally to each of the
Paracoussies, and left thirteen of them to Satourioua, which straightway
dispatched an Indian his subject, to carry news before of the victory to
them which stayed at home to guard their houses, which immediately began to
weep: But as soon as night was come they never left dancing and playing a
thousand gambols in honor of the feast. The next day the Paracoussy
Satourioua came home, who before he entered into his lodging caused all the
heirie skuls of his enemies to be set up before The manner of triumph.
his door and crowned them with branches of Laurel, showing by this glorious
spectacle the triumph of the victory which he had obtained. Straightway
began lamentation and mourninges, which as soon as the night began were
turned into pleasures and dances. After that I was advertised of these things,
I sent a soldier unto Satourioua praying him to send me two of his prisoners:
which he denied me, saying that he was nothing beholding unto me, and that I
had broken my promise, against the oath which I had sworn unto him at my
arrival. Which when I understood by my soldier, which was come back with
speed, I devised how I might be revenged of this savage, and to make him
know how dearly this bold brauado of his should cost him: therefore I
commanded my sergiant to provide me twenty soldiers to go with me to the
house of Satourioua: Where after I was come and entered into the hall without
any manner of salutation, I went and sat me down by him and stayed a long
while without speaking any word unto him, nor showing him any sign of
friendship, which thing put him deeply in his domps: besides that certain
soldiers remained at the gate, to whom I had given express commandment to
suffer no Indian to go forth: having stood still about half an hour with
this countenance, at length I demanded where the prisoners were, which he
had taken at Thomogoua, and commanded them presently to be brought unto
me. Whereunto the Paracoussy angry at the heart and astonyed wonderfully
stood a long while without making any answer, notwithstanding at last he
answered me very stoutly that being affraide to see us coming thither in such
warrelike manner they fled into the woods, and that not knowing which way they
were gone they were not able by any means to bring them again, Then I seemed
to make as though I understood not what he said, and asked for his prisoners
again, and for some of his principal allies. Then Satourioua commanded his
son Athore to seek out the prisoners, and to cause them to be brought Athore.
into that place, which thing he did within an hour after. After they were
come to the lodging of the Paracoussy, they humbly saluted me, and lifting up
their hands before me, they would have fallen down prostrate as it were at my
feet: but I would not suffer them, and soon after led them away with me unto
my own force. The Paracoussy, being wonderfully offended with this brauado,
bethought himself by all means how he might be revenged of us. But to give us
no suspicion thereof, and the better to cover his intention, he sent his
messengers oftentimes unto us bringing always with them some kind of
presents. Among others one day he sent three Indians, which brought us
Excellent Pompions.
two baskets full of great Pompions, much more excellent then those which we
have in France, and promised me in their kings behalf that during mine aboade
in that country I should never want victuals: I thanked them for their kings
good will, and signified unto them the great desire which I had, as well for the
benefit of Satourioua, as for the quiet of his subjects, to make a peace
between him and those of Thimogoua: which thing could not choose but turn to
their great benefit, seeing that being allied with the kings of those parts,
he had an open passage against Onatheaqua his ancient enemy, which otherwise
he could not set upon: Moreover that Olata Oaue Vtina was so mighty a
Paracoussy, that Satourioua was not able to withstand his forces: but being
agreed together they might easily overthrow all their enemies, and might pass
the confines of the farthest rivers that were toward the South. The messengers
prayed me to have patience until the morrow, at what time they would come
again unto me to certify me of their lords inclination: which they failed
not to do, aduertising me that Paracoussy Satourioua was the gladdest man in
the world to treat of this accord (although in deed he was quite contrary)
and that he besought me to be diligent therein, promising to observe and
perform whatsoever I should agree upon with those of Thimogoua: which things
the messengers also rehearsed unto the prisoners which I had led away. After
they were departed I resolved within two days to send back again the
prisoners to Olata Ouae Vtina, whose subjects they were: but before I embarked
them, I gave them certain small trifles, which were little knives or tablets of
glass, wherein the image of King Charles the ninth was drawn very lively,
for which they gave me very great thanks, as also for the honest
entertainment which was given them at the fort Caroline: after this they
embarked themselves, with captain Vasseur, and with monsur De Arlac mine
ensign which I had sent of purpose to remain a certain time with Ouae Vtina,
hoping that the favor of this great Paracoussy would serve my turn greatly to
make my discoueries in time to come. I sent with him also one of my sergeantes,
and six gallant soldiers. Thus things passed on this manner, and the hatred of
Paracoussy Satourioua against me did still continue, until that on the 29. of
August a lightning from heaven A wonderful lightning the 29. of August.
fell within half a league of our forte, more worthy I believe, to be wondered
at, and to be put in writing, then all the strange signs which have been seen
in times past, and whereof the histories have never written. For although the
meadows were at that season all green, and half covered over with water,
nevertheless the lightning in one instant consumed above five hundred acres
therewith, and burned with the ardent heat thereof all the fowls which took
their pastime in the meadows, which thing continued for three days space,
which caused us not a little to muse, not able to judge whereof this fire
proceeded: for one while we thought that the Indians had burnt their houses,
and abandoned their places for fear of us: another while we thought that they
had discovered some ships in the sea, and that according to their custom they
had kindled many fires here and there to signify that their country was
inhabited: nevertheless being not assured, I determined to send to Paracoussy
Serranay King Sarranay.
to know the truth thereof. But even as I was upon the point to send one by
boat to discover the matter, six Indians King Allimacany.
came unto me from Paracoussy Allimacany, which at their first entry made
unto me a long discourse, and a very large and ample oration (after they had
presented me with certain basketes full of Maiz, of Pompions and of Grapes,)
of the loving amity which Allimacany desired to continue with me, and that
he looked from day to day when it would please me to employ him in my
service. Therefore considering the serviceable affection that he bare unto me,
he found it very strange, that I thus discharged mine ordinance against his
dwelling, The savages think the lightning to be discharging of the Christians
ordinance.
which had burnt up an infinite sight of green meadows, and consumed even
down unto the bottom of the water, and came so near unto his mansion that
he thought he saw the fire in his house: wherefore he besought me most
humbly to command my men that they would not shoot any more toward his
lodging, otherwise that hereafter he should be constrained to abandon his
country, and to retire himself into some place more farther of from us.
Having understood the foolish opinion of this man, which notwithstanding could
not choose but be very profitable for us, I dissembled what I thought thereof
for that time, and answered the Indians with a cheerful countenance, that
the relation, which they made unto me of the obedience of their Paracoussy,
did please me right well, because that before he had not behaved himself in
such sort toward me, especially when I sommoned him to send me the
prisoners of great Olata Ouae Vtina which he detained, whereof notwithstanding
he made no great account, which was the principal cause wherefore I had
discharged mine ordinance against him: not that I meant to reach unto his
house, as I might have done easily, if it Laudonnlere used the present occasion
to his profit.
had pleased me, but that I was content to shoot the half way to make him
know my force: assuring him furthermore, that on condition that he would
continue in his good affection, no more ordinance should be discharged against
him hereafter: and besides that I would become his faithful protector against
his greatest enemies. The Indians contented with mine answer returned to
assure their Paracoussy, which notwithstanding the assurance withdrew himself
from his dwelling tweentie or five and twenty leages off, and that for the
space of more then two months. After that three days were expired the fire
was quite extinguished. But for two days after there followed such an
excessive A wonderful heat.
heat in the air, that the river near unto which we planted our habitation,
became so hoate, that I think it was almost ready to sees. For there died so
great abundance of fish, and that of so many diverse sorts, that in the mouth
of the river only there were found dead enough to have laden fifty Carts,
Fifty cart lode of fish dead in the river with this heat.
whereof there issued a putrefaction in the air which bred many dangerous
diseases amongst us, in so much that most of my men fell sick, and almost
ready to end their days. Yet notwithstanding it pleased our merciful God so
to provide by his providence that all our men recovered their health without
the loss of any one of them. Monsieur De Arlac, Captain Vasseur, The third
viage the tenth of September.
and one of my sergeants being embarked with their ten soldiers about the
tenth of September, to carry back the prisoners unto Vtina, sailed so far up
the river, that they discovered a Mayarqua a place eighty leages up the river
of May.
place called Mayarqua distant from our fort about fourscore leages, where the
Indians gave them good entertaynement, and in many other Villages which they
found. From this place they rowed to the dwelling of Paracoussy Vtina, which
after he had feasted them according to his ability and power, prayed monsieur
De Arlac and all his soldiers to stay a while with him, to aid and assist him
in battle against one of his enemies called King Patanou
Potanou, whereunto monsieur de De Arlac consented willingly. And because he
knew not how long he might have occasion to stay in these parts, he sent
me Captain Vasseur and the bark back again, which brought home only five
soldiers with him. Now because the custom of the Indians is always The
Indians manner of war.
to wage war by surprise, Vtina resolved to take his enemy Potanou in the
morning by the break of the day: to bring this to pass he made his men to
travail all the night, which might Two hundred Indians.
be in number two hundred persons, so well advised, that they prayed our
french shoot to be in the fore front, to the end (as they said) that the
noise of their pieces might astonishe their enemies: notwithstanding they
could not march so secretly, but that those of the village of Potanou,
distant from the dwelling of Vtina about five and twenty leages, were ware of
them: which suddenly employed and bestowed all their endeavor to defend their
village enclosed all with trees, A village enclosed with trees.
and issued out in great companies: but finding themselves charged with shot,
(a thing wherewith they never had been acquainted) also beholding the captain
of their band fall down dead in the beginning of their skirmish with a shot
of an Hargubuse which stroke him in the forehead, discharged by the hand of
monsur De Arlac, they left the place: and the Indians of Vtina gate into the
village, taking men, women, and children prisoners. Thus Paracoussy Vtina
obtained the victory by the aid of our Vtina gets the victory of Potanou
by the help of the french.
men, which slew many of his enemies, and lost in this conflict one of their
companions, wherewith Vtina was very much grieved. Eight or ten days after
I sent Captain Vasseur back again with a bark to fetch home monsur De Arlac
and his soldiers, which at their return brought me certain presents from
Vtina, as some silver, a small quantity of gold, painted skins, Silver, and
gold, and painted skins.
and other things, with a thousand thanks, which the Paracoussy gave me,
which promised that if in any enterprise of importance I should have need of
his men, he would furnish me with three hundred and above. While I thus
travailed to purchase friends and to practice one while with one here, an
otherwhile with an other there, certain soldiers of my company were suborned
under hand by one named la Roquette of the country of La Roquettes conspiracy.
Perigorte, which put in their heads that he was a great magicion, and that by
the secrets of art magic he had discovered a Mine of gold and silver far
up within the river, whereby, upon the loss of his life, every soldier should
receive in ready buillion the valor of ten thousand crowns, beside and above
fifteen hundred thousand which should be reserved for the Kings Majesty:
Wherefore they allied themselves with La Roquette and another of his
confederates, whose name was Le Geure, in Mounsur de Geure.
whom not withstanding I had great affiance. This Geure excaeding desirous to
enrich himself in those parts, and seeking to be revenged, because I would
not give him the carriage of the Paquet into France, secretly informed the
soldiers that were already suborned by La Roquette, that I would deprive them
of this great gain, in that I did set them daily on work, not sending them on
every side to discover the Countries: therefore that it were a good deed,
after they had made me understand so much, to seek means to dispatch me out
of the way, and to choose another Captain in my place, if I would not give
them Gieures message to Laudoniere in the soldiers name.
victuals according to their disordinate appetite. He also brought me word
hereof himself, making a large discourse unto me of the good affection of the
soldiers, which all besought me that I would conduct them to the countries
where the Mine was: I His answer.
made him answer that all could not go thither, and that it was necessary
before their departure to settle our fortress in such estate, that those which
were to stay at home behind should remain in security against the Indians
which might surprise them. Furthermore that their manner of proceeding seemed
strange unto me, for that they imagined, that the Kings Majesty was at the
charges of our voyage for none other end but to enrich them at their first
arrival, in as much as they showed themselves much more given unto
covetousness the^ unto the service of their Prince: But seeing mine answer
tended unto none other end but to make our fortress strong and defensible,
they determined to travel in the work, and made an ensign of old lynen,
which ordinarily they bare upon the ramparte when they went to work, always
wearing their weapons, which I thought they had done to encourage themselves to
work the better: But as I perceived afterward, and that by the confession A
dangerous practice against the captain and his liuetenant.
of Gieure sent me in letters which he writ to me of that matter, these gentle
soldiers did the same for none other end, but to have killed me, and my
lieuetenant also, if by chance I had given them any hard speeches. About the
twentieth of September as I came home from the woods and Coppises to finish the
building of my fort: and that according to my manner, I marched first to give
encouragement unto my soldiers, I chased my self in such sort that I fell
into a sickness, whereof I Laudounieres sickness.
thought I should die. During the which I called Le Gieure often unto me, as
one that I trusted above all others, and of whose conspiracies I doubted not
any whit at all. In this mean while assembling his accomplices, sometime in his
chamber and sometime in the woods to consult with them, he spoke unto them to
choose another Captain besides me, to the intent to put me to death: but being
not able by open force to execute his mischienous intention, he gate him unto
mine Apothecarie, praying him instantly to mingle in my medicine, which I was
to receive one Laudonniers Apothecarie.
or two days after, some drug that should make me pitch over the perch, or at
the least that he would give him a little arse^ike or quick silver which he
himself would put into my drink. But the apothecary denied him, as did in
^^ke manner master The master of the fire works.
S. which was master of the fire works. Thus wholely disappoynted of both his
means, he with certain others resolved to hide a little barrel of gunne-powder
underneath my bed, and by a train to set it on fire. Upon these practices a
gentleman which I had dispatched to return into France, being about to take
his leave of me, advertised me that Gieure had given him a book full of all
kind of lewd inuectiues and slanders against me, against Monsieur De
Ottigny, and against the principal of my company: upon which occasion I
assembled all my soldiers together, and captain Bourdet Captain Bourdet
arrived in Florida the fourth of September.
with all his, which on the fourth of September arrived in the rode, and were
come into our river. In their presence I caused the contents of the book to
be read alowde, that they might ^eare record of the untruths that were
written against me. Gieure, which had gotten him into the woods for fear of
being taken, where he lived for a while after with the savages by my
permission, writ unto me often, and in many of his letters confessed unto me
that he had deserved death, condemning himself, so far forth that he
referred all to my mercy and pity. The seventh or eighth of November, after
I had The fourth voyage the seventh of November.
caused sufficient provision of such victuals as were needful to be made, I
sent two of my men, to wit, La Roche Ferriere, and an other toward king Vtina,
to discover every day more and more of the country: where he was the space of
five or six months, during which he discovered many villages, and among
others one named Hostaqua, the king whereof Hostaqua a village.
desiring my friendship sent me a quiver made of a Luserns skin full of
arrows, a couple of bows, four or five skins painted after their manner,
and a cheyne of silver A chain of silver.
weying about a pound weight. In recompense of which presents I sent him two
whole suits of apparel with certain cutting hooks or hatchettes. After these
things therefore in this sort passed, about the tenth of this month captain
Bourdet determined to leave me to return into France. Then I requested him,
yea rather was exceeding importunate with him, to carry home with him some
six or seven soldiers whom I could not trust by any means: which he did
for my sake, and would not charge him self with Gieure, which offered him a
great sum of money, if it would please him to carry him into France: he
transported him only to the other side of the river. Three days after his
departure thirteen mariners which I had brought out of France, suborned by
certain other mariners which captain Bourdet had left me, stole away my
barks in manner following. These mariners of captain Bourdet put mine in the
head, that if they had One of his Barks stolen away by his mariners.
such barks as mine were, they might gain very much in the Isles of the
Antilles, and make an exceeding profitable voyage. Herevppon they began to
devise how they might steal away my barks, and consulted that when I should
command them to go unto the village of Sarauahi distant above The village of
Sarrauahi.
a league and an half from our sort, and situated upon an arm of the river
(whither according to my manner I sent them daily to seek clay, to make brick
and mortar for our houses) they would return no more, but would furnish
themselves with victuals as well as they might possibly: and then would
embarke themselves all in one vessel and would go Another of his barks
stolen away by two carpenters.
their way: as in deed they did. And that which was worse, two Flemmishe
carpenters, which the said Bourdet had left me, stole away the other bark,
and before their departure cut the cables of the bark and of the ship Boat,
that it might go away with the tide, that I might not pursue them: so that I
remained without either bark or boat, which fell out as unluckily for me as
was possible. For I was ready to imbarke my self with all speed, to discover
as far up our river, as I might by any means. Now my mariners, as I
understood afterward, took a bark that was a passenger of the Spaniardes
near the Isle of Cuba, wherein they found a certain quantity of gold and
silver, which they seized upon: And having this booty they lay a while at
sea, until their victuals began to sail them: which was the cause that
oppressed with famine they came unto Hauana the principal town of the isle
One of these mariners named Francis Iean betrayed his own country men to the
Spaniards and brought them into Florida.
of Cuba: whereupon proceeded that mischief which hereafter I will declare
more at large. When I saw my Barks returned not at their wonted hour, and
suspecting that which fell out in deed, I commanded my Carpenters with all
diligence to make a little boat with a flat bottom, to search those rivers for
some news of these Mariners. The boat dispatched within a day and a night,
by reason that my Carpenters found planks and timber ready sawed to their
hands, as commonly I caused A savve mill necessary here
my Sawyers to provide it, I sent men to seek some news of my thieues: but
all was in vain. Therefore I determined to cause two great Barks to be built,
each of which might be thirty five or thirty six foot long in the keele.
And now the work was very well forward which I set my workmen about, when
ambition and avarice, the mother of all mischief, took root in the hearts
of four or five soldiers which could not away with the work and pains
taking: and which from hence forward, namely one Foueneaux, and one La Croix,
and another called The third sedition.
Steven le Geneuois, the three principal authors of the sedition, began to
practice with the best of my troop, showing them that it was a vile thing for
men of honest parentage, as they were, to moyle them selves thus which abject
and base work, seeing they had the best occasion of the world offered them to
make themselves all rich: which was to arm the two Barks which were in
building and to furnish them with good men: and then to sail unto Peru, and
the other Isles of the Antilles, where every By Peru the French mean the
cost of Carthagena and Nombre de Dios.
soldier might easily enrich himself with ten thousand crowns. And if their
enterprise should be misliked with all in France, they should be always
able, by reason of the great wealth that they should gain, to return
themselves into Italy, until the heat were over passed, and that in the
mean season some war would fall out which would cause all this to be quite
forgotten. This word of riches sounded so well in the ears of my soldiers,
that in fine, after they had oftentimes consulted of their affairs, they grew
to the number of three score and fix: which to color their great desire which
they had to go on stealing, they caused a request to be presented unto me by
Francis la Caille sergeant of my company, containing in sum a declaration of
the small store of victuals that was left to maintain us, until the time that
ships might return from France: for remedy whereof they thought it
necessary to send to New Spaigne, to Peru, and all the Isles adjoining, which
they besought me to be content to grant. But I made them answer* that when
the barks were finished, I would take such good order in general, that by
means of the kings Merchandise, without sparing mine own apparel, we
would get victuals of the inhabitants of the country: seeing also that we
had enough to serve us for four months to come. For I feared greatly, that
under pretense of serching victuals they would enterprise somewhat against the
kings of Spaynes subjects, which in time to come might justly be laid to my
charge, considering that at our departure The captains charge at his setting
forth.
out of France, the Queen had charged me very expressly, to do no kind of
wrong to the king of Spaines subjects, nor any thing whereof he might conteyne
any ielosie. They made as though they were content with this answer. But eight
days after, as I continued in working upon our fort, and on my barks, I fell
sick. Then my seditious companions forgetting all honor and duty, supposing
that they had found good occasion to execute their rebellious enterprise, began
to practice afresh their former designs, handling their business so well,
during my sickness, that they openly vowed that they would sease of the corpse
de guard, and of the ^ort, yea and to force me also, if I would not consent unto
their wicked desire. My lieuetenant being hereof advertised, came and told me
that he suspected some evil practice: and the next day in the morninge I was
saluted at my gate with men in complet harnes, what time my soldiers were about
to play me a shrewde trick: then I sent to seek a couple of gentlemen, whom
I most trusted, which brought me word that the soldiers were determined to come
to me to make a request unto me: But I told them that this was not the fashion
to present a request unto a captain in this manner, and therefore they should
send some few unto me to signify unto me what they would have. Hereupon the
five thiese authors of the sedition armed with Corslets, their Pistolles in
their hands already bent, pressed into my Chamber, saying unto me, that they
would go to New Spain to seek their adventure. Then I warned them to be
well advised what they meant to do: but they forth with replied, that they
were fully advised already* and that I must grant them this request: seeing
(then quoth I) that I am enforced to do it, I will send Captain Vasseur and
my sergeant, which will make answer and give me an account of every thing
that shall be done in this voyage: and to content you I think it good that
you take one man out of every chamber, that they may accompany Captain
Vasseur and my sergeant: whereupon, blaspheming the name of God* they answered
that they must go thither: that there lacked nothing, but that I should
deliver them the armor which I had in my custody, for fear least I might use
them to their disadvantage (being so villanously abused by them:) wherein
notwithstanding I would not yield unto them: But they took all by force, and
carried it out of my house, yea and after they had hurt a gentleman in my
Chamber, which spoke against their doings, they laid hands on me, and
carried me very sick as I was prisoner into a ship which rode at ancre in
the midst of the river, wherein Lan^o^niere kept 15. days prisoners by his
own soldiers.
I was the space of fifteen days attended upon with one man only without
permission for any of my servants to come to visit me: from every one of
whom as also from the rest that took my part they took away their armor. And
they sent me a pass port to sign, telling me plainly after I had denied
them, that if I made any difficulty, they would all come and cut my
throat in the ship: Thus was I constrained to sign their pass port, and
forth with to grant them certain mariners, Thenchant a skillful pilot.
with Trenchant an honest and skillful Pilot. When the barks were finished
they armed them with the kings munition, with powder, with bullets, and
artilerie as much as they needed, and chose one of my sergeautes for their
Captain, named Bertrand Conferrent, for their ensign one named La Croix. They
compelled Captain Vasseur to deliver them the flagge of his ship. Then having
determined to sail unto a place of the Antilles Leauguaue over of the Antiles.
called Leauguaue, belonging unto the king of Spain, and there to go on land
on Christmasse night, with intention to enter into the Church while the Mass
was said after midnight, and to murder all those that they found there, they
set sail the eight of December. But because the greatest part of them by this
December 8.
time repented them of their enterprise, and that now they began to fall
into mutinies among themselves, when they came forth of the mouth of the river
the two barks divided themselves, the one kept a long the coast unto Cuba, to
double the Cape more easily, and the other went right forth to pass athwart
the Isles of Lucaya: by reason whereof they met not until six weeks after
their departure: during which time the bark that took her way a long the
coast, wherein one of the chief conspiratours named De Orange was captain,
and Trenchant was pilote, near unto a place called Archaha took a Brigantine
laden with a certain quantity of Cassaua, Cassaua bread made of roots
which is a kind of bread made of roots, and yet nevertheless is very
white and good to eat, and some little Wine, which was not without some loss
of their men. For in one assault that the inhabitants of Archaha made upon
them, two of their men were taken, to wit Steven Gondeau, and one named Grand
Pre, besides two more that were slain in the place, namely Nicolas Master and
Doublet: yet nevertheless they took the brigantine, wherein they put all
their stuff that was in their own bark, because it was of greater burden
and better of sail then their own: afterward they sailed right unto the Cape
of Santa Maria near to Leauguaue, where they went on land to calke and bray
their ship which had a great leake. In this mean while they resolved to
sail to Baracou, which is a Baracou a village in the Isle of Iamaica.
village of the Isle of Iamaica: where at there arrival they found a Carauele
of fifty or threescore tons burden, which they took without any body in
it, And, after they had made good chere in the village the space of five or
six days, they embarked themselves in it, leaving their second ship: then
they returned to the Cape of Tiburon, where they met with a patach, which they
took The cape of Tiburon.
by force after a long conflicte. In this Patache the governor of Iamaica was
taken with great store of riches as well of gold and silver, as of merchandise
and wine and many other things: The gouerno^ of Iamaica taken.
wherewith our sedicious companions not content determined to seek more in
their Carauell, and their governor of Iamaica also. After they were come to
Iamaica, they missed of another Carauell which did save it self in the Haven.
The governor being fine and subtle, seeing himself brought unto the place
which he desired and where he commanded, obtained so much by his fair words
that they which had taken him let him put two little boys which were taken with
him into a little cock boat and send them to his wife into the village to
advertise her that she should make provision of victuals to send unto him. But
in steed of writing unto his wife, he spoke unto the boys secretly that with
all diligence she should send the vessels that were in the havens near that
place to suecour and rescue him. Which she did so cunningly, that on a morning
about the break of the day as our seditious companions were at the havens
mouth (which reaches above two leagues up within the land) there came out of
the haven a Malgualire which makes Malgualire a kind of vessel that will
sail forward and backward.
sail both forward and backwarde, and then two great ships, which might be
each of them of fourscore or an hundred tons a piece with good store of
ordinance and well furnished with men: at whose coming our mutinous fellows
were surprised, being not able to see them when they came, as well because of the
darkness of the weather, as also by reason of the length of the haven,
considering also they mistrusted nothing. True it is that five or six and
tweentie that were in the Brigantine discovered these ships when they were
near them, which, seeing themselves pressed for want of leisure to weigh their
ancer, cut their cable, and the trumpetter which was in it advertised the rest:
whereupon the Spaniardes, seeing them selves descryed, discharged a voley of
Canon shot against the Frenchmen, which they followed by the space of three
leages and recovered their own ships: the brigantine The Cape of S. Antonie in
Cuba.
which escaped away passed in the sight of the Cape des Aigrettes, and the Cape
of S. Anthony situate in the Isle of Cuba, and from thence passed within the
sight of Hauana. But Trenchant Hauana.
their Pilot, and the trompetter, and certain other mariners of this
brigantine which were led away by force in this voyage (as else where we have
declared) desired nothing more then to return to me: wherefore the so men
agreed together, (if peradventure the ^i^^ served them well) to pass the
channel of Bahama, The Chanel of Bahama.
while their seditious companions were a sleep: which they did accomplish with
such good success, that in the morning toward the break of the day about the
five and twentieth of March they arrived upon the cost of Florida: where knowing
the fault which they had committed, in a kind of mockery they counterfaited
the judges: But they played not this prancke until they had tippled well of
the wine which remained yet in their prise. One counterfayted the judge, an
other presented my person: one other, after he had heard the matter pleaded,
coucluded thus: make you your causes as good as it pleases you, but if when
you come to the fort Caroline the Captain cause you not to be hanged, I will
never take him for an honest man: others thought that my choler being passed I
would easily forget this matter. Their sail was no sooner descried upon our
coast, but the king of King Patica.
the place named Patica, dwelling eight leagues distant from our fort, and
being one of our good friends, sent an Indian to advertise me that he had
descried a ship upon the coast, and that he thought it was one of our
Nation. Herevppon the Brigantine oppressed with famine came to an ancre at the
mouth of the river of May: when at the first blush we thought they had been
ships come from France: which gave us occasion of great joy. But after I had
caused her to be better viewed, I was advertised The return of part of
Laudonieres seditious soldiers.
that they were our seditious companious that were returned. Therefore I sent
them word by Captain Vasseur and my Sergeant, that they should bring up their
Brigantine before the fortress, which they promised to do. Now there was not
above two leagues distance from the mouth of the river where they cast ancre
unto the fortress. The next day I sent the same Captain and Sergeant with
thirty soldiers, because I saw they much delaied their coming. Then they
brought them, and because certain of them had sworn at their departure, that
they would never come again within the fort, I was well pleased they should
keep their oath. For this purpose I waited for them at the rivers mouth, where
I made my barks to be built, and commanded my Sergeant to bring the four
chief authors of the mutiny on shore. Whom I caused unmediately to be put in
fetters: for my meaning was not to punish the rest, considering that they were
suborned, and because my counsel, expressly assembled for this purpose, had
concluded that these four only should die, Laudonnieres oration to his
mutinous soldiers.
to serve for an example to the rest. In the same place I made an Oration unto
them in this manner. My friends, you know the cause why our king sent unto
this country: you know that he is our natural Prince, whom we are bound
to obey according to the commandment of God, in such sort that we ought
neither to spare our goods nor lives to do those things, that concern his
service: ye know, or at least you can not be ignorant, that besides this
general and natural obligation, you have this also joined thereunto, that in
receiving of him reasonable pay and wages, you are bound to follow those,
whom he has established over you, to be your governors, and to command
you in his name, having for this purpose given him an oath of fidelity, which
you cannot by any means revoke for any fair appearance which you have to do
the contrary: for this is reason that seeing you live upon his charges on
this condition, (this is reason I say,) that you should be faithful unto
him. Notwithstanding you have had more regard unto your unbridled affections,
then unto virtue, which invited you to the observance of your oath, in such
sort that being become contemners of all honesty, you have passed your bonds,
and thought that all things were lawful for you. Whereupon it is fallen out,
that while you thought to escape the justice of men you could not avoid the
judgment of God: which as a thing by no means to be avoided has led you,
and in spite of you has made you to arrive in this place, to make you to
confess, how true his judgments are, and that he never suffers so foul a
fault to escape unpunished. After that I had used unto the^ these or the like
speeches, following that which we had agreed upon in counsel, in respect of
the crimes which they had committed, as well against the kings Majesty, as
against me which was their Captain, I commanded that they should be
hanged. Seeing therefore The sentence of death.
that there was no starting hole nor means at all to save themselves from this
arrest, they took themselves unto their prayers. Yet one of the four thinking
to raise a mutiny among my soldiers, said thus unto them: What, brethren and
companions, will you suffer us to die so shamefully? And taking the word out of
his mouth, I said unto him, that they were not companio^s of authors of
sedition and rebels unto the kings service. Hereupon the soldiers besought me
not to hang the^, but rather let them be shot through* and then afterward if I
thought good, their bodies might be Execution.
hanged upon certain gibbets along the Havens mouth: which I caused presently
to be put in execution. Lo here what was the and of my mutinous soldiers,
without which I had always lived peaceably and enjoyed the good desire which I
had to make an happy and quiet voyage. But because I have spoken of nothing
but their accidents and adventures which happened unto them after their
departure, without making any mention of our fort, The continuation of the
history.
I will return to the matters from which I digressed: to declare that which
fell out after their departure. First I began to consider, to the end I might
confirm and make my self more constant in mine affliction, that these
murmurours could not ground their sedition upon want of victuals. For from
the time of our arrival, every soldier daily unto this day and besides until
the eight and twentieth of February had a loaf of bread weighing two and twenty
ounces. Again I recounted with my self that all new conquests by sea or by
land are ordinarily troubled Nevve conquests subject to rebellions and mutinies.
with rebellions, which are easy to be raised as well in respect of the distance
of place, as in respect of the hope that the soldiers have to make their
profit, as we may be well informed both by ancient histories, and also by
the troubles which lately happened unto Christopher Columbus, after his first
discovery, to Francis Pizarro, and Diego de Almagro in Peru, and to Fernand
Cortes. An hundred thousand other things came unto my mind, to encourage and
confirm me. My Lieuetenaunt Ottigny and my Sergeaurunt of my band came to
seek me in the ship, where I was prisoner, and carried me from thence in a
bark, as soon as our rebels were departed. After I was come unto the fort, I
Laudonniere sets things in order after his return out of prison to the fort.
caused all my company that remained to be assembled in the midst of the
place before the corpse de guard, and declared unto them the faults which they
which had forsaken us had committed, praying them to bear them in memory, to
bear witness thereof when need should require. Forthwith I ordained new
Captains to command the troops, and prescribed them an order, according
whereunto they were to govern themselves from thence forward, and to enter
into their watch, for the greatest part of the souldyers of whom I had the
best opinion, were gone away with them. My declaration ended, they promised me
all with one accord to obey me most humbly, and to do whatsoever I should
command them, though it were to die at my feet for the kings service:
wherein assuredly they never after failed: So that I dare say after the
departure of my mutinous companions I was as well obeyed as ever was Captain
in place where he commanded. The next day after my return unto the fort, I
assembled my men together again, to declare unto them that our fort was not
yet finished, and that it was needful that all of us should put thereto our
helping hands, to assure our selves against the Indians. Wherein having
willingly agreed unto me, Reperation of the west side of the fort. Carpenters.
they raised it all with turfes from the gate unto the river, which is on the
west side. This done I set my Carpenters on work to make another bark of the
same bigness that the others were of: I commanded the sawiers that they should
prepare plancks, Savviers. Smithes. Coleyers.
the Smithes to prepare iron and Nails, and certain others to make coals: so
that the bark was finished in eighteen days. Afterward I made an other
lesser then the first the better to discover up the river. In this mean space
the Indians visited me and brought me daily certain presents, as fish, dear,
Turkicockes, Leopards, little Bears, and other things according to the place
of their habitation. I recompensed them with certain hatchets, knives, beads
of glass, combs, and looking-glasses. Two Indians came unto me one day to
salute me on the King Marracou.
behalf of their king whose name was Marracou, dwelling from the place of our
fort some forty leagues toward the South, and told me that there was one in
the house of King Onathaqua which was called Barbu or the bearded man, and in
the house of King Onathaqua. King Mathiaca.
king Mathiaca another man whose name they knew not, which was not of their
nation: whereupon I conceived that these might be some Christians. Wherefore I
sent to all the kings my neighbors to pray them, that if there were any
Christian dwelling in their countries, they would find means that he might
be brought unto me, and that I would make them double recompense. They, which
love rewards, took so much pain, that the two men, whereof we have spoken,
were brought unto the fort unto me. They were naked, wearing their heirs long
unto their hammes as the savages use to do: and were Two Spaniards brought
unto Laudonniere by the savages.
Spaniards borne, yet so well accustomed to the fashion of the country, that
at the first sight they found our manner of apparel strange. After that I had
questioned of certain matters with the^, I caused them to be apparelled and to
cut their heir, which they would not loose, but lapped it up in a lynen cloth,
saying that they would carry it into their country to be a testimony of the
misery that they had endured in the Indies. In the heir of one of them was
found a little gold hidden, to the value of five and twenty Crowns, which
he gave unto me. And examining them of the places, where they had been, and
how they came thither, they answered me that fifteen years past, three
ships, in one of which they were, were cast away over against Calos a place
The Flattes called the Martyrs near the Cape of Florida.
a place named Calos upon the Flates which are called The Martyrs, and that
the king of Calos recovered the greatest part of the riches which were in the
said ships, traueiling in such sort that the greatest part of the people was
saved and many women, among which number there were three or four women
married, remaining there yet, and their children also, with this king of Calos.
I desired to learn what this king was: The King of Calos.
they answered me, that he was the goodliest and the tallest Indian of the
country, a mighty man, a warrier, and having many subjects under his
obedience. They told me moreover, that he had great store of gold and
silver, so far forth that in a Great quantity of gold and silver.
certain village he had a pit full thereof, which was at the least as high as
a man, and as large as a tun, all which wealth the Spaniards fully persuaded
themselves that they could cause me to recover, if I were able to march
thither with an hundred shot, besides that which I might get of the common
people of the country, which had also great store thereof. They further also
advertised me, that the women going to dance did we are Plates of gold as
broad as a savvcer.
about their girdles plates of gold as broad as a sawcer, and in such number
that the weight did hinder them to dance at their ease, and that the men ware
the like also. The greatest part of these riches was had, as they said, out of
the Spanish ^^ppes which commonly were cast away in this straight, and the
rest, by the traficke which this king of Calos had with the other kings of the
country, finally that he had in great reverence of his subjects, and that
he made them beleene, that his sorceries and charms were the causes that made
the earth bring forth her fruit, and that he might the easier persuade them
that it was so, he retired himself once or twice a year to a certain house,
accompanied with two or three of his most familier friends, where he used
certain inchauntmentes, and if any man intruded himself to go to see what
they did in this place, the king immediately caused him to be put to death.
Moreover they One of these Spaniardes names was Martin Gomes.
told me, that every year in the time of harvest this savage king sacrificed
one man, which was kept expressly for this purpose, and taken out of the
number of the Spaniardes, which by tempest were cast away upon that cost. One
of these two declared unto me that he had served him a long time for a
messenger: and that oftentimes by his commandment he had visited a king
named Oathcaqua, distant from Calos four King Oathcaqua or Houathcha.
or five days journey, which always remained his faithful friend: but that
in the midway there was an Island situate in a great lake of freshwater, named
Sarrope, about five leagues in Sarrope an Island. Abundance of Dates. A root
of great price to make bread of
bigness, abounding with many sorts of fruits, specially in Dates which
grow on the palm trees, whereof they make a wonderful traficke, yet not so
great as a kind of root, whereof they make a kind of meal so good to make
bread of, that it is impossible to eat better: and that, for fifteen leagues
about, all the country is fed therewith. Which is the cause that the
inhabitants of the Isle gain of their neighbors great wealth and profit:
for they will not depart with this root without they he well paid for it:
besides that they are taken for the most warrelike men of all that country, as
they made good proof when the king of Calos, having made alliance with
Oathcaqua, was deprived of Oathcaquaes daughter which he had promised to him
in marriage. He told me the whole matter in this sort. As Oathcaqua well
accompanied with his people carried one of his daughters, exceeding beawtifull,
according to the color of the country, unto king Calos, to give her unto him
for his wife, the inhabitants of his Isle advertised of the matter, laid an
ambush for him in a place where he should pass, and so behaved themselves,
that Oathcaqua was discomfited, the betrothed young spouse taken, and all the
Damoselles that accompanied her, which they carried unto their The greatest
victory among the Floridians.
Isle, which thing in all the Indians country they esteem to be the greatest
victory: for afterward they marry these virgins, and love them above all
measure. The Spaniarde that made this relation, told me that after this
defeite he went to dwell with Oathcaqua, and had been with him full eight
years, even until the time that he was sent unto me. The place of The
situation of Calos.
Calos is situate upon a river which is beyond the Cape of Florida forty or
fifty leagues toward the Southwest: and the dwelling of Oathcaqua is on this
side the Cape toward the North in a place which we call in the Carte
Caignaueral, which Caiguaueral in 28. degrees.
is in eight and twenty degrees. About the five and twenteth of January
Paracoussy Satourioua my neighbor sent me certain presents by two of his
subjects, to persuade me to join with him, and to make war upon Ouae Vtina
which was my friend: and farther besought me to retire certain of my men
which were with Vtina, for whom if it had not been he had oftentimes set
upon him and defeited him, he besought me herein by diverse other kings his
allies, which for three weeks or a months space sent messengers unto me to
this end and purpose. But I would not grant unto them that they should make
war upon him, yea rather contrariwise I endeavored to make them friends:
wherein they condiscended unto me, so far forth that they were content to
allow of any thing that I would set down: whereupon the two Spaniardes which
of long time knew well the nature of the Indians, warned me that in any case I
should not trust unto them: because that when they The Floridians great
traitors and disemblers.
showed good countenance and the best cheer unto men, then was the time that
they would surprise and betraye them: and that of their nature they were the
greatest traitors and most deep dissemblers of the world. Besides I never
trusted them but upon good ground, as one that had discovered a thousand of
their crafts and subtilties, as well by experience as by reading of the
histories of late years. Our two barks were not so soon finished, but I sent
Captain Vasseur to disconer a long the cost lying toward the North, and
commanded him to sail unto a river the king whereof was called Audusta, which
was lord of that place, where those of the year 1562. inhabites. I sent him
twoe suits of apparel, with certain hachats, knives, and other small trifles,
the better to insinuate my self into his friendship. And the better to win
him I sent in the bark with captain Vasseur a soldier called Aimon, which was
one of them which returned home in the first voyage, hoping that king Audusta
might remember him. But before they were embarked I commanded them to make
inquiry what was become of another called Rouffi, which remained alone in
those parts, when Nicolas Nicalas Masson.
Masson and those of the first voyage embarked themselves to return into
France. They understood at their arriual there, that a bark passing that way
had carried away the same soldier: And afterward I knew for a certainty, that
they were Spaniardes which had carried him to Hauana. The king Audusta sent
me back my bark full of mill, with a certain quantity of King Audustas
great humanity. Perles burned
beans, twoe stages, some skins painted after their manner, and certain
pearls of small value, because they were burnt: and sent me word that if I
would dwell in his quarters, he would give me a great country: and that
after he had gathered his mil, he would spare me as much as I would have. In
the mean while there came unto our forte a flock of stock voues in so Peter
Martyr writes cap. 1. decad. 7. that the like flocks of Pigeons are in the
Isles of the Lucayes.
great number, and that for the space of seven weeks together, that every
day we killed with hargubuse shot twoe hundred in the woods about our forte.
After that captain Vasseur was returned I caused the two barks to be
furnished again with soldiers and mariners, and sent them to carry a present
from me unto the widow of king Hioacaia, whose dwelling was distante The
widow of King Hioacaia, or Hihouhacara.
from our forte about twelve leages northward. She courteously received our
men, sent me back my barks full of mil and acorns with certain baskets full
of the leaves of Cassine, where with they make their drink. And the place
where this widow dwells is the most plentiful of mil that is in all the
coaste and the This Queen's name was Nia-Cubacani.
most pleasant. It is thought that the queen is the most beautiful of all the
Indians, and of whom they make most account: yea and her subjects honor her
so much, that almost continualy they bear her on their shoulders and will not
suffer her to go on foot. With in a few days after the return of my barks,
she sent to visit me by her Hiatiqui, which is as much to say as her
interpreter. Now while I thought I was furnished with victuals until the time
that our ships might come out of France, (for fear of The fifth voyage up the
river of May.
keeping my people idle) I sent my two barks to discover along the river and
up toward the head thereof, which went so far up that they were thirty
leagues good beyond a place named Mathiaqua, Mathiaqua. The discovery of a
mighty lake on the one sid vvherof no land can be seen.
and there they discovered the entrance of a lake upon the oneside whereof no
land can be seen, according to the report of the Indians, which had
oftentimes climed on the hiest trees in the country to see land, and
notwithstanding could not discern any: which was the cause that my men went no
further, but returned back, and in coming home went to see the Island of The
Isle of Edelano.
Edelano situated in the midst of the river, as fair a place as any that may
be seen through the world. For in the space of some three leagues, that it may
contain in length and breadth, a man may see an exceeding rich country and
marueilou fly peopled. At the coming out of the village of Edelano to go unto
the rivers side a man must pass through an allie about three hundred pases
long and fifty paces broad: on both sides whereof great trees are planted,
the boughs whereof are tied together like an An excellent work of nature.
arche, and meet together so artificiallye that a man would think it were an
arboure made of purpose, as fair I say, as any in all christendom, although
it be altogether natural. Our Eneguape, Chilily, Patica, Coya.
men departing from this place rowed to Eneguape, then to Chilily, from thence
to Patica, and lastly they came unto Coya: where leuing their barks in a little
creek of the river with men to guard them, they went to visit Vtina, which
received them very courteously: and when they departed from his house, he
entreated them so earnestly, that six of my men remained with him, of which
number there was one gentleman named Groutauld, which after he had aboade there
about two months and taken great pains to discover the country, with
another which I had left a great while there to that intent, came unto me to
the fort, and The king of Hostaqua or Oustaca able to bring three or four
thousand savages, to the field.
told me that he never saw a fairer country. Among other things he
reported unto me that he had seen a place named Hostaqua, and that the king
thereof was so mighty, that he was able to bring three or four thousand
savages to the field: with whom if I would join and enter in to league, we
might be able to reduce all the rest of the inhabitants unto our obedience:
Besides that The mountain of Apalassy.
this king knew the passages unto the mountain of Apalassi, which the French
men desired so greatly to attain unto, and where the enemy of Hostaqua made
his abode, which was easy to be subdued, if so be we would enter into league
together. This king sent me a plate of a mynerall that came out of this
mountain, out of the foot whereof there runs a stream of gold or copper,
as the savages think, out of which they dig There is a Mine of gold or rich
copper in the mountain of Apalassi.
up the sand with an holow and dry cane of a reed until the cane be full,
afterward they shake it, and find that there are many small grains of
copper and silver among this sand: which gives them to understand that some
rich mine must needs be in the Mountain. And because the mountain was not
past five or six days journey from our fort lying toward the northwest, I
Note.
determined, as soon as our supply should come out of France, to remove our
habitation unto some rivers more toward the north, that I might be nearer
thereunto. One of my soldiers whose name Peter Gamby slain. The village of
Edelano. Gold and silver.
was Peter Gamby, which had remained a long space before in this country to
learn the languages and traffic with the Indians, at the last came to the
village of Edelano, where having gotten together a certain quantity of gold
and silver, and purposing to return unto me, he prayed the king of the village
to lend him a Canoa (which is a vessel made of one whole piece of wood which
the Indians use to fish with all and to row upon the rivers) which this lord of
Edelano granted him. But being greedy of the riches which he had, he commanded
two Indians, which he had charged to conduct him in the Canoa, to murder him
and bring him the merchandise and the gold which he had. Which y^ two traitors
villanously executed: for they knocked him in the head with an hatchet, as he
was blowing of the fire in the Canoa to sees fish. The Paracoussy Vtina sent
certain days afterward, to pray Vtinasendeth to I audonniere for his help.
me to lend him a dosen or fifteen of my shot, to enuade his enemy Potanou,
and sent me word that this enemy once vanquished, he would make me passage,
yea and would conduct me unto the mountains, in such sort that no man should
be able to hinder me. Then I assembled my men to demand their advice, as I
was wont to do in all mine enterprises. The greater part was of A good note.
opinion, that I should do well to send succor unto this Paracoussy,
because it would be hard for me to discover any farther up into the country
without his help: and that the Spaniards A special note
when they were employed in their conquestes, did always enter into alliance
with some one king to ruin another. Notwithstanding, because I did always
mistrust the Indians, and that the more after the last advertisement that the
Spaniards had given me, I doubted least the small number which Vtina demanded
might incur some danger: wherefore I sent him thirty shot under the charge
of Lieuetenant Ottigny: which stayed not above two days with Vtina, while he
prepared victuals for his voyage, which ordinarily and according to the custom
of the country are carried by women and young boys, and by Hermaphrodites.
Vtina setting forward with three hundred of his subjects, Three hundred Indians.
having each of them their bow and quiver full of arrows, caused our thirty
shot to be placed in the forewarde, and made them march all the day until that
the night approaching, and having not gone past half the way, they were
enforced to lie alnight in the woods, near a great sake, and there to encampe
themselves: they separated themselves by six and six, making each of them a
fire about the place where their king lay, for whose guard they ordained a
certain number of those archars, in whom he put most confidence. As soon as
day was come, the camp of the Indians marched within three leagues of
Potanou: There king Vtina requested my Lieutenant to grant him four or five
of his men to go and discover the country: which departed immediately, and
had not gone far but they perceived A lake three leages distant from the
village of Potanou.
upon a lake, distant about three leagues from the village of Potanou, three
Indians which fished in a Canoa. Now the custom is that when they fish in
this lake, they have always a company of Watchmen, armed with Bows and
Arrows to guard the fishers. Our men being hereof advertised by those of the
company, durst not pass any further, for fear of falling into some ambushe.
Wherefore they returned toward Vtina, which suddenly sent them back with a
greater company to surprise the fishers, before they might retire and advertise
their king Potanou of the coming of his enemies. Which they could not execute
so politikely but that two of them escaped: the third also did the best he
could to save himself by swimming, in which mean while he was stayed with
shot of arrows, and they drew him stark dead unto the banks side, where
our Indians fleade of the skin of his head, cut of both his arms in the high
way, reserving his hair for the triumph which their king hoped to make for
the defeat of his enemy. Vtina fearing least Potanou advertised by the
Fishers which were escaped, should put himself in arms to withstand him
valiantly, asked counsel Iavva, signifies their Priest or magician.
of his Iawa, which is as much to say in their language as his Magician, whether
it were best to go any farther. Then this Magician made certain signs
hidious and fearful to behold, and used certain words, which being ended,
he said unto his king, Potanou accompanied with two thousand Indians.
that it was not best to pass any farther, and that Potanou accompanied with
two thousand Indians at the least stayed in such and such a place for him, to
bid him battle: and besides this, that all the said Indians were furnished
with coards to bind the prisoners which they made full account to take. This
relation caused Vtina to be unwilling to pass any farther: Whereupon my
Lieuetenant being as angry as ever he might be, because he had taken so great
pains without doing any thing of account, said unto him, that he would never
think well of him nor of his people, if he would not hazard himself: and that
if he would not do it, at the least that he would give him a guide to conduct
him and his small company to the place where the enemies were encamped.
Hereupon Vtina was ashamed, and seeing the good affection The prediction of the
magician found true.
on of Mountieur de Ottigny determined to go forward. And he failed not to
find his enemies in the very place which the Magician had named: where the
skirmish began, which lasted three long hours: wherein without doubt Vtina had
been defeated, unless our harquebusiers had not borne the burden and brunt
of all the battle, and slain a great number of the soldiers of Potanou,
upon which occasion they were put to flight. Wherewithal Vtina being content
for the present, caused his people to retire and return homewarde to the great
coffeehouse of Mounsieur de Ottigny, which desired nothing more, then to
pursue his victory. After he was come home to his house he sent messagers to
Vtina has eighteen or twenty kings to his Vassals.
eighteen or twenty villages of other kings his vassals, and summoned them to
be present at the feasts and dances which he purposed to celebrate because of
his victory. In the mean while Mounsieur de Ottigny refreshed himself for
two days: and then taking his leave of the Paracoussi, and leaving him twelve
of his men, to see that Potanou, bethinking himself of his late loss, should
not come to burn the houses of Vtina, he set forward on his way to come unto
me unto our fort, where he up and told me how every thing had passed: and
withal that he had promised the twelve soldiers that he would come back
again to fetch them. Then the kings my neighbors all enemies to Vtina, being
advertised of the return of my Lieuetenaunt, came to visit me with presents
and to enquire how things had passed, praying me all to receive them into my
favor, and to become enemy to Vtina, which notwithstanding I would not grant
them for many reasons that moved me.

The Indians are wont to leave their houses and to retire A custom of the
Indians to leave their houses for three or four months and to live in the
vvoods.
themselves into the woods, the space of three months, to wit January,
February, and March: during which time by no means a man can see one Indian.
For when they go on hunting, they make little cottages in the woods,
whereunto they retire themselves, living upon that which they take in hunting.
This was the cause that during this time, we could get no victuals by their
means: and had it not been that I had made good provision They look for
succor out of France by the end of April at the uttermost.
thereof, while my men had store, until the end of April (which was the
time, when at the uttermost, we hoped to have had succor out of France) I
should have been greatly amazed. This hope was the cause that the soldiers
took no great care to look well unto their victuals, although I divided
equally among the^ that which I could get abroad in the country, without
reserving unto my self any more then the least souldyer of all the company.
The month of May approaching and no manner of succor commen out of France, we
fell into extreme want of victuals, constrained to eat the roots of the
earth and certain sorrel which we found in the fields. For although the
savages were returned by this time unto their villages, yet they succored us
with nothing but certain fish, without which assuredly we had perished with
famine. Besides they had given us before the greatest part of their maiz and of
their beans for our merchandise. This Extreme famine for six weeks space^
famine held us from the beginning of May, until the midst of June. During
which time the poor souldyers and handycraftesmen become as feeble as might
be, and being not able to work, did nothing but go one after another in
sentinel unto the clift of an hill, situate very near unto the fort, to see
if they might discover any French ship. In fine being frustrated of their
hope, they assembled altogether, and came to beseech me to take some order that
they might return into France, considering that if we let pass the season to
embarke our selves, we were never like to see our country, where it could not
be chosen but that some troubles were fallen out, seeing they had broken their
promise Promise broken.
made unto us, and that no succor was come from thence. Thereupon it was
consulted and resolved by all the company that the bark Breton should be
trimmed up, whereof Captain Vasseur had charge. But because the ship was not
big enough to receive us all, some thought good to build the Brigantine two
deckes higher, which our mutinous soldyers had brought back, and that 25. men
should hazard themselves to pass therein into France. The rest being better
advised said that it should be far better to build a fair ship upon the
keele of the galiote which I had caused to be made, promising to labor
courageously there upon. Then I enquired of my shipwrights to know in what
space they could make this ship ready. They assured the whole company that
being furnished with all things necessary, they would make it ready by the
eighth of August. Immediately I disposed of the time to w^rke upon it, I gave
charge to Mounsieur de Ottigny my Lieuetenant to cause timber necessary for
the finishing of both the vessels to be brought, and to Mounsieur de Arlac my
standart bearer to go with a bark a league of from the fort to cut down
trees fit to make planckes, and to cause the sawiers which he carried with him
to saw them: and to my Sergeaunt of the company to cause fifteen or sixteen
men to labor in making coals: and to Master Hance keeper of the artillery,
and to the gunner to gather store of rosen to braye the vessels: wherein he
used such diligence, that in less then three Two hogsheads of rosen
weeks he gathered two hogsheads of the same together. There remained now but
the principal, which was to recover victuals to sustain us while our work
endured: which I undertook to do with the rest of my company and the Mariners
of the ship. To this end I embarked my self making up y^ thirtieth in my
great bark to make a voyage of forty or fifty leagues, having with us no
provision at all of victuals: whereby it may easily be gathered how simply
those of our fort were provided. True it is that certain souldyers being
better husbands then the rest, and having made some provision of mast, sold a
little measure thereof for fifteen and twenty sous unto their companions.
During our voyage we lived of nothing else but raspices, of a certain round
grain, little and black, and of the roots of palmites which we gate by the
river sides, wherein after we had sailed a long time in vain, I was
constrained to return to the fort: where the soldyers beginning to be weary
of working because of the extreme famine which did consume them, assembled
themselves, and declared unto me, that seeing we could get no victuals of the
Indians, it was expedient for the saving of their lives, to sease upon the
person of one of the kings of the country: assuring themselves that being
taken, the subjects would not suffer our men to want victuals. I made them
answer that this enterprise was not rashly to be attempted. But that we
ought to have good regard unto the consequence that might ensue thereof.
Hereupon they replied unto me, that seeing the time was past of our succor
from France, and that we were resolved to abandon the country, that there was
no danger to constrain the savages to furnish us with victuals: which for the
present I would not grant unto the^ but promised them assuredly that I would
send to advertise y^ Indians that they should bring me victuals for exchange
of merchandise and apparel: which they also did for the space of certain days,
during which they brought of their mast and of their fish, The vile nature of
the Indians.
which these Indians being traiterous, and mischievous of nature, and knowing
our exceeding strange famine, sold us at so dear a price that for less then
nothing they had gotten from us all the rest of our merchandise which remained.
And which was worse, fearing to be forced by us and seeing that they had gotten
al from us, they came no nearer to our fort then the shot of an Harquebuse.
Thither they brought their fish in their little boats, to which our poor
soldiers were constrained to go, and oftentimes (as I have seen) to give away
the very shirtes from their backs to get one fish. If at any time they showed
unto the savages the excessive price which they took, A cruel answer of the
savages.
these villains would answer the^ rughly and churlishly: if thou make so great
account of thy merchandise, eat it, and we will eat our fish: then fell they out
a laughing and mocked us with open throat. Whereupon our souldyers utterly
impatient, were oftentimes ready to cut them in pieces, and to make them pay
the price of their foolish arrogancy. Notwithstanding considering the
importance hereof, I took pains to appease the impatient soldier: for I
would not by any means enter into question with the savages, and it sufficed
me to delay the time. Wherefore I devised to send unto Vtina to pray him to
deal so far forth with his subjects, as to succor me with mast and maiz:
which he did very sparingly, sending me twelve or fifteen baskets of mast, and
Pinocke a certain kind of fruit as big as cheries.
two of pinockes, which are a kind of little green fruits which grow among
the weeds in the river, and are as big as cheries: yea and this was not but by
giving of them in exchange twice as much merchandise and apparel as they were
worth. For the subjects of Vtina perceived evidently the necessity wherein
we were, and began to use the like speech unto us as the others did: as it is
commonly seen that need alters men's affections. While these things were in
doing a certain breathing space presented it self: for Vtina gave me to
understand that there was a king his subject whose name was Astina, which he
determined Astina a king.
to take prisoner, and to chastise him for his disobedience: that for this
cause, if I would give him aid with a certain number of my soldiers, he
would bring them to the village of Astina, where there was means to recover
mast and maiz. In the mean season he excused himself unto me because he had
sent me no more maiz, and sent me word that the little store that he had left,
was scarcely sufficient for his seede-corne. Now being somewhat relieved, as I
thought, by the hope which I had of this offer, I would not fail to send him
the men which he desired of me, which never the less were very evil
entreated: for he deceived them, and in steed of leading them against Astina,
he caused them to march against his other enemies. My Lieuetenant which had the
charge of this enterprise with Captain Vasseur and my Sergeaunt was determined
to be revenged of Vtina and to cut him in pieces and his people: and had it
not been that they feared to do any thing against my will, without all doubt
they would have put their enterprise in execution. Therefore they would not
pass any farther without aduertising me thereof. Wherefore being come back
again unto the fort, angry and pricked deeply to the quick for being so
mocked, they made their complaints unto me, declaring unto me that they were
almost dead for hunger. They told the whole matter to the rest of the
souldyers, which were very glad that they had entered into that action, and
resolved, assembling themselves again together, to let me understand that
they did persist in their first deliberation, which was, to punish the boldness
and maliciousues of the savages, which they could no longer endure, and were
determined to take one of their kings prisoner: which thing I was enforced to
grant unto them, to the end to avoid a greater mischief, and the sedition
which I foresaw would ensue, if I had made refusal thereof. For, said they,
what occasion have you to deny us, considering the necessity wherein we are,
and the small account that they make of us. Shall it not be lawful for us to
punish them for the wrongs which they do unto us, besides that we know
apparently how little they respect us? Is not this sufficient although there
were no necessity at all, since they thus delude us, and have broken promise
with us? After I had therefore resolved with them to sease on the person of
Vtina, which besides that he had given us occasion hereof, was also most able
to help us to recover victuals, I departed with fiftye of my best souldyers
all embarked in two Barks and we* arrived in the dominions of Vtina, distant
from our fort about fortye or fiftye leagues: then going on shore we drew
toward his village Vtina taken prisoner in his village by Laudoniere and 50.
of his souldyers.
situated six great leagues from the river, where we took him prisoner, how
be it not without great cries and alarmes, and led him away in our barks,
having first signyfied unto his Fatherin law and his chief subjects, that in
that I had taken him, it was not for any desire that I had to do him any
harm, but only to relieve my necesiitie and want of victuals which oppressed
me, and that in case they would help me to some, I would find means to set
him again at liberty: that in the mean space I would retire my self into
my Barks (for I feared least they would there assemble themselves together,
and that some mischief might thereof ensue) where I would stay for him two
days, to receive his answer: notwithstanding that my meaning was not to have
any thing without exchange of marchaundise. This they promised they would
do. And in very deed the very same evening, his wife accompanied withal
the women of the village came unto the Ryuers brincke, and cried unto me to
enter into the bark, to see her husband and her son, which I held both
prisoners. I discovered the Five or six hundred Indians.
next day five or six hundred Indyans Archers, which drew near unto the
Ryuers side, and came to me to signyfie unto me how that during the absence
of their king, their enemy Potanou being thereof advertised, was entered into
their vyllage, The deep dissembling of the Indians.
and had set al on fire. They prayed me that I would succor them:
nevertheless in the mean while they had one part of their troop in ambush,
with intent to set upon me if I had come on land, which was easy for me
to discern. For seeing that I refused so to do, they greatly doubted that
they were discovered, and sought by all means, to remove out of my mind that
evil opinion which I had conceived of them. They brought me therefore fish in
their little boats and of their meal of Mast, they made also of their drink
which they call cassine, which they sent to Vtina and me. Now albeit I had
gotten this point of them, that I held their king prisoner, yet nevertheless
I could not get any great quantitye of victuals for the present: the reason
was, because they thought, that after I had drawn victuals from them, I would
put their King to death. For they measured my will according to their custom,
The Indians kill all the men prisoners that they take in war.
whereby they put to death all the men prisoners that they take in War. And
thus being out of all hope of his liberty, they assembled themselves in the
great house, and having called all the people together they proposed the
election of a new King, at which time the Father in law of Vtina set one of
the Kings The election of a new king.
young Sons upon the royal throne: and took such pains that every man did
him homage by the Mayor part of the voices. This election had like to have
been the cause of great troubles among them. For there was a kinsman of a
King near adjoining which pretended a title to the Kingdom, and in deed he
had gotten one part of the Subjects: notwithstanding this enterprise could
not take effect, for as much as by a common consent of the chief, it was
consulted and concluded, that the Son was more meet to succeed the Father
then any other. Now all this while I kept Vtina with me, to whom I had
given some of mine apparel to cloth him, as I had likewise done unto his
Son. But his Subjects which before had an opinion that I would have killed
him, being aduertysed of the good entertaynement which I used toward him,
sent two men which walked alonge the River, and came to visit him, and brought
us some victuals. These two men at their coming were received by me with all
courtesy, and entertained according to the victuals which I had. While these
things thus passed there arrived from all quarters many savages of the
countries The hatred among the savage kings of Florida.
adjoining, which came to see Vtina, and sought by all means to persuade me to
put him to death, offering that if I would do so, they would take order that
I should want no victuals. There was also a king my neighbor whose name was
Saturioua, a subtle and crafty man, and one that showed by proof that he
Note.
was greatly practiced in affairs. This king sent ordinarily messengers unto
me, to pray me to deliver Vtina unto him: and to win me the more easily, he
sent twice seven or eight baskets of Maze or of mast, thinking by this way to
allure me, and to make me come to composition with him: In the end
notwithstanding when he saw he lost his time he ceased to visit me with
ambassages and victuals: and in the mean while I was not able with the small
store of victuals which I had so well to proportion out the travail upon the
ships which we built to return into France, but that in the end we were
constrained to endure extreme famine, which continued among us all the month
of May: for in this latter season, neither Maiz nor Beans, Note.
nor Mast was to be found in the villages, because they had employed all for
to sow their fields, insomuch that we were constrained to eat roots, which
the most part of our men punned in Roots.
the morters which I had brought with me to beat gunnepowder in, and the
grain which came to us from other places: some took the wood of Esquine,
beat it, and made meal thereof, Esquine.
which they boiled with water, and eat it: others went with their harquebusies
to seek to kill some Foul. Yea this misery was so great, that one was found
that gathered up among the filth of my house, all the Fish bones that he
could find, which he dried and beat into powder to make bread thereof. The
effects of this hidious famine appeared incontinently among us, for our bones
eftsoons began to clean so near unto the skin, that the most part of the
souldyers had their skins pierced thorough with them in many parts of their
bodies: in such sort that my greatest fear was, least the Indyans would rise
up against us, considering that it would have been very hard for us to have
defended our selves in such extreme decay of all our forces, besides the
scarsitye of all victuals, which failed us all at once. For the very River had
not such plenty of fish as it was wont, and it seemed that the land and water
did fight against us. Now as we were thus upon terms of despair, about the
end of the month of May, and the beginning New corn by the end of May in
Florida.
of June, I was advertised by certain Indyans that were my neighbors, that in
the high country up above the river, there was new maiz, and that that
country was most forward of all. This caused me to take upon me to go thither
with a certain number of my men, and I went up the river to a place called
Enecaque: where I met the sister of Vtina in a village The village of Enecaque.
where she made us very good cheer and sent us fish. We found that which was
told us to be true: for the maiz was now ripe: but by this good luck one
shrewde turn happened unto me. For the most part of my souldyers fell sick
with eating more of it then their weakened stomachs could digest. We had also
been the space of four days, since we departed from our fort, without
eating any thing saving little pinockes, and a A little green fruit that
grows in the ryuers as big as cheries. The Isle of Edelano.
little fish, which we gate of the Fyshers, which we met sometimes along
the ryner. And yet this was so little that certain souldyers eat priuylye
little whelps which were newly whelped. The next day I purpdsed to go into
the Isle of Edelano to take the king which had caused one of my men to be
slain, as I have mentioned before: but being aduertysed of my departing out
of my Fort, and of the way which I took up the River, he feared that I went
forth with a purpose to be revenged of the evil turn which he had played:
so that when I came thither, I found the houses emptye: for he was retired a
little before wythall his people: and I could not by any means keep my
soldiers, being angry because they had lost one of their companions, from
setting the village on fire. At my departure from thence I passed back again
by Enecaque, where I gathered as much maiz as I could possibly: which with
great diligence I conveyed to our fort, to succor my poor men, which I had
left in great necessity. They therefore seeing me a far off coming ran to
that side of the river where they thought I would come on land: for hunger so
pinched them to the heart, that they could not stay until the victuals were
brought them to the fort. And that they well showed, as soon as I was come, and
that I had distributed that little maiz among them, which I had given to each
man, before I came out of the bark: for they eat it before they had taken it
out of the husk. But seeing my self in this extreme need, I took pains
day by day to seek some villages, where there was some food. And as I
travailed Two Carpe^ters killed for gathering the Indians maiz.
this way and that way, it happened that two of my Carpenters were killed by
the two sons of king Emola, and by one whose name was Casti, as they went on
walking to the village called Athore. The cause of this murder was, because
they The village Athore.
could not refrain themselves as they walked through the fields from gathering
a little maiz, which as they were doing they were taken in the manner: whereof
I was presently advertised by an Indian which a little before had brought me a
present from Nia-Cubacany a queen.
Nia-Cubacani Queen of a village, and neighbor to our forte. Upon receipt of
this aduertisment, I sent my sergeant with a number of soldiers, which found
nothing else but the two dead corpses, which they buried, and returned without
doing any other exploite, because the inhabitants were fled away fearing they
should be punished for such a foul fact. As these things thus passed, and
that by this time we had almost driven out the month of May, two subjects of
king Vtina came unto me with an Hermaphrodite, which showed me that by this
time ye maiz was ripe in the greatest part of their quarters. Whereupon Vtina
signified unto me that in case I would carry him home to his house, he
would take such good order that I should have plenty of maiz and beans: and
withal, that the field which he had caused to be sowed for me, should be
reserved to my use. I consulted with my men concerning this matter, and found
by the advice of all my company, that it was best to grant him his request,
saying, yt he had means to succor us with food sufficient to serve our turns
for our embarkement, and that therefore I might do well to carry him home.
Wherefore I caused the two barks forthwith to be made ready, wherein I sailed
to Patica, Patica a village.
a place distant from his village eight or nine leagues, where I found no
body: for they were gotten into the woods, and would not show themselves,
albeit Vtina showed himself unto them, for as much as they imagined that I
should be constrained to let him go. But seeing no body to show themselves I
was constrained to hazard one of my men, which had been acquainted with the
state of the country, to whom I delivered the young son of Vtina, and
commanded him to go with diligence to the village of Vtina, unto his father
in law and his wife, to advertise them that if they would have their king
again, they should bring me victuals unto the side of the little river
whither I was gone. At my man's coming every one made much of the little child,
neither was there a man that thought not himself well appaide to touch him.
His father in law and his wife hearing of these news came presently toward
our barks, and brought bread which they gave unto my soldiers, they held me
there three days, and in the mean while did all y^ they could to take me:
which presently I discovered, and therefore stood diligently upon my guard.
Wherefore perceiving they could not have their purpose, and that they were
already discovered, they sent to advertise me y^ as yet they could not help
me to victuals, and that the corn was not yet ripe. Thus I was constrained to
return and to carry back Vtina home, where I had much a do to save him from
y^ rage of my soldiers: which perceiving y^ maliciousnes of the Indians, went
about to have murdered him. Moreover it seemed they were content that they had
gotten y^ son, and that they cared notgreatly for the father. Now my hope
failing me on this side, I devised to send my men to the villages, where I
thought y^ maiz was by this time ripe: I went to diverse places, and continued
so doing fifteen days after, when as Vtina besought me again to send him
unto his village, assuring himself that his subjects would not stick to give
me victuals: and that in case they refused so to do, he was content that I
should do what I thought good with him. I undertook this voyage the second time
with the two barks furnished as before. At my coming unto the little river, we
found his subjects there, which failed not to come thither, with some quantity
of bread, beans, and fish, to give my soldiers. Nevertheless returning again
to Desire of revenge rooted in the savages
their former practice they sought almeanes to entrap me, hoping to cry
quittance for the imprisonment of their king, if they might have gotten the
victory of me. But after that they saw the small means, which they had to
annoy me, they returned to entreaties and offered that if I would give them
their king with certain of my soldiers, they would conduct them unto the
village, and that the subjects seeing him, would be more willing to give us
victuals. Which thing notwithstanding I would not grant unto the^ (mistrusting
their subtlety, which was not so couerte, but that one might epsy day at a
little hole) until they had first given me two me^ in pledge with charge y^ by
the next day they should bring me victuals. Which thing they granted, and gave
me two men, which I put in chains, for fear they should escape away, as I
knew well they were instructed to do. Four days were spent in these
conferences, at the end whereof they declared unto me, that they could not
fully and wholly perform their promise: and that the uttermost that they could
do for the present was to cause each subject to bring his burden of myl. To
conclude they were content to do so on condition that I would send them their
two pledges within ten days. As my lieuetenant was ready to depart, I warned A
necessary admonition.
him above all things, to take heed he fell not into the Indians hands:
because I knew them to be very subtle and crafty to enterprise and execute
any thing to our disadvantage. He departed therefore with his troop, and came
to the small river whereinto we were accustomed to enter to approach as near as
we could unto the village of Vtina, being six french leagues distant from
thence. There he went on shore, put his men in good array, and drew straight
toward the great house that was the kings, where the chief men of y^
country were assembled, which caused very great store of victuals to be
brought now one and then another, in doing whereof they spent notwithstanding
three or four days: in which mean while they gathered men together to set
upon us in our retreite. They used therefore many means to hold us still in
breath. The Floridians subtilties.
For one while they demanded their pledges, another while (seeing my liuetenant
would not yield to the^, until such time as they had brought the victuals unto
the boats, according to the agreement passed between us) they signified unto
him that the women and young children were affraide out of all measure to see
fire in their matches so near their harquebuses: and that therefore they most
earnestly besought them to put them out, that they might more easily get people
enough to carry the victuals, and that they for their parts would leave
their bows, and arrows, and would be contented that their servants should
carry them. This second request was as flatly denied them as the former: For
it was an easy matter to smell out their intention. But while these things
were thus in handling, Vtina by no means was to be seen, but hid and kept
himself secret in a little house a part, where certain chosen men of mine
went to see him, showing themselves agreeued with him, for the long delays of
his subjects: whereunto he answered, that his subjects were so much incensed
against us, that by no means possible he was able to keep them in such
obedience, as he willingly would have done, and that he could not hold them
from waging of war against Monsieur De Ottigny. That he also called to mind,
that even while he was prisoner, at what time our men led him into his
country to obtain some victuals, he saw along the high ways arrows stuck
up, at the ends whereof A certain sign of war
long hairs were fastened, which was a certain sign of open war
proclaimed, which arrows the captain also carried with him to the fort. He
said further that in respect of the good will he bare the Captain, he
forewarned his Lieuetenant that his subjects were determined to cut down the
trees, and cause them to fall a thwhart the little river, where the boats
were, to keep them from departing thence, that they might fight with them at
their ease, and that if it thus fell out, he assured him for his part he
would not be there to meddle in the matter. And that which much more augmented
the suspicion of war was, that as my messengers departed from Vtina, they
heard the voice of one of my men, which during the voyage had always been
among the Indians, and whom as yet they would never render, until they had
gotten their pledges home. This poor fellow cried out a main, because two
Indians would have carried him into the woods to have cut his throat:
whereupon he was succored and delivered. These admonitions being well
understood, and after ripe deliberation thereof Mounsieur, de Ottigny resolved
to retire himself the seven and twentieth of July. Wherefore he set his
soldiers in order, and delivered to each of them a sack full of myl: and
afterward he marched toward his barks, thinking to prevent the enterprise of
the savages. There is at the An alley of three or four hundred pases long.
coming forth of the village a great alley about three or four hundred pases
long, which is covered on both sides with great trees. My lieutenant disposed
his men in this alley and set them in such order as they desired to march: for
he was well assured that if there were any ambush, it would be at the coming
out of the trees. Therefore he caused Mounsieur De Arlac mine ensign to march
somewhat before with eight harquebusiers to discover whether there were any
danger: besides he commanded one of my sergeants and corporalles to march on
the out side of the alley with four harquebusiers while he himself conducted
the rest of his company through it. Now as he suspected, so it fell out: for
Mounsieur de Arlac met with two or three hundred Indians at the end of the
alley, which saluted him with an infinite A skirmish tvveene the Savages and
the French.
number of their arrows, and with such fury that it was easy to see with
what desire they sought to charge us. Howbeit they were so well sustained in the
first assault which mine ensign gave them, that they which fell down dead,
did somewhat abate the choler of those which remained alive. This done my
lieuetenant hasted to gain ground in such sort as I have already said. A
second fresh charge of Savages.
After he had marched about four hundred pases, he was charged afresh with a
new troop of savages which were in number about three hundred, which assailed
him before, while the rest of the former set upon him behind. This second
assault was so valiantly sustained, that I may justly say that Monsieur De
Ottigny so well discharged his duty, as was possible for a good Captain to
do. And so it stood them upon: for he had to deal with such kind of men, as
knew well how to fight and to obey their head which conducted them, and which
knew so well to behave themselves in this conflict, as if Ottigny had not
prevented their practice, he had been in danger to have been defeated. The
Floridians manner of fight.
Their manner in their fight was, that when two hundred had shot, they
retired themselves and gave place to the rest that were behind, and all the
while had their eye and foot so quick and ready, that as soon as ever they
saw the harquebusie laid to the cheek, so soon were they on the ground, and
eftsone up to answer with their bows, and to fly their way, if by chance
they perceived we went about to take them: for there is nothing that they fear
so much, because of our swords and daggers. This The Floridians chief fear.
conflict continued and lasted from nine of the clock in the morning, until
the night departed them. And if Ottigny had not bethought himself to cause his
men to break the arrows which they found in the way, and so to deprive the
savages of the means to begin again, without all doubt he should have had
very much to do: for by this mean they lacked arrows, and so were constrained
to retire themselves. During the time of the conflict they cried and made
signs that they were the captains and lieutenants friends: and that they
fought for none other cause but to be revenged on the soldiers, which were
their mortal enemies. My lieutenant being come unto his boats took a reuewe
of his company, and found two men wanting which were Two slain.
killed, of whom the one was called James Sale, and the others name was
Mesureur. He found moreover two and twenty of Two and twenty vvounded.
them wounded, which with much ado he caused to be brought unto the boats.
All the mill that he found among his company came but to two men's burdens,
which he divided equally among them. For as soon as the conflict began,
every man was constrained to leave his sack to put his hand unto his weapon.
In this mean while I remained at the forte, and caused every man diligently to
travel, hoping that my Lieutenant would bring us victuals. But seeing the
time consume away, I began to suspect the crueth of that which fell out,
whereof I was assured immediately after at their return. Seeing therefore mine
Prayer and thanks unto God for their deliverance.
hope frustrate on that side, I made my prayer unto GOD, and thanked him of his
grace which he had showed unto my poor soldiers which were escaped: Afterward
I thought upon new means to obtain victuals, as well for our return into
France, as to drive out the time until our embarking. I was advertised by
certain of our company, which usually went on hunting into the woods and
through the villages, that in the village The village Sarauhi.
Sarauahi situated on the other side of the river and two leagues distant from
the fort, and in the village Emoloa there were The village Emoloa.
fields wherein the mil was very forward, and that there was thereof in those
parts in great abundance. Wherefore I caused my boats to be made ready, and
sent my Sergeant thither with certain soldiers, which used such diligence,
that we had good store of myl. I sent also to the river which the Savages call
The river of Iaracana called by Ribault the river of Sum.
Iracana named by captain Ribault the river of Sum, where Captain Vasseur
and my sergeant arrived with two boats and their ordinary furniture, and
found there a great assembly of the Lords of the country, among whom was
Athore the son of Satourioua, Appolou, and Tacadocorou, which were there
assembled to make merry: because that in this place are the fairest maids and
women of all the country. Captain Vasseur in my Courtesy and liberality the
best means to deal with the savages.
name gave certain small trifles to all the Lords, to the Queen, to the maids
and women of the villages. Whereupon the boats were forth with laden with
myl, after they had made our men as good cheer as they could devise. The
Queen sent me two small Mats so artificially wrought as it was impossible to
Most artificial mattes.
make better. Now finding our selves by this mean sufficiently furnished with
victuals, we began each of us in his place, to travail and use such diligence,
as the desire to see our native country might move us. But because two of our
Carpenters were slain by the Indians (as heretofore I mentioned) John de Hais,
Master carpenter, a man very worthy of his vocation, repaired unto me, and
told me that by reason of want of men he was not able to make me up the ship
against the time that he had promised me: which speech caused such a mutiny
among the soldiers that very hardly he escaped killing: howbeit I appeased
them as well as I could, and determined to work no more from thence forth upon
the ship, but to content our selves to repair the Brigantine which I had. So
we began to beat down all The beating down of the houses without the
fort, and the palisade.
the houses that were without the forte, and caused coals to be made of the
timber thereof: likewise the soldiers beat down the pallisade which was
toward the waters side, neither was I ever able to keep them from doing it. I
had also determined to beat down the fort before my departure and to set it
on fire, for fear least some newe-come gueste should have enjoyed and
possessed it. In the mean while there was none of us to whom it was not an
extreme grief to leave a country, wherein we had endured so great travails
and necessities, to discover that which we must forsake through our own
countriemens default. For if we had been succored in time and place, and
according The cause why the French lost Florida.
to the promise that was made unto us, the war which was between us and
Vtina, had not fallen out, neither should we have had occasion to offend the
Indians, which with all pains in the world I entertained in good amity, as well
with merchandise and apparel, as with promise of greater matters, and with
whom I so behaved my self, that although sometimes I was constrained to take
victuals in some few villages, yet I lost Eight kings Laudonniers friends
and allies. The principal scope of planters in strange countries.
not the alliance of eight kings and Lords my neighbors, which continually
succored and aided me with whatsoever they were able to afford. Yea this was
the principal scope of all my purposes, to win and entertain them, knowing
how greatly their amity might advance our enterprise, and principally while I
discovered the commodities of the country, and sought to strengthen my self
therein. I leave it to your cogitation to think how near it went to our
hearts, to leave a place abounding Florida a rich country.
in riches (as we were thoroughly informed thereof) in coming whereunto, and
doing service unto our Prince, we left our own country, wives, children,
parents, and friends, and passed the perils of the sea, and were therein
arrived, as in a plentiful treasure of all our hearts desire. As each of us
were much tormented in mind with these or such like cogitations, the Aug. 3.
1565.
third of August I discryed four sails in the sea, as I walked upon a
little hill, whereof I was exceeding well appaide: I sent immediately one of
them which were with me to advertise those of the fort thereof, which were so
glad of those news, that one would have thought them to be out of their
wits to see them laugh and leap for joy. After these ships had cast ancre,
we discried that they sent one of their ship boats to land: whereupon I
caused one of mine to be armed with diligence, to send to meet them, and to
know who they were. In the mean while fearing least they were Spaniards, I set
my soldiers in order and in readiness, attending the return of Captain Vasseur
and my lieutenant, which were gone to meet them, which brought me word that
they were Englishmen: and in truth they had in their company one whose name
was Martine Atinas of Diepe, which at that time was in their service, which on
the behalf of Master Master John Havvkins the English general.
John Hawkins their general came to request me that I would suffer them to
take fresh water, whereof they stood in great need, signifiyng unto me that
they had been above fifteen days on the coast to get some. He brought unto
me from the general two flacons of wine, and bread made of wheat: whichich
greatly refreshed me, forasmuch as for seven months space I never tasted a
drop of wine: nevertheless it was all divided among the greatest part of my
souldyers. This Martine Atinas had guided the Englishmen unto our coast,
wherewith he was acquainted: for in the year 1562. he came thither with me,
and therefore the general sent him to me. Therefore after I had granted his
request, he signified the same unto the general, which the next day following
caused one of his small ships to enter into the river, and came to see me in
a great shipboate, accompanied with gentlemen honorably apparelled, yet
unarmed. He sent for great store of bread and wine, to distribute thereof to
every one: On my part I made him the best cheer I could possibly, and caused
certain Sheep and Poultrie carried into Florida.
sheep and poultry to be killed, which until this present I had carefully
preserved hoping to store the country withal. For, notwithstanding all the
necessities and sickness that happened unto me, I would not suffer so much as
one chicking to be killed: by which means in a short time I had gathered
together above an hundred Pullets. Now three days passed, while the English
general remained with me, during which time the Indyans came in from all parts
to see him, and asked me whether he were my An advantage vvisely taken.
brother: I told them he was so, and signified unto them, that he was come to
see me and aid me with so great store of victuals, that from thence forward I
should have no need to take any thing of them. The brute hereof incontinently
was spread over all the country, in such sort as Ambassadors came unto me
from all parts, which on the behalf of the kings their masters desired to make
alliance with me: and even they, which before sought to make war against me,
came to offer their friendship and service unto me: Whereupon I received them
and gratified them with certain presents. The general immediately
understood the desire and urgent occasion which I had to return into France:
Whereupon he offered to transport me and al my company home: whereunto
notwithstanding I would not agree, being in doubt upon what occasion he made
so large an offer. For I knew not how the case stood between the French and
the English: and although he promised me on his faith to put me on land in
France, before he would touch in England, yet I stood in doubt least he The
French mistrusted that the Englishmen would plant in Florida.
would attempt somewhat in Florida in the name of his mistress. Wherefore I
flatly refused his offer: whereupon there rose a great mutiny among my
Soldiers, which said that I sought to destroy them all, and that the
Brigantine, whereof I spoke before, was not sufficient to transport them,
considering the season of the year wherein we were. The brute and mutinye
increased more and more: for after that the General was returned to his ships,
he told certain gentlemen and soldiers which went to see him, partly to make
good cheer with him, he declared, I say, unto them, that he greatly doubted
that hardly we should be able to pass safely in those vessels which we had:
and that in case we should enterprise the same, we should no doubt be in
great ieopardye: notwithstanding if I were so contented, he would transport
part of my men in his ships, and that he would leave me a small ship to
transport the rest. The Souldyers were no sooner come home, but they signified
the offer unto their companyons, which incontinently consented together that in
case I would not accept the same they would embarke themselves with him and
forsake me, so that he would receive them according to his promise. They
therefore assembled themselves altogether and came to seek me in my Chamber,
and signified unto me their intention, whereunto I promised to answer within
one hour after. In which mean space I gathered together the principal
members of my company, which after I had broken the matter with them, answered
me all with one voice, that I ought not to refuse this offer, nor contemn the
occasion which presented it self, and that they could not think evil of it
in France, if being forsaken, as we were, we aided our selves with such means
as God had sent us. After sundry debatinges of this matter, in conclusion I
gave mine advise, that we ought to deliver him the price of the ship which
he was to leave us, and that for my part I was content Silver found in Florida.
to give him the best of my stuff, and the silver which I had gathered in the
Country. Whereupon notwithstanding it was determined that I should keep the
silver, for fear, least the Queen of England seeing the same* should the
rather be encouraged Note.
to set footing there, as before she had desired: that it was far better to
carry it into France, to give encouragement unto The great importance of this
enterprise.
our Princes not to leave of an enterprise of so great importance for our
common wealth, and that, seeing we were resolved to depart, it was far better
to give him our Artillerye, which otherwise we should be constrained to leave
behind us, or to hide it in the ground, by reason of the weakness of our men,
being not able to embarke the same. This point being thus concluded and
resolved on, I went my self unto the English General, accompanied with my
Lieutenant, and Captain Vasseur, Captain Verdier, and Trenchant the Pilot,
and my Sergeant, all men of experience in such affairs and knowing
sufficiently how to drive such a bargain. We therefore took a view of the
ship which the General would sell, whom we drew to such reason, that he was
content to stand unto mine own men's judgment, who esteemed it to be worth
seven hundred crowns, whereof we agreed very friendly. Wherefore I delivered him
in earnest of the sum, two bastards, two mynions, one thousand of iron, and
one thousand of powder. This bargain thus made* he considered the necessity
wherein we were, having for all our sustenance but myl and water: whereupon The
great humanity and bounty of Master John Havvkins to the French.
being moved withpitie, he offered to relieve me with twenty barrels of meal,
six pipes of beans, one hogshead of salt, and a hundred of wax to make
candels. Moreover forasmuch as he saw my Souldyers go barefoote, he offered
me besides fifty payres of shoes, which I accepted and agreed of a price with
him, and gave him a byll of mine hand for the same, for which until this
present I am indebted to him. He did more then this: for particularly he
bestowed upon my self a great iare of oil, a iare of Uynagre, a barill of
Olyues, and a great quantitye of Ryce, and a barill of white Biscuit. Besides
he gave diverse presents to the principal Officers of my company according
to their qualities: so that I may say that we received as many courtesies of
the General, as it was possible to receive of any man living. Wherein
doubtless he has won the reputation of a good and charitable man,
deserving to be esteemed as much of us all as if he had saved all our lives.
Incontinent after his The departure of the English General
departure I spared no pain to hasten my men to make biscuits of the meal
which he had left me, and to hoope my Caske to take in water needful for
the voyage. A man may well think what diligence we used, in respect of the
great desire we had to depart, wherein me continued so well, that the
fiifteenth day of August the biscuit, the greatest part of our water, and all
the August. 15.
Souldyers stuff was brought aborde: so that from that day forward we did
nothing but stay for good winds to drive us into France: which had freed us
from an infinite number of mischiefs which afterward we suffered, if they
had come as we desired: but it was not Gods good pleasure, as shall appear
hereafter. Being thus in a readynes to set Sail, we bethought our selves
that it would do well to bring certain men and women of the country into
France, to the end, that if this voyage should be taken in hand again,
they might declare unto their Kings, the greatness of our King, the
excellencye of our Princes, the goodness of our Country, and the manner of
living of the Frenchmen: and that they might also learn our language to serve
our turns thereby in time to come. Wherein I took so good order, that I had
found means to bring away with me the goodlyest persons of all the Country,
if our intentions had succeeded, ad I hoped they would have done. In the mean
season the Kings my neighbors came often to see and visit me: which, after
that they understood that I would return into France, demanded of me
whether I meant to return again or no, and whether it should be in short
time. I signyfied unto them that within ten Moons (so they call their
Months) I would visit them again with The Floridians measure their months
by the reuolutions of the Moon.
such force, that I would be able to make them Conquerours over all their
enemies. They prayed me that I would leave them my house, that I would
forbid my Souldyers to beat down the fort and their lodginges, and that I
would leave them a boat to aid them withal in their war against their
enemies. Which I made as though I would grant unto them, to the end I might
always remain their friend until my last departure.

The end of the second voyage.
THE THIRD VOYAGE of the French men made by Captain JOHN RIBAVLT unto FLORIDA.
AS I was thus occupied in these conferences, the The arriual of Captain John
Ribault at the fort the 28. of August. 1565.
wind and the tide served well to set soil, which was the eight and twentieth
of August, at which instant Captain Vasseur, which commanded in one of my
ships, and Captain Verdier, which was chief in the other, now ready to go
forth, began to discrye certain sails at sea, whereof they advertised me
with diligence: whereupon I appointed to arm forth a beat in good order to
go to descrye and know what they were. I sent also to the sentinels, which I
caused to be kept on a little knappe, to cause certain men to clymbe up to the
top of the highest trees Note.
the better to discover them. They discryed the great beat of the ships,
which as yet they could not perfectly discern, which, as far as they could
judge, seemed to chase my boat, which by this time was passed the bar of the
River: so that we could not possiblye judge whether they were enemies which
would have carried her away with them: for it was to great a ken to judge the
truth thereof. Upon this doubt I put my men in order and in such array as though
they had been enemies: and in deed I had great occasion to mistrust the same:
for my boat came unto their ship about two of the clock in the afternoon,
and sent me no news all that day long to put me out of doubt who they should
be. The next day in the morning about eight or nine of the clock I saw seven
boats (among which mine own was one) full of soldiers enter into the River,
having every man his harquebuse and moryon on his head, which marched all in
battle along the cliffes where my sentinels were, to whom they would make no
kind of answer, notwithstanding all the demaundes that were made unto them,
in so much as one of my soldyers was constrained to bestow a shot at them
without doing hurt nevertheless to any of them, by reason of the distance
between him and the boats. The report hereof being made unto me, I placed each
of my men in his quarter, with full deliberation to defend our selves, if they
had been enemies, as in truth we thought them to have been: likewise I
caused the two small field pieces which I had left me to be trimmed in such
sort, as if in approaching to the fort they had not cried, y^ it was Captain
Ribault, I had not failed to have discharged the same upon them. Afterward I
understood that the cause why they entered in this manner, proceeded of the
false reports False reports of Laudonniere to the Admiral of France.
which had been made unto my Lord Admiral by those which were returned into
France in the first ships. For they had put in his head, that I playde the Lord
and the King, and that I would hardly suffer that any other save my self
should enter in thither to govern there. Thus we see how the good name of the
most honest is oftentimes assailed by such, as having no means to win
themselves credyt by virtuous and laudable endeavors, think by debas^ng of
other men's virtues to augment the feeble force of their faint courage, which
nevertheless is one of the most notable dangers which may happen in a
commonwealth, and The danger of backbiting.
chieflye among men of war which are placed in government. For it is very
hard, yea utterly impossible, that in governing of a company of men gathered
out of diverse places and sundry Nations, and namely such as we know them to be
in our wars, it is, I say, impossible, but there will be always some of
evil conditions and hard to be ruled, which easily conceive an hatred against
him, which by admonitions and light corrections endeavors to reduce them to
the discypline of war. For they seek nothing else, but for a small occasion
founded upon a light pretext to found into the ears of great Lords that which
mischieuously they have contrived against those, whose execution of justice is
odious unto them. And albeit I will not place my self in the rank of great
and renowned Captains, such as lived in times passed, yet we may judge by
their examples, how hurtful backebyters have been unto commonwealths. I
will only take Alcibiades Alcibiades banished by backebyters.
for witness in the commonwealth of the Athenians, which by this mean was cast
into banishment, whereupon his Citizens felt the smart of an infinite number of
mischiefs: insomuch as in the end they were constrained to call him home
again, and acknowledge at length the fault they had committed in forgetting
his good services, and rather believing a false report, then having had regard
unto so many notable exploytes which in former time he had achieved. But that
I loose not my self in digressing so far in this my justification, I will
return again to my first course. Being therefore advertised that it was
Captain Ribault, I went Laudonnieres receiving of Captain Ribault.
forth of the fort to go to meet him, and to do him all the honor I could
by any means, I caused him to be welcomed with the artillery, and a gentle
voley of my shot, whereunto he answered with his. Afterward being come on
shore and received honorably and with joy, I brought him to my lodging,
rejoicing not a little because that in this company I knew a good number of my
friends, which I entreated in the best sort that I was able, with such
victuals as I could get in the country, and y^ small store which I had left
me, with that which I had of the English General. Howbeit I maruailed not a
little when as all of them with one voice began to utter unto me these or the
like speeches. My Captain, we praise God that we have found you alive, and
chiefly because we know, y^ the reports which have been made of you, are false.
These speeches moved me in such sort, y^ I would needs out of hand know more,
mistrusting some evil. Wherefore having accosted Captain John Ribault, and
going both of us aside together out of y^ fort, he signified unto me the charge
which he had, praying me not to return into France, but to stay with him my
self and my company, and assured me that he would make it well thought of at
home. Whereupon I replied that out of this place I would do him all service:
that for the present I could not nor ought not accept this offer, since he was
come for no other intent then to occupy the place which I before possessed:
that I could have no credit to be there commanded: that my friends would never
like of it, and that he would hardly give me that counsel, if in good
earnest I should demand his advise therein. He made me answer, that he would
not command me, that we should be companions, and that he would build another
fortress, and that he would leave mine own unto me. This notwithstanding I
fully advertised him, that I could not receive a greater comfort then the
news which he brought me to return into France: and farther y^ though I
should stay there, yet it must needs be y^ one of us both was to command with
title of the kings Lieutenant, y^ this could not well agree together: that I had
rather have it cast in my teeth to be the poorest beggar in the world, then
to be commanded in that place, where I had endured so much to inhabit and
plant there, if it were not by some great Lord or Knight of the order: and that
in these respects I prayed him very heartily to deliver me the Letters which
my Lord Admiral had written unto me, which he performed.

The contents of those letters was this.

Captain Laudonniere, because some of them which are returned from Florida
speak indifferently of the Country, Letters of the Lord Admiral unto
Laudonniere.
the King desires your presence, to the end, that according to your trial, he
may resolve to bestow great cost thereon, or wholly to leave it: and therefore
I send Captain John Ribault to be Governor there, to whom you shall deliver
whatsoever you have in charge, and inform him of all things you have
discovered. And in a postscript of the letter was thus written. Think not,
that whereas I send for you, it is for any evil opinion or mistrust that I
have of you, but that it is for your good and for your credit, and assure your
self that during my life you shall find me your good Master.

Chastillon.


Now after I had long discoursed with Captain Ribault, Captain la Grange
accosted me, and told me of an infinite sight of false reports which had been
made of me to my great hinderaunce: and among other things he informed me,
that my Lord 1. Accusations against him. 2. 3. 4. 5.
Admyrall took it very evil that I had carried a woman with me: likewise
that some body had told him that I went about to counterfayte the King, and
to play the Tyrant: that I was to cruel unto the men that went with me:
that I sought to be advanced by other means then by my Lord Admiral, and
that I had written to many Lords of the Court, which I ought not to have done.
Whereunto I answered, that the woman was a poor Chambermayde, which I had
taken up in an Inn, to ouersee 1. Laudonnieres answer thereunto.
my household business, to look to an infinite sort of diverse beasts, as
Sheep and Poultrye which I carried over with me to store the country
withal: that it was not meet to put a man to attend this business: likewise,
considering the length of the time that I was to abide there, me thought it
should not offend any body, to take a woman with me, as well to help my
soldiers in their sicknesses, as in mine own, whereinto I fell afterward. And
how necessary her service was for us, each one at that time might easily
perceive: That all my men thought so well of her, that at one instant there
were six or seven which did demand her of me in marriage (as in very deed
one of them had her after our return.) Touching that which was said that I
plaide the king, 2.
these reports were made, because I would not bear with any thing which was
against the duty of my charge and the kings service. Moreover, that in such
enterprises it is necessary for a governor to make himself known and
obeyed, for fear least every body would become a master, perceauing
themselves far from greater forces. And that if the tale tellers called this
rigor, 3.
it rather proceeded of their disobedience, then of my nature less subject to
cruelty then they were to rebellion. For the 4.
last point, that I had not written to any of the Lords of the Court but by
the advice and commandment of my Lord Admiral, which willed me at my
departure to send part of such things as I should find in the country unto
the Lords of the Counsel: to the end that being moved by this mean they might
deal with the Queen mother for the continuance of this enterprise: that
having been so small time in the country, continually hindered with building
of fortresses, and vnlading of my ships, I was not able to come by any new or
rare things to send the^, whereupon I thought it best to content them in the
mean while with letters, until such time as I might have longer space to
search out the Country, and might recover something to send them: the
distribution of which letters I meant not otherwise but to refer to my Lord
Admirals good pleasure: that if the bearer had forgot himself so far, as
that he had broken the covering of the letters, and presented the^ himself for
hope of gain, it was not my commandment. And that I never honored noble 5.
man so much, nor did to any more willing and faithful service then to my Lord
Admiral, nor ever sought advancement but by his means. You see how things
passed for this day. The next day the Indians came in from all parts, to know
what people these were, to whom I signified that this was he which in the
year a thousand five hundred sixty and two arrived in this country, and
erected the pillar which stood at the entry of the river. Some of them knew
him: for in truth he was easy to be known by reason of the great bearde
which he ware. He received many presents of the^ which were of the villages
near adjoining, among whom there were some that he had not yet forgotten. The
kings Homoloa, Sarauahi, Alimacani, Malica, and Casti, Five Indian kings.
came to visit him and welcome him with diverse gifts according to their
manner. I advertised them that he was sent thither by the king of France, to
remain there in my room, and that I was sent for. Then they demanded and
prayed him, if it might stand with his good pleasure, to cause the merchandise
that he had brought with him to be delivered them, and that in few days they
would bring him to the mountains of Apalassy, The montains of Apalassy
wherein are mines of perfect gold. Sieroa Pira read metell.
whither they had promised to conduct me, and that in case they performed not
their promise, that they were content to be cut in pieces. In those mountains,
as they said, is found red copper, which they call in their language Sieroa
Pira, which is as much to say, as read mettell, whereof I had a piece, which at
the very instant I showed to Captain Ribault, which caused his gold-finer to
make an assay thereof, which reported unto him that it was perfect gold. About
the time of these conferences, Perfect gold.
commings and goings of the kings of the country, being weakened with my
former travail, and fallen into a melancholy upon the false reports that had
been made of me, I fell into a great continual fever, which held me eight or
nine days, during which time Captain Ribault caused his victuals to be
brought on shore, and bestowed the most part thereof in the house which my
Lieutenant had built about two hundred pases without the fort: which he did to
the end they might be the better defended from the weather, and likewise to the
intent that the meal might be nearer to the bake-house, which I had built of
purpose in that Good means to avoid the danger of fire.
place, the better to avoid the danger of the fire, as I said before. But lo
how oftentimes misfortune does search and pursue us, even then when we think to
be at rest! lo see what happened after that captain Ribault had brought up
three of his small ships into the river, which was the fourth of September!
Six great Spanish September. 4.
ships arrived in the rode, where four of our greatest ships remained, which
cast anchor, assuring our men of good amity. They The Spaniards undermining and
surprising of the French.
asked how the chief captains of the enterprise did, and called them all by
their names and surnames. I report me to you if it could be otherwise but these
men before they went out of Spain must needs be informed of the enterprise and
of those that were to execute the same. About ye break of day they began to
make toward our men: but our men which trusted them never a deal, had hoised
their sails by night, being ready to cut the stringes that tied them.
Wherefore perceiving yt this making toward our men of the Spaniards was not to
do them any pleasure, and knowing well that their furniture was to small to make
head against them, because that ye most part of their men were on shore, they
cut their Cables, left their ankers, and set sail. The Spaniards seeing the^
selves discovered lent the^ certain vol^es of their great ordinance, made
sail after them, and chased them al day long: but our men got way of them still
toward the sea. And the Spaniardes seeing they could not rech them, by reason
that the french ships were better of sail then theirs, and also because they
would not leave the coast, turned back and went on shore in the river Seloy,
which we call The river Seloy or the river of Dolphines but eight or ten
leagues over land from the fort: but it is thirty dubling the cape by sea fol.
19.
the river of Dolphines eight or ten leagues distant from the place where we
were. Our men therefore finding themselves better of sail then they, followed
them to discry what they did, which after they had don, they returned unto the
river of May, where captain Ribault having discryed the^ embarked himself in
a great boat to know what news they had. Being at the entry of the river he
met with the boat of Captain Cousets ship, wherein there was a good number
of men which made relation unto him of all the Spaniards doings: and how the
great ship named the Trinity had kept the sea, and that she was not returned
with the^. They told him moreover yt they had seen three Spanish ships enter
into ye river of Dolphins, and the other three remained in ye rode, farther, yt
they had put their soldiers, their victuals and munitio^ on land. After he
understood these news he returned to the fortress, and came to my chamber
where I was sick, and there in the presence of ye captains, La Grange, S.
Marie, Ottigny, Visty, Yonuille, and other gentlemen, he propounded, yt it was
necessary for ye kings service, to embark himself with all his forces, and with
y^ three ships y^ were in the rode to seek the Spanish fleet, whereupon he
asked our advise. I first replied, and showed unto him the consequence of such
an enterprise, aduertising him among other things of Dangerous flawes of wind
on the cost of Florida in september.
the perilous flawes of winds that rise on this coast, and that if it chanced
that he were driven from the shore, it would be very hard for him to
recover it again, that in the mean while they which should stay in the fort
should be in fear and danger. The Captains, Saint Marie, and La Grange
declared unto him farther, that they thought it not good to put any such
enterprise in execution, that it was far better to keep the land, and do
their best endeavor to fortify themselves: And that after that the Trinity
(which was the principal ship) were returned, there would be much more
likelihood to enterprise this voyage. This notwithstanding he resolved to
undertake it, and that which more is, after he understood by king Emola, one
of our neighbors King Emola.
which arrived upon the handling of these matters, that y^ Spaniards in great
numbers were gone on shore, which had taken possession of the houses of Seloy,
in the most part whereof they A village and a river both of that name.
had placed their Negros, which they had brought to labor, and also lodged
themselves and had cast diverse trenches about them. Thus for the considerations
which he had, and doubtinge (as he might well do) that the Spaniardes would
encampe themselves there to molest us, and in the end to chase us out of the
country, he resolved and persisted in his embarkment, caused a Proclamation
to be made, that all soldiers that were under his charge should presently with
their weapons embarke them, and that his two ensigns should march: which was
put in execution. He came into my chamber, and prayed me to lend him my
Lieutenant, mine ensign, and my sergeant, and to let all my good soldiers,
which I had, go with him, which I denied him, because, my self being sick,
there was no man to stay in the fort. Thereuppon he answered me that I needed
not to doubt at all, and that he would return the morrow after, that in y^
mean space Monsieur De Lys should stay behind to look to al things. Then I
showed unto him that he was chief in this country, and that I for my part had
no farther authority: that therefore he would take good aduisement what he
did, for fear least some inconvenience might ensue. Then he told me that he
could do no less, then to continue this enterprise, and that in the letter
which he had received from my Lord Admiral, there was a An aduertisment of my
Lord Admiral to Captain Ribault.
postscript, which he showed me written in these words: Captain John Ribault,
as I was enclosing up this letter, I received a certain advice, that Don Pedro
Melendes departs from Spain to go to the coaste of New France: see you
that you suffer him not to encroch upon you, no more then he would that you
should encroch upon him. You see, (quoth he) the charge that I have, and I
leave it unto your self to judge if you could do any less in this case,
considering the certain aduertisment that we have, that they are already on
land, and will invade us. This stopped my mouth. Thus therefore confirmed or
rather obstinate in this enterprise, and having regard rather unto his
particular opinion then unto the aduertismentes which I had given him, and the
inconveniences of the time whereof I had forewarned him, he embarked himself
the eighth of Captain Ribaults embarkment Sept. 8.
September, and took mine ensign and eight and thirty of my men away with
him. I report me to those that know what wars mean, if when an ensign
marches any soldier that has any courage in him will stay behind, to forsake
his ensign: Thus no man of commandment stayed behind with me, for each one
followed him as chief, in whose name, straight after his arriual, all cries
and proclamations were made. Captain Grange, which liked not very well of this
enterprise, was unto the tenth The tenth of September.
of the month with me, and would not have gone aborde, if it had not been
for the instant requests that Captain Ribault made unto him, which staid two
days in the rode attending until La Grange was come unto him: Who being come
aborde they set sail altogether, and from that time forward I never A mighty
tempest the tenth of Sept.
saw them more. The very day that he departed, which was the tenth of
September, there rose so great a tempest accompanied with such storms, that
the Indians themselves assured me that it was the worst weather that ever was
seen on that coast: where upon two or three days after, fearing least our
ships might be in some distress, I sent for Monsieur Du Lys unto me, to take
order to assemble the rest of our people to declare unto them what need we had
to fortify our felues: which was done accordingly: and then I gave them to
understand the necessity and inconveniences whereinto we were like to fall,
as well by the absence of our ships, as by the neerenes of the Spaniards, at
whose hands we could look for no less then an open and sufficient proclaimed
war, seeing they had taken land and forcified themselves so near unto us.
And if any misfortune were fallen unto our men which were at sea, we ought to
make a full account with ourselves that we were to endure many great miseries,
being in so small number, and so many ways afflicted as we were. Thus every
one promised me to take pains: and therefore considering that their proportion
of victuals was small, and that so continuing, they would not be able to do
any great work, I augmented their allowance: although that after the arrival
of captain Ribault my portion of vituacls was allotted unto me as Laudonniere
hardly used by Ribault
unto a common soldier, nether was I able to give so much as part of a
bottel of wine to any man which deserved it: for I was so far from having
means to do so, that the Captain himself took two of my boats, wherein
the rest of the meal was which was left me of the biscuits which I caused to
be made to return into France: so that if I should say that I received more
favor at the hands of the Englishmen being strangers Laudonniere and his
company begin to fortify themselves.
unto me, I should say but a truth. We began therefore to fortify our
selves and to repair that which was broken down, principally toward the
waterside, where I caused threescore foot of trees to be planted, to repair
the Palissado with the plankes which I caused to be taken of the ship which
I had builded. Nevertheless not withstanding all our diligence and travail,
we were never able fully to repair it by reason of the storms, which commonly
did us so great annoy, that we could not finish our enclosure. Perceatting my
self in such extremity I took a muster of the men, which captain Ribault
had left me, A muster of the men left in the fort by Ribault.
to see if there were any that wanted weapon: I found nine or ten of them
whereof not past two or three had ever drawn sword out of a scabbarde, as I
think. Let them which have been bold to say that I had men enough left me,
so that I had means to defend my self, give ear a little now unto me, and
if they have eyes in their heads, let them se what men I had. Of the nine there
were four but young striplinges, which served Captain Ribault and kept his
dogs, the fifth was a cook: among those that were without the fort, and which
were of the aforesaid company of Captain Ribault, there was a Carpenter of
threescore years old, one a beerebrewer, one old Crosse-bowe maker, two
shoemakers, and four or five men that had their wives, a player on the
Virginals, two servants of Monsieur Du Lys, one of Monsieur De Beauhaire, one
of Monsieur De la Grange, and about fourscore and five or six in all,
counting as well Lackeys Fourscore and five left in the fort with Laudonniere.
as women and children. Behold the goodly troop so sufficient to defend
themselves and so courageous as they have esteemed them to be: and for my part
I leave it to others consideration to imagine whether Captain Ribault would
have left them with me to have borrowed my men, if they had been such. Those
which were left me of mine own company were about sixteen or seventeen
that could bear arms, and all of them poor and lean: the rest were sick
and maimed in the conflicte which my Lieutenant had against Vtina. This view
being thus taken, we set our watches, whereof we made two sentinels, that the
soldiers might have one night free. Then we bethought our selves of those which
might be most sufficient, among whom we chose two, one of whom was named
Monsieur Saint Cler, and the other Monsieur De la Vigne, to whom we delivered
candles and Lanterns to go round about the fort to view the watch because of
the foul and foggie weather. I delivered them also a sandglasse or clock that
the sentinels might not be troubled more one then the other. In the mean while
I ceased not, for all the foul weather nor my sickness which I had, to
ouersee the corpse de guard. The night between the ninetenth and twentieth of
September La Vigne kept watch with his company, wherein he used all endeavor
although it rayned without ceasing. When the day was therefore come, and that
he saw that it rayned still worse then it did before, he pitied the
centinelles so too moyled and wette: and thinking the Spaniardes would not
have come in such a strange time, he let them depart, and, to say the truth,
he went himself unto his lodging. In the mean while one which had something
to do without the fort, and my trompet which went up unto the The Spaniards
discryed the 20. of September.
rampart perceived a troop of Spaniards which came down from a little knappe.
Where incontinently they began to cry alarm, and the trompetter also: Which
as soon as ever I understood, forthwith I issued out, with my Target and
sword in my hand, and gatte me into the midst of the Court, where I
began to cry upon my soldiers. Some of them which weee of the forward sort
went toward the breach, which was on the south side, and where the munitions
of the artillery lay, where they were repulsed and slain. By the selfsame
place The Spaniards enter the fort.
two ensigns entered, which immediately were planted on the walls. Two other
ensigns also entered on the other side toward the West, where there was another
brech: and those which were loged in this quarter, and which showed themselves,
were likewise defeated. As I went to succor them which were defending the
breach on the southwest side, I incountred by chance a great company of
Spaniardes, which had already repulsed our men Francis Iean a traitor to his
nation.
and were now entered, which drove me back unto the court of the fort: being
there I espied with them one called Francis Iean, which was one of the
mariners which stoale away my barks, and had guided and conducted y^
Spaniards thither. As Soon as he saw me, he began to say, This is y^ Captain.
This troop was led by Don Pedro Melendes captain of the Spaniards.
a captain whose name, as I think, was Don Pedro Melendes: these made
certain pushes at me with their pikes which lighted on my target. But perceauing
y^ I was not able to withstand so great a company, and that the court was
already won, and their ensigns planted on the ramparts, and that I had never
a man about me, saving one only whose name was Bartholomew, I entered into the
yard of my lodging, into which they followed me, and had it not been for a
tent that was set up, I had been taken: but the Spaniards which followed me
were occupied in cutting of the Cords of the tent, and in the mean while I
saved my self by the breach which was on the west side near unto my
Lieutenantes Laudonniers escape.
lodging, and gate away into the woods: where I found certain of my men which
were escaped, of which number there were three or four which were sore hurt.
Then spoke I thus unto them: Sirs, since it has pleased GOD that this
mischaunce is happened unto us, we must needs take the pains to get over
the Marshes unto the ships which are at the mouth of the River. Some would
needs go to a little village which was in the woods, the rest followed me
thorough the reeds in the water, where being able to go no farther by reason
of my sickness which I had, I sent two of my men which were with me, which
could swim well, unto the ships, to advertise them of that which had happened,
and to send them word to come and help me. They were not able that day to get
unto the ships to certify them thereof: so I was constrained to stand in the
water up to the shoulders all that night long, with one of my men which would
never forsake me. The next day morning, being scarcely able to draw my breath
any more, I betook me to my prayers with the soldier which was with me,
whose name was John du Chemin: John du Chemin a faithful servant.
for I felt my self so feeble, that I was afraid I should dye suddenly: and in
truth if he had not embraced me in both his arms, and so held me up, it had
not been possible to save me. After we had made an end of our prayers, I
heard a voice, which in my judgment was one of theirs which I had sent, which
were over against the ships and called for the ship boat, which was so in
deed: and because those of the ships had understanding of the taking of the
fort by one called John de Hais, master Carpenter, which fled unto them in a
shallop, they had set sail to run along the coast to see if they might save
any: wherein doubtless they did very well The diligence of the Mariners to
save them that escaped out of the fort.
their endeavor. They went straight to the place where the two men were which I
had sent, and which called them. As Soon as they had received them in and
understood where I was, they came and found me in a pitiful case. Five or six
of them took me and carried me into the shallop: for I was not able by any
means to go one foot. After I was brought into the shalloppe some of the
Mariners took their clothes from their backs to lend them me, and would have
carried me presently to their ships to give me a little Aqua vitae. Howbeit I
would not go thither, until I had first gone with y^ boat along the reeds,
to seek out the poor souls which were scattered abroad, where we gathered up
eighteen or Among those was Jacques Morgues painter yet living in the
Blacke-Fryers in London.
twentye of them. The last that I took in was y^ Nephewe of the Treasurer le
Beau. After we were all come to the ships, I comforted them as well as I could,
and sent back the boat again with speed to see if they could find yet any
more. Upon her return, the Mariners told me how that Captain James Ribault
Francis Iean cause of this enterprise.
which was in his ship about two muskets shot distant from the fort, had
parled with the Spaniardes, and that Francis Iean came unto his ship, where
he stayed a long space, whereat they greatly maruailed, considering that he
was the cause of this enterprise, how he would let him escape. After I was come
into the ship called the Greyhounde, Captain James Ribault and Captain Valuot
came to see me: and there we concluded to return into France. Now forasmuch
as I found the ship unfurnished of Captain, Pilot, Master, and
Masters-mate, I gave advise to choose out one of the most able men among all
the Mariners, and that by their own voices. I took also six men out of
another small ship, which we had sunk because it wanted ballast and could
not be saved. Thus I increased the furniture of the ship wherein I was my self
embarked, and made one, which had been Masters-mate in the foresaid small
ship, Master of mine. And because I lacked a Pilot, I prayed James Ribault
that he would grant me one of the four men that he had in his ship, which
I should name unto him, to serve me for a Pilot: he promised to give me them,
which nevertheless he did not at the instant The bad dealing of James Ribault.
when we were ready to depart, notwithstanding all the speech I used to him,
in declaring that it was for the Kings service. I was constrained to leave the
ship behind me which I had bought of the English Captain, because I wanted
men to bring her away. For Captain James Ribault had taken away her furniture:
I took away her ordinance only, which was all dismounted, whereof I gave nine
pieces to James Ribault to carrye into France, the other five I put into my
ship. The five and twentieth of September we set sails to return into
France, and Our return into France the 25. of September 1565.
Captain John Ribault and I kept company all that day and the next until
three or four a clock in the after noone: but because his ship was better
at bowling then ours, he kept him to the wind and left us the same day. Thus we
continued our voyage, wherein we had marvelous flawes of wind. And about the
eight and twentieth of October in the morning at the break of October. 28.
day we discried the Isle of Flores, one of the Assores, where immediately
upon our approaching to the land we had a mighty gust of wind which came from
the Northeast, which caused us to bear against it four days: afterward the
wind came South and Southeast, and was always variable. In all the time of
our passage we had none other food saving Biscuit and water. About the tenth
or eleventh of November, after we had sailed a long Nouemb. 10.
time, and supposing we were not far from land, I caused my men to sound,
where they found threescore and fifteen fathoms water, whereat we all
reioysed, and praised God because we had sailed so prosperously. Immediately
after I caused them to set sail again and so we continued our way: but for
as much as we had borne to much toward the Northeast we entered into Saint
Georges The chanel of Saint George.
chanel, a place much feared of all Sailers, and where as many ships are cast
away: But it was a fair gift of God that we entered into it when the weather
was clear. We sailed all the night, supposing we had been shot into the narrow
Sea between England and France, and by the next day to reach Diepe, but we
were deceived of our longing: for about two or three of the clock after
midnight as I walked upon the hatches, I discried land round about me, whereat
we were astonished. Immediately I caused them to strike sail and sound: we found
we had not under us past eight fathoms of water, whereupon I commanded them to
stay till break of day: which being come, and seeing my Mariners told me
that they knew not this land, I commanded them to approach unto it. Being near
thereunto I made them cast anchor, and sent the boat on shore to understand in
what country we were. Word was brought me that we were in Wales a province of
England. I went incontinently on land, where after I had taken the air, a
sickness took me whereof I thought I should have dyed. In the mean while
I caused the ship to be brought into the bay of a small town called
Swansey, where I found Merchants Laudonnieres arrival in Swansey Bay in
Glamorgan sheer in South wales.
of saint Malo, which lent me money, wherewith I made certain apparel for my
self and part of my company that was with me: and because there were no
victuals in the ship I bought two Oxen, and salted them, and a tonne of
Beer, which I delivered into his hands which had charge of the ship,
praying him to carry it into France, which he promised me to do: for mine own
part I purposed with my men to pass by land, and after I had taken leave of my
Mariners, I departed from Swansey, and came that night with my company to a
place called Morgan, where the The courtesy of one Mastes Morgan,
Lord of the place, understanding what I was, stayed me with him for the space
of six or seven days, and at my departure moved with pity to see me go on
foot, especially being so weak as I was, gave me a little Hackenye. Thus I
passed on my journey first to Bristo, and then to London, where I went to do my
duty to Bristow. London. Monsieur de Foix Ambassador for the French king in
England.
Monsieur de Foix, which for the present was the kings Ambassador, and help
me with money in my necessity. From thence I passed to Calis, afterward to
Paris, where I was infourmed that ye king was gone to Moulins to sotourne
there: incontinently, and with all the have I could possibly make, I gate me
thither with part of my company. Thus briefly you see the discourse of all that
happened The conclusion.
in new France since the time it pleased y^ kings Majesty to send his subjects
thither to discover those parts. The indifferent and unpassionate readers may
easily weigh the truth of my doings, and be upright judges of y^ endeavor which
I there used. For mine own part I will not accuse nor excuse any: it suffices
me to have followed the truth of the history, whereof many are able to bear
witness, which were there present. I will plainly say one thing, That The causes
why the French lost Florida.
the long delay that Captain John Ribault used in his embarking, and the
fifteen days that he spent in rouing along the coast of Florida before he came
to our fort Caroline, were the cause of the loss that we sustained. For he
discovered the coast the fourteenth of August, and spent the time in going from
river to river, which had been sufficient for him to have discharged his ships
in, and for me to have embarked my self to return into France. I wot well
that all that he did was upon a good intent: yet in mine opinion he should
have had more regard unto his charge, then to the devises of his own brain,
which sometimes he printed in his head so deeply that it was very hard to put
them out: which also turned to his utter undoing: for he was no sooner
departed from us, but a tempest took him, which in fine wrackt him upon the
The French fleet cast away on the coast of Florida.
coast, where all his ships were cast away, and he with much adooe escaped
drowning, to fall into their hands, which cruelly massacred him and all his
company.

The end of the history written by Laudonniere.
THE FOVRTH VOYAGE of the French men into Florida, under the conduct of
Captain GOVRGVES, in the year, 1567.
Captain Gourgues a Gentleman borne in the country near unto Bordeaux incited
with a desire of revenge, to repair the honor of his nation, borrowed of his
friends and soulde part of his own goods to set forth and furnish three
ships of indifferent burden with all things necessary, having in them an
hundred and fiftye Soldiers, and fourscore chosen Mariners under Captain
Cazenoue his Lieutenant, and Francis Bourdelois Master over the Mariners. He
set forth the two and twentieth of August 1567. And having endured contrary
winds and storms for a season at length he arrived and went on shore in the
Isle of Cuba. From thence he passed to the Cape of Saint Antony at the end of
the Isle of Cuba, about two hundred leagues distant from Florida, where the
Captain disclosed unto them his intention which hitherto he had concealed
from them, praying and exhorting them not to leave him being so near the
enemy, so well furnished, and in such a cause: which they all swear unto him,
and that with such courage that they would not stay the full Moon to pass the
channel of Bahama, but The chanel of Bahama between Florida and the Isles of
Lucayes.
speedily discovered Florida, where the Spaniards saluted them with two Canons
shot from their fort, supposing that they had been of their Nation, and
Gourgues saluted them again to entertain them in this error, that he might
surprise them at more advantage, yet sailing by them, and making as though he
went to some other place until he had sailed out of sight of the place so
that about evening, he landed fifteen leagues from the fort, at the mouth of
the River Tacata courou, which the Frenchmen called The French men's landing at
the River Tacata courou
Seine, because they thought it to be like Seine in France. Afterward
perceiving the shore to be covered with Savages with their bows and arrows,
(besides the sign of peace and amity which he made them from his ships) he
sent his Trumpettour, to assure them, that they were come thither for none
other end but to renew the amity and ancient league of the French with them.
The Trompettour did his message so well (by reason he had been there before
under Laudonniere) that he brought back from king Satourioua, the greatest of
all the other kings, a kidde and other meat to refresh us, besides the offer of
his friendship and amity. Afterward they retired daunsing in sign of joy, to
advertise all the kings Satouriouaes kinsmen to repair thither the next day to
make a league of amitye with the French men. Whereupon in the mean space our
general went about to sound the chanel of the River to bring in his ships,
and the better to traffic and deal with the savages, of whom the chief the
next day in the morning presented themselves, namely the great king Satourioua,
Tacatacourou, Halmacanir, Athore, Ha^paha, Eight savage kings.
Helmacape, Helicopile, Molloua and others his kinsme^ and allies, with their
accustomed weapons. Then sent they to entreat the French General to come on
shore, which he caused his men to do with their swords and harquebusies,
which he made them leave behind them, in token of mutual assurance leaving
his men but their swords only, after that the savages complaining thereof had
left and likewise sent away their weapons at the request of Gourgues. This done
Satourioua going to meet him, caused him to sit on his right hand in a seat
of wood of lentisque covered The kings seat
with moss made of purpose like unto his own. Then two of the eldest of the
company pulled up the brambles and other weeds which were before them, and
after they had made the place very clean, they all sat round about them on
the ground. Afterward Gourgues being about to speak, Satourioua prevented
him, declaring at large unto him the incredible Complaints of the savages
against the Spaniards.
wrongs, and continual outrages that all the savages, their wives and
children had received of the Spaniards since their coming into the country and
massacring of the Frenchmen, with their continual desire if we would assist
them thoroughly to revenge so shameful a treason, as well as their own
particular griefs, for the firm good will they always had borne unto the
Frenchmen. Whereupon Gourgues giving them his faith, and making a league
between them and him with an oath gave them certain presents of daggers,
knyues, looking glasses, hatchets, ringes, belles, and such other things
trifles unto us, but precious unto these kings, which moreover, seeing his
great liberality, demanded each one a shirt of him to wear only on their
festival days, and to be buried in at their death. Which things after that
they had received, and Satourioua had given in recompense to Captain Gourgues
two chains of silver Two chains of silver given to Gourgues.
grains which hung about his neck, and each of the kings certain Deares
skins dressed after their manner, they retired themselves daunsing and very
iocond, with promise to keep all things secret, and to bring unto the same
place good companies of their subjects all well armed to be avenged thoroughly
on the Spaniards. In the mean space Gourgues having narrowly examined Peter de
Bre borne in Newhauen, which being but Peter de Bre had lived above two years
with Satourioua.
a young stripling escaped out of the fort into the woods while the Spaniards
murdered the rest of the French, and was afterward brought up with Satourioua,
which at that time bestowed him on our General, whose advise stood him in
great steed: Whereupon he sent to discover the fort and the estate of the
eminies by certain of his men, being guided by Olotacara Satouriouaes Nephew
which he had given him for this purpose and for assurance of Estam^es a
gentleman of Cominges, and others which he sent to discry the state of the
enemies. Moreover he gave him a son Three pledges delivered to Gourgues by
Satourioua.
of his stark naked as all of them are, and his wife which he loved best of
all the rest of eighteen years old apparelled with the moss of trees, which
for three days space were in the ships, until our men returned from discrying
the state of the enemy, and the kings had furnished their preparation at the
rende-vous. Their marching being concluded, and the savages rende-vous being
appointed them beyond the river Salinacani, of our men called The River of
Salinacani, called Sum by the French.
Sum, they all drank with great solemnity their drink called Cassine, made
of the juice of certain herbs (as they are wont to do, when they go to any
place of danger,) which has such force, that it takes from them hunger and
thirst for four and twenty hours, and Gourgues was fain to make as though he
drank thereof for company. Afterward they lift up their hands and swear all
that they would never forsake him. Olotocara followed him with pike in hand.
Being all met at the river of Sarauahi, not without The River of Sarauahi.
great trouble, by reason of the rain and places full of water which they must
needs pass, which hindered their passage, they were distressed with famine
finding nothing by the way to eat, their Bark of provision being not
arrived, which was to come unto him from the ships, the oversight and charge
whereof he had left unto Burdelois with the rest of the Mariners. Now he had
learned that the Spaniards were four hundred strong, divided The estate of the
Spaniards in Florida.
into three forts builded and flanked, and well fortified upon the river of
May, the great fort especially begun by the French, and afterward repaired by
them: upon the most dangerous and principal landing place whereof, two
leagues lower and nearer toward the Ryuers mouth, they had made two smaller
Fortes, which were defended, the River passing between them, with six score
soldiers, good store of artillery and other munition, which they had in the
same. From Saracary unto these small forts was The River of Saracary, or
Sarauahi.
two leagues space, which he found very painful because of the had ways and
continual raynes. Afterward he departed from the river Cata couru with ten
shot, to view the first fort, and to assault it the next day in the
morninge by the break of day, which he could not do, because of the foul
weather and darkness of the night. King Helicopile saying him out of quiet in
that he had failed of his purpose there, assured him to guide him a more easy
way, though it were farther about. In somuche as leading him through the
woods, he brought him within sight of the fort, where he discerned one
quarter which was but begun to be entrenched. Thus after he had sounded the
small river that falls down thereby he stayed until ten of the clock in
the morninge for an ebb water that his men might pass ^uer there, unto a
place where he had seen a little grove between the river and the fort (that
he might not be seen to pass and set his soldiers in array) causing them to
faste^ their flasks to their Morions, and to hold up their swords and kaliuers
in their hands, for fear least y^ water, which reached up to their girdles,
should not wette them, where they found such abundance of great oysters* and
shells which were so sharp, that many had their legs cut with them, and many
others lost their shoes. Notwithstanding as soon as they were passed over with
a French courage they prepared themselves to the assault on the sunday eve next
after Easter day in April 1568. In so much that Gourgues to employ the ardent
heat of this good affection, gave twenty shot to his Lieutenant Cazenoue, and
ten Mariners laden with pots and balls of wild fire to burn the gate: and
then he assaulted the Fort on an The assault and taking of the first Fort.
other side, after he had made a short speech unto his men of the strange
treasons which the Spaniardes had plaide their companions. But being discried
as they came holding down their heads within two hundred pases from the fort,
the Gunner being upon the terrace of the fort, after he had cried, Arm, Arm,
these be French men, discharged twice upon them a coluerine whereon the Arms
of France were graven, which had been taken from Laudonniere. But as he went
about to charge it the third time, Olotocara, which had not learned to keep
his rank, The valor of Olotocara.
or rather moved with rage, lept on the platte form, and thrust him through
the body with his pike and slew him. Whereupon Gourgues advanced forward, and
after he had heard Cazenoue cry, that the Spaniards which issued out armed at
the cr^ of the alarm, were fled, he drew to that part, and so hemmed them in
between him and his Lieutenant, that of threescore there escaped not a man,
saving only fifteen reserved unto the same death which they had put the French
unto. The Spaniards of the other Fort in the mean while ceased not to play
with their ordinance which much annoyed the assailants: although to answer
them they had by this placed and oftentimes pointed the four pieces found in
the first fort. Whereupon Gourgues being accompanied with The assault and
taking of the second Fort.
fourscore shot went abourd the bark, which met him there to good purpose
to pass into the wood near unto the fort, out of which he supposed the
Spaniards would issue to save themselves thorough the benefit of the woods
in the great fort, which was not past one league distant from the same.
Afterward the Savages The savages great swimmers.
not staying for the return of the bark, lept al into the water holding up
their bows and arrows in one hand and swymming with the other, so that the
Spaniards seeing both the shoars covered with so great a number of men, thought
to flee toward the woods: but being charged by the French, and afterward
repulsed by the savages, toward whom they would have retired, they were sooner
then they would bereft of their lives. To conclude they all The Spaniards of
the second Fort all slain.
there ended their days saving fifteen of those which were reserved to be
executed for example of others. Whereupon Captain Courgues having caused all that he found in the second fort to be transported unto the first, where he
meant to strengthen himself to take resolution against the great fort, the
state whereof he did not understand: in fine a Sergeaunt of a band one of the
prisoners assured him that they might be there very near three hundred well
furnished under a brave Governor, which had fortified there attending farther
succors. Thus having obtained of him, the platform, the height, the
fortifications and passages unto it, and having prepared eight good lathers,
and raised all Note.
the country against the Spaniarde, that he neither might have news, nor
succors, nor retraicte on any side, he determined to march forward. In the
mean while the Governor sent a Spaniard A notable Spanish subtilty.
disguised like a Savage to spy out the state of the French. And though he
were discovered by Olotocara, yet he used all the cunning he could possibly to
persuade them y^ he was one of the second fort, out of which having escaped,
and seeing none but savages on every side, he hoped more, as he said, in the
Frenchmens then in their mercy, unto whom he came to yield himself disguised
like a savage, for fear least, if he should have been known, he should have
been massacred by those Barbarians: But the spy being brought face to face
with the Sergeaunt of the band, and convicted to be one of the great fort, was
reserved until an other time: after that he had assured Gourgues that the
bruit was that he had two thousand Frenchmen with him, for fear of whom the
two hundred and threescore Spaniardes which remained in the great fort, were
greatly astonished. Whereupon Gourgues being resolved to set upon them while they
were thus amazed, and leaving his standerd-bearer and a Captain with fifteen
shot to keep the fort and the entrye of the river, he caused the savages to
depart by night to lie in ambush within the woods on both sides of the river,
then he departed in the morning, leading the Sergeaunt and the spy fast bound
along with him to show him that in deed, which they had only made him
understand before in paynting. As they marched Olotocara a resolute savage
which never left the Captain, said unto him, that he had served him
faithfully and done whatsoever he had commanded him, that he was assured to
die in the conflict at the great fort, wherein nevertheless he would not
fail though it were to save his life: but he prayed him to give that unto his
wife, if he escaped not, which he The cause why the Floridians bury their goods
with them.
had meant to bestow on him, that she might bury the same with him, that
thereby he might be better welcome unto the village of the souls or spirits
departed. To whom Captain Gourgues answered, after he had commended his
faithful valor, the love toward his wife, and his noble care of immortal
honor, that he desired rather to honor him alive then dead, and that by Gods
help he would bring him home again with victory. After the discovery of the
fort the Spaniards were no niggards of their Canon shot, nor of two double
coluerines, which being mounted upon a bulwark commanded all along the
River, which made captain Gourgues to get to the hill covered with wood, at the
foot whereof the Fort begins, and the forest or wood continues and
stretches forth beyond it: so that he had sufficient Note.
couerture to approach thereunto without offense. He purposed also to remain
there until the morning wherein he was resolved to assault the Spaniardes by
scaling their walls on the side toward the hill where the Trench seemed not
sufficiently flanked for the defense of the courtaines, and from whence part
of his men might draw them that were besieged, which should show themselves
to defend the rampart while the rest were coming up. But the Governor
hastened his unhappy destinye, causing threescore shot to sallie forth,
which passing thorough the Trenches advanced forward to discry the number and
valor of the French, whereof twenty under the conduct of Cazenoue, getting
between the Fort and them which now were issued forth, cut of their
repassage, while Gourgues commanded the rest to charge them in the front, but
not to discharge but near at hand, and so that they might be sure to hitte
them, that afterward with more ease they might cut them in pieces with their
swords. So that turning their backs as soon as they were charged, and
compassed in by his Lieutenaunt, they remained all slain upon the The
slaughter of the Spaniards of the third Fort.
place. Whereat the rest that were besieged were so astonished that they knew
none other mean to save their lives, but by fleeing into the Wooddes
adjoining, where nevertheless being encountered again by the Arrows of the
Savages which lay in weight there for them (whereof one ran thorough the
target and body of a Spaniarde, which therewithal fell down stark dead)
some were constrained to turn back, choosing rather to die by the hand of the
French, which pursued them: assuring themselves that none of them could find
any favor neither with the one nor the other Nation, whom they had alike and
so out of measure cruelly entreated, saving those which were reserved to be an
example for the time to come. The fort when it was taken was found well
provided of all necessaries: namely of five The taking of the third Fort.
double coluerines, and four mynions, with diverse other small pieces of all
sorts, and eighteen gross cakes of gunnepowder, all sorts of weapons, which
Gourgues caused with speed to be embarked, saving the powder and other
moueables, by reason it was all consumed with fire through the negligence of a
savage, which in seething of his fish, set fire on a train of powder which
was made and hidden by the Spaniardes to have feasted the French at the first
assault, thus blowing up the store house and the other houses built of pyne
trees. The rest of the Spaniards being led away prisoners with the others,
after that the General had showed them the wrong which they had done without
occasion to all the French Nation, were all hanged on the boughs of the same
trees whereon the French hunge: of which number five were hanged by one
Spaniarde, which perceiving himself in the like miserable estate confessed his
fault, and the just judgment which God had brought upon him. But in steed of
the writing which Pedro Melendes had hanged over them, emporting these words in
Spanish, I do not this as unto French men, but as unto Lutherans, Gourgues
caused to be imprinted with a seering The writings hanged over the French and
Spaniards slain in Florida.
iron in a table of Firrewoode, I do not this as unto Spaniardes, nor as unto
Mariners, but as unto Traiters, Robbers, and Murderers. Afterward considering
he had not men enough to keep his Forts which he had won, much less to
store them, fearing also least the Spaniarde which has dominions near
adioining should renew his forces, or the Savages should prevail against the
French men, unless his Majesty would send thither, he resolved to raze them.
And in deed, after he had assembled, and in the end persuaded, all the savage
kings so to do, they caused their subjects to run thither with such
affection, that they ouerthrewe all the three Forts flat even with the ground
in one day. The three Forts razed.
This done by Gonrgues, that he might return to his ships which were left
in the River of Seyne called Tacatacourou, fifteen leagues distant from
thence, he sent Cazenoue and the artillery by water, afterward with fourestore
harquebusiers, armed with corslets, and matches light, followed with forty
Mariners bearing pikes, by reason of the small confidence he was to have in so
many savages, he marched by land always in battle ray, finding the Great
honor done by the Savages to Gourgues.
ways covered with savages, which came to honor him with presents and praises,
as the deliueret of all the countries round about adjoining. An old woman among
the rest said unto him, that now she cared not any more to die, since she had
seen the Frenchmen once again in Florida, and the Spaniards chased out.
Briefly being arrived, and finding his ships set in order, and every thing
ready to set sail, he counseled the kings to continue in the amity and
ancient league, which they had made with the king of France, which would
defend them against all Nations: which they all promised, shedding tears
because of his departure, Olocotara especially: for appeasing of whom he
promised them to return within twelve Moons (so they count the years) and
that his king would send them an army, and store of knyues for Knives in great
estimation.
presents, and all other things necessary. So that after he had taken his
leave of them, and assembled his men, he thanked God of al his success since
his setting forth, and prayed to him for an happy return. The third of May
1568. all things were made The third of May.
ready, the rende-vous appointed, and the Ankers weighed to set sail, so
prosperously, that in seventeen days they ran eleven* hundred leagues,
continuing which course they arrived The arrival of Gourgues at Rochel, the
sixth of June.
at Rochell the sixth of June, the four and thirtieth day after their
departure from the River of May, having lost but a small Pinnesse and eight men
in it, with a few gentlemen and others which were slain in the assaulting of
the Forts. After the cheer and good entertainment which he received of those
of Rochell, he sailed to Bordeaux to enfourme Monsieur Monluc of the things
above mentioned, albeit he was advertised of eighteen Pinnesses, and a great
ship of two hundred Tons full of Spaniardes, which being assured of the
defeat in Florida, and that he was at Rochell, came as far as Che-de Bay, the
same Che-de Bay.
day that he departed thence, and followed him as far as Blay (but he was
gotten already to Bordeaux) to make him yield another account of his voyage,
then that where with he made many Frenchmen right glad. The Catholic king
being afterward infourmed that Gourgues could not easilye be taken, offered a
great sum of money to him that could bring him his head, praying moreover
king Charles to do justice on him as of the author of so bloudye an art
contrary to their alliance and good leage of friendship. In so much as
coming to Paris to present himself unto the king, to signify unto him the
success of his voyage, and the means which he had to subdue this whole
country unto his obedience, (wherein he offered to employe his life, and all
his goods,) he found his entertainment and answer so contrary to his
expectation, that in fine he was constrained to hide himself a long space in
the Court of Roan, about the year 1570. And without the assistaunce of
President Marigny, in whose house he remained certain days, and of the
receiver of Vacquieulx, which always was his faithful friend, he had been
in great danger. Which grieved not a little Dominicke de Gourgues, considering
the services which he had done as well unto him as to his predecessors kings
of France. He The birth, life and death of Captain Gourgues.
was borne in Mount Marsan in Guyenne, and employed for the service of the most
Christian kings in all the armies made since these twentye five or thirty
years: at last he had the charge and honor of a Captain, which in a place
near unto Siene, with thirty Souldyers sustained the brunt of a part of the
Spanish Army, by which being taken in the assault, and having all his men
cut in pieces, he was put into a galcy in token of the good war and
singular favor which the Spaniarde is wont to show us. But as the galey was
going toward Sicillie being taken by the Turks, led away to Rhodes, and
thence to Constantinople, it was shortly afterward recovered by Romeguas,
commander over the army of Malta. By this mean returning home, he made a
voyage on the coast of Africa, whence he took his course to Bresil, and to
the south Sea. At length being desirous to repair the honor of France he
set upon Florida with such success as you have heard. So that being become
by his continual warlike actions both by land and Sea, no less valiant
Captain then skillful Mariner, he has made himself feared of the Spaniard,
and acceptable unto the Queen of England for the desert of his virtues. To
conclude, he died in the year 1582. to the great grief of such as knew him.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal things that are contained in this history, after
the order of the Alphabet. The letter B. always signifies the second page.
A
Accusations against Laudonniere. 55. b Advantage wisely taken. 50 Ael^us
Pertinax desce^ding from base parentage became Emperor of Rome. 9. b Aequara a
king. ^6 Agathocles a potters son became king of Sicilie. 10 Albert left
Captain of Charles-fort: Ribaults speech unto him. 10. b He is slame by his
own soldiers: the causes why. 15. b Alcibiades banished by backbiters. 52. b
An allie of fourehundred pases long. 48 Allimacani a king. 30. b and 53. b
America unknown to all antiquity. 1. the three general parts thereof. ibidem.
Americus Vespucius of whom America took the name. ibidem. Anacharaqua a king.
26 Ananas a fruit of Great excellency. 18. b Appalassy Mountains rich in
mines of gold. 2. b. 40. b. and 54. b Assemblies of the Floridians. 3 Astina a
king rebelleth against Vtina. 43. b Athore the son of satourioua. 29. b A
village of that name. 46 Audusta a king. 11. b. his great humaitie. 39. b
Aygles in Florida. 22
B
Backbiting dangerous. 52. b Bahama chanel. 35. b Baracou a village in the Isle
of Iamaica. 35 Base a river fifteen leagues Northward of port Royal. 11 Bay
trees of sovereign odor. 22 Beans very good. 3. b Bristowe. 59. b Bullets of
silver. 23 Bur^all of kings with the manner and strange ceremonies thereof. 3.
b Burial of Priests. ibidem. Burying of goods with the dead and the cause why
the Floridians do so. 63
C
Cadecha a king. 26 Caignaueral in 28. degrees. 39 Calany a king. 26. Calos a
village and a king. 38. his great riches, ibidem* the situation of that
village. 39 Cape Fransois. 4. b Cape ^userne and why so called. 7 Cape Tiburon.
35 Cape saint Anthony. 60 Charles-Fort built in port Royal by R^bault. 10. b.
set on fire by casualtie. 14. reedified in twelve hours. 14. b. abandoned. 16
Caroline the French fort built by Laudonniere in form of a triangle in the
river of May. 24. b. beaten down by the French. 49. repaired by the French. 56.
b surprised and taken by the spaniardes. 57. b Cassau^ a root whereof bread is
made. 35 Cassine a drink made of leaves: the excellency thereof: none may
drink of it but such as have made proof of their valor in war. 3. b Casti
a king killed two Frenchmen. 46. and 53. b Causes why the French lost Florida.
49. b and 59. b Cedars. 22 Ceremonies used by the Floridians before they go to
war. 28. b Ceremonies to call to mind the death of their ancestors slain
by their enemies. 27. b Chamoys skins. 7. and 12 Childy a king. 26. a place. 40
Chiquola or Chicora a king of great stature. 8. b Chiquola a fair and rich
City Northwarde of port Royal. 8. b Christopher Cholon or Columb. 1
Complaints of the savages against the spamardes. 60. b Consultations of the
Floridians. 3. and 28. b Consultation of the French where it were best to
plant. 23 Cordage for tackle found in Florida. 16 Corn ripe in three months.
3. b Corn equally divided according to each man's quality. 4 Couexis a great
king. 13 Coya a village. 40 Cristal, and the place where it grows in great
quantity. 15 Crocodiles exceeding those of Nilus. 14. b Courtesy of the
Floridians. 21 Cypresses of great height 14. b
D
Desire of revenge rooted in the savages. 47 Diligence of the Mariners to save
the French that escaped out of the Fort. 58 Diseases and the manner of curing
thereof. 4 Dominica an Island and the commendation thereof. 18. b Dominicke
Gourgues and his commendation. 64 Dressing of fish and flesh over the smoke
called Boucaning. 4
E
Eclauou a king. 26 Edeland a rich and goodly Island. 40. and 45. b Election of
a new king. 44. b Emoloa a village. 49. Emoloa or Homoloa a king 53. b. and 55
b Enacappe a king. 26. Enecaque a village. 4^. b Enegaupe a village. 4^ English
men succor the French in extreme famine. 16. b Enemies taken in war how
used by the Floridians. 26. b. and 44. b Epitaphes set up over the French and
Spaniards hanged in Florida. 63. b Esquine a drugge excellent against the
French pockes. 22. and 45 Execution of four mutinous souldters. 37
F
False reports of Loudonniere. 52. b Famine in great extrenutie. 16. and 42
Fire very dangerous in Florida. 24. b Fight and the manner thereof among the
Floridians. 48 Fish parcks made of reeds in the form of a labarinth. 5 Fish
in great abundance. 6. b Fish to fifty cart load killed in the mouth of the
River of May with extreme heat. 31 Florida and the description thereof. 1. b
the trees, beasts, foul, gold, silver, dies, colors, and other commodities
of Florida. 2. b their manners, wearing of their hair, exercises, running for
games, shooting, playing at bal, hunting, fishing, form of war, triumphs,
worship of sun and Moon. 2. b their treasons. 39. their deep dissembling.
44. b their subtilties. 47. their chiete fear. 48. b their league with the
French. 61 Fort beaten down by the Frenchmen themselves before their
departure. 49 Francis Iean a Traitor to his own countrymen. 33. b and 57. b.
and ^8. Frenchmen mistrusted that the English would plant in Florida. 50. b
they hid the silver which they found in Florida from the English, least the
Queen of England should be encouraged to inhabit there after their
departure. ^1
G
Gieure and his message to Laudonniere in the soldiers name. 32. b Gold and
silver found in the River of May. 23. b Gold in the mountains of Apallassy,
and the manner how the savages resine it. 40. b Gourgues his voyage. 60. his
confederacy with the savages. 61. his taking of the two small spanish forts.
62. his taking of the third fort. 63. b his return to Rochell. 64. his death
and commendation. 64. b Governor of Iamaica taken by the French. 35. his
escape. 36 Groles or Cornish choughes great deuourers of the corn in Florida.
22
H
Halmacanir a king. 60. b Harpaha a king. 60. b Hauana a town in Cuba. 35. b
Heed to be taken of the Floridians. 47 Helicopile a king. 60 b Helmacape a
king. 60. b Herinaphrodites common in Florida. 3 their travail and pains in
carrying of burdens. ibidem. their (...) of ^^^ture. 23. b Hiatiqui an
interpretour. 40 High buildings not good in Florida. 24. b Houstaqua a great
king. 26. ^^le ^^^^ing three or four thousand to the (...). 40 Houstaqua or
Hostaqua a village. ^^. b Hoya a king. 12
I
James Ribault. 58. his bad dealing with Laudonniere. 58. b Iawa the Priest or
Magician among the Floridians. 3. b. and 41. his counsel as^ed before they
go to battle. ibid. his aunsweres are found true. ibid. Indians two taken
with consent of their king. 7. b. their doleful songs ^. they eat not before
the sun let. ibidein. their escape 9 Indians of Florida use to trim
themselves with rich feathers. 12. b Instruments to till the ground like broad
mattocks. 3. b Inuocations of the Iawas or Priests unto Toya. 13 John Hawkins
the English Generalis arrival in Florida. 50. his great humanity and
liberality to the starued Frenchmen. 51. his departure. 51. b John Ribaults
first voyage to florida. 4. b his pithy oration to his company. 9. his building
of a fort in port Royal. 10. b. his return and arrival in France. 11. b. his
second voyage to Florida. 52. how he was received by Laudonniere. 53. an
advertisement unto him to beware of the spaniardes. 56. his embarkement to
follow the spaniardes. 56. his shipwreck and death. 59 b Iracana a River
called by the French the River of sum. 49 Isle of Cedars. 7. b
K
Kings of Florida at hatred one with another. 45 The king of Edelano caused
Peter Gamby to be murdered for his riches. 40. b
L
La Chere a French souldyer eaten of his companions for hunger. 16 b A Lake
discovered in Florida from the one side whereof the land cannot be seen to the
other. 40 A Lake three leagues distant from the village of Potanou. 41 Letters
of Admiral Chastillon to John Ribault. 56 Letters of Admiral Chastillon to
Laudonniere. 53. b Laudonniere was in the first voyage of Ribault unto Florida.
4 b. he puts down in writing the words and phrases of the Floridians
speech. 8. Laudonnieres second voyage to Florida. 18. his arriual there. 19.
conspiracy against hun in his sickness. 32. his danger of being empoysoned.
32. b. his fifteen days unprisonment by his own company. 34. b. his oration
to his mutinous souidiers. 36. his intention to remove his seat more
Northward to be nearer the rich mountains of Apalassy. 40 b. he is hardly used
by John Ribault. 56. b. he had but ^5. men left in his fort when the spaniardes
surprised it. 57. his escape out of their hands. 57. b his arriual in swansey
Bay in Glamorganshiere in south Wales. 59. his courteous entertainment by one
M. Morgan. ibidem. his passing by Bristow to London. 59. b. his visiting of
Monsieur de Foix the French Ambassador there, his passing over into France to
the Court at Moulins. ibidem. Liberality and courtesy are the best means to
deal with savages. 49 Lightinng exceeding strange. 30. it is thought by the
savages to be ye discharging of the Christians ordinance. 30. b Love and
courtesy of the Floridians. 20
M
Maccou a king. 13. b Malica a king 27. b. and 53. b Malgualire a kind of
vessel that can sail forward and backward. 3^. b Marriages and the slate
thereof in Florida. 3 Maracou a southern king. 37. b Martinica an Island. 18. b
Martyrs certain dangerous flats near the Cape of Florida. 38 Mathiaca a
king. 37. b. a village of the same name. 40 Mattes very artificial. 49 Mayarqua
a place fourscore leagues up the river of May. 3 Mayou a king. 12 Mayrta a
rich king. 25. b Medlers excellent good. 2 Molloua a king. 25. b Molona a king.
26. b Months reckoned by Moons in Florida. 51. b. and 64 Moquoso a king. 26
Moss used by the french to calke ships. 16 Moss used in s^eede of napkins.
27. b. and in steed of apparel. 61 Mulbury trees. 2 Mulburies white and read.
5 Mutiny against Captain Albert, and the causes thereof. 15
N
New Conquests subject to rebellion and mutinies. 37 New Corn ripe by the
end of May in Florida. 45. b Nicolas Bar chosen in Captain Alberts room.
his good government. 15. b
O
Oathcaqua a king. 38. b Olata O^ae Vtina a great king. 25. b. forty other
Kings his vassals. 26 Olocotara a King. 62. his valor. ibidem. Omittaqua a
King. 26 Omoloa a King. 29 Onathaqua a King. 37. b Onatheaqua a great King and
his rich dwelling. 26 Ottigni Laudonnieres Lieutenaunt. 21. commendation of his
valor. 48 Ouade a King. 13. his rich tapistry made of feathers, and couerlets
finely wrote with read fringe. 13. b. his great liberality. ibidem. Oil, and
the use thereof in Florida. 4
P
Palms. 22. their leaves serve to thatch houses in Florida. 24 Paracoussy
signifies a King and Governor. 20 Partridges gray and read. 6 Passage by the
River of port Royal into the south sea. 6. b Patica a King. 36. a village also
of that name. 40. and 46. b Painting of faces with black and red. 26 Pedro
Melendes Captain of the spaniards in Florida. 57. b Pearls 7. pearls
exceeding fair. 15. pearls burnt. 39. b Physicians and Chirurgions in
Florida. 3 they are called Iawas. 12 b Pigeons in strange flocks in Florida.
39. b Pillar with the Arms of France thereon set up. 4. b. and 7. b. it was
worshipped by the savages. 20. b Pinocks a certain kind of fruit as big as
cherries. 43. b. and 45. b Planting in strange countries, and the benesite
thereof. 9 Planters in strange countries, and their principal scope. 49. b
Plates of gold and silver. 26. and 38 Plumes of Egrepthes feathers dyed in
read. 5 Pompions very fair. 3. b and 29. b Potanou a great King and his
dwelling. 26. he is enemy to Vtina. 31 he was accompanied to the war with
two thousand Indians. 41. b Prayer and thanks given to God by the French for
their safe arriual in Florida. 4. b. and 24 Provision of corn for six months
only among the floridians. 4
Q
Queen Nia-cubacani a woman of singular beauty. 39. b she is wonderfully
honored of her subjects. ibidem. she sends presents to Laudonniere. 46
R
Rivers of May, seine, sum, Loire, Chare^te, Garonue, Gironde, Belle, Grande,
Belle a veoir, port Royal, Liborne. 6 Roots of great price to make bread of.
38. b Roquettes conspiracy. 31. b Rosen to bray ships. 16. and 42. b Rusten
Basha of an heardmans son became the great Turks son in law. 10
S
Saint Georges chanel. 5^ Sal^nacani called by the French the River of sum.
61 Salutations of Kings. 3 Sarauahi a village. 33. and 48. b. a King 54. b
Sarrope a rich Island. 30. b Satourioua Monarch of the confines of the River of
May, having thirty Kings under him. 26. followed with 500. Indians. 28. b. his
subtilty. 45 Savage Isle. 18 Savages in Florida two hundred and fifty years
old. 22. their vile nature. 43 their cruel aunsweres. ibidem. Sedition against
Laudonaiere the third time. 3. b Seloy a River called by the French the River
of Dolphins. 20. and 55. and a village of that name. 55. b Sheep and Poultry
carried into florida. 50 Serranay a King. 30 Siertoa phira read metal or
gold. 54. b Simples of rare virtue. 6. b Skirmish between the French and the
savages. 48 Sowing of Corn twice in six months. 3. b Spaniardes brought to
Laudonniere by ^e savages. 38 Spaniards in their Conquests enter into alliance
with one King to ruin another 41 they undermine the French. 55. they are
discryed. 17. they surprise the French fort. 57. b spamards slain. 63 Spanish
subtilty. 62. b Stalame a King 12. his country distant fifteen leagues from
Charles-fort. ibid. Supply not sent in due tune unto florida by reason of the
civil wars of france. 18 and 42. and 42. b Swansey Bay in southwales. 59
Silk worms in exceeding great number. 5. b Silver found in florida. 50. b.
silver chains. 32. b and 61
T
Tacatacourou a River. 60. a king of that name. 60. b Tapestry made of feathers
of diverse colors. 13. b Tapestry made of small reeds. 27. b Tempest and
mighty flawes of wind in september on the coast of florida. 56 Teneriffe an
Island. 18 Thimogoua signifies an enemy, and not a place or country. 22. b
Touppa a king. 12 Toya a spirit worshipped of the Floridians 8. b. a large
description thereof. 12 Trenchant an honest and skillful Pilot. ^4 b. Triumphs
and the manner thereof among the floridiane. 29 Turkicocks in abundance. 6
V
Vale of Laudonniere. 23. b Villages enclosed with trees. 31. b Vtina gets
the victory of Potanou by the help of the french. 31. b. he sends silver and
gold and painted skins to the french. ibidem. he sends to Laudonniere
again for help. 40. b. he is taken prisoner. 44 Urine drunk for want of
freshwater. ^6
W
Warrelike marching and the order thereof. 3. and 31 Warrelike provision. 3
War and the certain sign thereof. 47 b Wedgeof silver presented to the
french. 20. b Winter and how the savages pass the same in cottage^ in the
woods for three or four months. 4. their living of acornes and roots in the
winter. 13. and 42 Women of florida are painful. 3. excellent in swimming and
climbing. 4 Winning of Virgins and young women in florida is ^^^^ted the
greatest victory. 39
FINIS.

