The second Sermon of Master Hughe Latimer, which he preached before the
Kings majesty, wtin his graces Palayce at Westminster ye.xv. day of March.
M.ccccc.xlix.

Cum gratia et Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.

To the Reader.
EVen as intimes past, al me^, which were honestly bente to the promoting of
virtue and learning, found means, that the works of worthy orators, of
famous and renoumed Philosophers, should be by ye, benefit of publishing,
redeemed from the tyranny of oblivion, to the great and high profette of
countries, of commen wealths, of empyres, and of assemblies of men: likewise
ought we to fetch our presydente from those men, and suffer no worthi mo^ument
to perysh, whereby any good may grow, either to the more godly admynystracyon of
politik^ and ciuyl affairs, or else to the better establyshing of christian
judgment. Numa Po^pilius (who was inagured and created king of the Romans
next after Romulus) was far more careful and busier in grounding of Idolatrus
religion (as upon rytes, ceremonies, sacrifices and supersticions) then we are
in promoting of christian religyon to the advancement of the glory due to the
omnipotent majesty of God him self, who has revealed and uttered his word
unto us by his Prophets, and last of all by his only begotten son Jesus
Christ whereby he has confyrmed our conscience in a more perfect certenty of
the truth, the^ ever they were before. This Numa instituted an Archbishop for
the perseruyng of the Commentaries, contaynyng the sole^pnities of their
religion with many other appendixes, united to the office of the high
bishop. What do we? We have suppressed. We have wrastled with fire, and sword
not only to deface the wrytynges of such learned me^ as have paynefully
trauailled to publysh Gods word: but also we have sturred every stone, and
sought al deuelish devises, to deteine yt same word of god itself from his
people. May not we (and not vnwortheli) be accounted far under ye Ethenickes
who wrought only by natural mocyon and antipacyons, without breathinge and
inspiring of the holy ghost, if we would not (I mean not be equal with them)
but be far more zealous in promotyng good learning and religion the^ ever they
were. They, when they had such noble and worthy clerks (as Socrates. Plato,
and Aristotle) with al diligence; caused ye fruits of those most rare and
profound wits, to be preserved for their posterity, that the eyes of all
generations might enjoy the fruicion and use of them, thinking that such
wonderful virtues, should not be buried in ye same grave that their bodies
were. After so manifold and dangerous ship wrackes of religion, as in our
times we may well remember, whereas the ambitious and blind prelates (some of
wily wilfulnes, some of gross ignorance) rules the stern and evermore
blemished the true knowledge of Gods word, and did their endeavor to obscure
the same with their polytyke and decente ceremosies and trampery of
supersticions. How often has religion been tossed on the stormy sourgis and
dangerous rocks of the Romyshe seas? How often has it been in such a
desperate state, that the true mynysters have been inforsed (as you would say)
to way up ancker (the tackling of the ship being broken (and destytute of all
other help and succoures to give over the rulynge of the ship to God him
self, who is only able to save, when al ye world by man's reason judges it
past cure. Such (O Lord) is thy mercy and ineffable power: what criste^ heart
that favors ye glory of God, did not even lamente and bewail the state of
religion, and thought verily the utter ruin of Christ's church to be at hand
seeing the late martyrdom of those that suffered? Yet did thou lord stir
up thousands out of their ashes, and what was done of a popysh polycye to
suppress and keep under thy truth, that of al other, did most set forth the
same. Thou have delivered Danyel out of the den of the lions, and he has set
fourth thy word abroad, But now cou^tremen, who^ God has blessed by
deliuerynge you from the tirranny of the lions and her whelps, (which went
through the whole realm sucekyng the innocent blood) how unthankful are you
unto God so greatly neglecting so special a benefyt, falling into such a
lousenes of lauicioouse living as the like has never been heard of hereto
fore. Eue^ as ye are grown to a perfeccyo^ in knowledge so are ye come to a
perfeccyo^ in all mychiefe. The Heathen, which had no other guide but the law of
nature, graven in the tables of their heart, were never so poisoned with the
contagion of most horyble heresies, as some of us Christians which are not
ashamed to brag and boste of the spirit. But it is a phanaticke spirit, a
brainsicke spitite a sedicious and a malignante spirit. Christ breath his
spirit upon you yt ye may read ye scripture wtih al humblenes and reverence,
to fetch from thence comfort for your wounded consciences, not to make that
lively fountain of life to serve for the fedynge of your idle brains, to
dyspute more subtellye thereby, or else by mysunderstandynge of the same to
conceive pernicious and annabaptistical opinions, Remember yt the servant
which knows his masters will and does it not shall be beaten with many
strypes. God is a good God, a mercyful God, a father which bears much with
our crooked nature and vnchristyan behavior, and very slote to revenge his
blasphemy this maitenaunce of so many unscripturlye opinions, these
brablynges and scismatyke co^tencions wherein a great pack of us delight and
repose our glory, all though as fo^dly, as eroniously, to ye great sclaunder of
the godly learned, and also to the hynderaunce of the good success and fre
passage of the word of God. But as truly as god is God if we repent not
shortly, his plages and vengaunce are not far of, his indignacyon and wrath
shall be poured from heaven upon our ungodliness. He is long a coming but when
he coms be will pay whom and (as Lacta^cius says recompense his long
sufferance with greuouser punishments. The world and the devil has so
bewitched us, yt we in our deeds (I fear we to many of us) deny God to be God
whatsoever we pittle pattle with our to^ges. Gods word must not be talcked of
only, for that is not enough) it must be expressed. Then must we as welliue
the word as talk the word, or else, if good life do not ensue and follow upon
our reading to the example of other, we wyghte as well spend that time in
redyng of profane hystories, of cantorburye tales, or a fit of Robyn Hode Let
us join good life with our readyng, and yet al wylbe to little. Remember that
the world and all that is in it, is mere vanitye, and shall have an end. Thou I
say, yt thus abusest the gift of Gods holy word, and the gratyousnes of the
Kings majesty, which has lycensed the to read the same, for the comfort of
thine own soul, for the instruction of thy famyly, the educacyon of thy
children, and edifiyng of thy neighbor. Thou that art so gorgiously
apparelled, and feadeth thy corruptible carcass so dayntely, thou that
purchasest so fast, to the utter undoing of the poor, consoider whereof thou
came, and whereunto thou shall return. Where is the^ all thy pomp? where is al
thy ruff of thy gloriousnes become? What will thou say for thy self in that
horrible day of judgment, where thou shall stand naked before God, where the
tables of thine own conscience shall be opened and laid before thine eyes to
accuse the? Thou which reysest the rentes so gredely as though thou should
never have enough. Thy judgment is, throw miserable ma^mon, so captyuate and
blind. that you can not tell when you have enough, or what is enough? Truly,
alitle is to much for him yt knows not how to use much well. Therefore learn
first the use of money and riches, and some other honester means to attain
them, that this thine insaciable covetousness and unlawful desyryng of other
men's goods, may be reduced to some reasonable measure, and that it do not
excede the lymyttes or compass of honesti, and the bo^des of brotherly love:
lest God (before whom thou shall appear one day, to render a straight
acco^ptes, for the deeds done in thy flesh) burden and charge the with thy
unmerciful hand lyng of thy Tennant (but yet notwythstandyng thy brother (whom,
with new Incomes, fynes, inhauncyng of rentes, and such like unreasonable
exactyons, thou pills polles, and miserably oppresses. When that terrible day
shall once come, a little of Gods mercy will be worth a mass or a whole hepe
of thy monei. There thy wicked Ma^mon, whom thou serueste like a slave, can
purchase the no mercy. There thy money so gleaned and gathered of the and thine
(to the impouerishment of many to make the only rych) can not prevail the,
nor yet redeem thy cause before that just and severe judge, which the^, and
there will render to ye, the self same measure yt you measureste to other men.
What did we speak of preuaylynge, or redeming of thy cause wtth money? Nay the^
thy monei, and the roust of thy gold shall be a wytnes against ye and shall eat
thy flesh as the fire. How frantycke and folyshe might al wise men, well judge
and deem him too be (which against the day of his araignement when he should
stand upon the trial of death and life) would busy him self, his folks, and
his friends to prepare and get many witnesses against him to cast him away by
their evidence and witness and to provide such men as should be the only
cause of his death. Even. So franctycke, so folysh art thou, which does toil,
travail, and turmoyle so ernestly and busylye about the getting of goods
and riches, before thou haste well learned and taken forth of the lesson, of
well vsyng the same. Howbeit, truly I doubt much of the well vsyng of that,
which was never well nor truly gotten. Learn therefore first, Proverb. xix.
to know what is enough. For the wise man says, it is better to have a little
with the fear of the Lord, then great and insaciable riches. Sophoni. i
Sophonye says their gold shall not be able to deliver the^ in the day of the
Lords wrath. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with
that ye have already, i. Hebre. iii.
Godliness is a great riches, if a man be content with such as God sendes. For
we brought nothing into this world, i. Timoth. vii
neither shall we carry any thing out. When we have food and raymente, let us
therewith be content. Behold thy Scholemaster Paul teaches the hear a good
lesson. Here thou may learn well enough, to know what is enough. But lest
thou should fear at any time, the want or lack of this inoughe. Here
father the rest of thy lesson. For god verily says. The Lord is mine helpper,
I will not fear what man does to me. If the revenues and yearly Rentes of thy
patrymonye and lands, be not enough, nor sufffcient for thy finddyng, and will
not suffice thy charges, then moderate thine expenses, borrow of thy two next
neighbors, that is to say of thy back and thy belly. Learn to eat with in
thy teather. Pull down thy sail. Say down proud heart. Mayntayn no greater
port, then thou art able to bear out and support of thine own provision, Put
thy hand no further then thy sleue will reach. Lut thy cloth after thy
measure. Keep thy house after the spending. Thou must not pil and polle thy
Tenante, that thou may have (as they sai) Vnde, and that thy never enough to
ruffull it out in a riotus ruff, and a prodigal, disolute, and licenciouse
living. We read in the scripture give to every man his duty, tribute, to whom
tribute belongs, custom, to whom Custom, is due fear to whom fear
belongs honor to whom honor partayneth. But we find not there, nor
else where, fynes to whom fines, incomes to whom incomes. Paulle was not
acquainted with none of those terms. Belike they were not used and come up in
his time, or else he would have made mencio^ of them. Yeat not with standing,
we deny not but these reasonably required and upon honest couena^tes and
co^tractes, are ye more tolleraable, and so used, so may be permitted. But the
couenau^tes and ye co^tractes we remit to the godly wisdom of the hie
magistrates, Esaias. ^.
who (we pray god) may take such order and direction in this, and al other, yt
the common people may be releaued and eased of many importable charges and
iniures, which many of them, contrary to al equity and right, sustain. But woe
worth this covetousness, not without skyll called the root of all evil. If
covetousness were not, we think many things amiss should shortelye be
redressed. She is a mighty Matro^ a Lady of great power. She has retained moo
servants the^ any Lady has in England, But mark how well in fine she has
rewarded her servants: and learn to be wise by another ma^s harm. Acham by
the commandment of God, was stoned to death, because he took of the
excommunicate goods. Deutro. xvii.
Saul moved with covetousness dissobeied gods word, reseruinge the King, Agag
and a parsell of the fatteste of the cattle, and lost his kingdom thereby.
Gehize was strycken with leaprosy and all his posterity, because he took money
and raymente of Naaman. The rich and unmerciful gloton, which fared well and
deyntely every day, was buried in hell, and there he takes now such fare as
the devil him self does Woo be to you, that join house to house, and feelde
to feeld: shall ye alone inhabyte the pearth? Let these terrible examples
suffyce at this present, to teach, and admonysh, the inhaunser of Rentes, the
unreasonable exactour and gredye requirer of fienes and incomes, the couetouse
lease monger, the douourer of towns and contries as. M. Latimer terms them
rightly. If these scriptures (which they may read in these godly sermons do
not pearse their stony hertes (we fear) more will not serve The Lord be
mercyful to them. But now the wicked Judge, which corrupts justice for
Brybes here he may learn also the lesson that Moses taught long before this
time, Iosue. vii.
ye magistrates and Judges in the common wealth of Israel be no accepters of
persons neither be desyreous of gifts, for they make wise men blind, and
change the mind of the ryghtuouse. i. To the kings. xv.
In judgment be merciful to the faitheles, Ecclesiastical xilti. Prouer* xvii.
as a father, and be in stead of an husband unto their mother. The ungodly
takes gifts out of the bosom, to wrast the ways of judgment, Let him that
rules be delige^t says Paul. What means he by this term, dilligent? He
requyres no such diligence, as the most part of our lucratiue lawyers do use,
in dyfferryng and prolo^ging of matters, and accyons from. Term to Term and
in the tractynge, of time in the same. Whear perchance the title or the right
of the matter might have come to light, and been tried long before if the
Lawyers and the Judges would have used such diligence as Paul would have them
to do, But what care ye lawyers for Paul? Paul was but a mad man of law to
controlle the^ for their diligence. Paull, yea and Peter to, could better skill
of mending of an old net, of clouting of an old tent, the^ to teach lawiers
what diligence they should use in the expedicio^ of matters. Whi? but be not
lawiers diligent say ye? Yea truly are they about their own profit there are no
more dilige^ter me^ nor busier persons in all England They trudg in ye term
time to and fro. They apply the world hard. They forslow no time. They follow
Assizes and Sessio^s, Letes. Lawdaies and Hu^dredes. They should serve the king
but they serve them selves. And how they use (nay rather abuse) their office in
the same, some good manne will tell them thereof. We lack a few moo
Latymers, a few moo such Preachers. Such plain Pasquyls, we pray God provide
for us, yt will keep nothing back. Of the which sort and number, we may most
worthily reckon this faithful minister of ^od, and constant Preacher of his
word Master Hugh Latymer, which by his perseueraunce, and stedfastnes in the
truth, has stablished this waueryng world. He has been tossed for the truths
saked, and tried with the storms of persecutyon, as gold in the furnace. He is
one, whom, as well for his learned, sound, and chatholyke judgment, in the
knoledge of Gods word, as for his integrety and example of christian
co^uersacyon, all we and (specially ministers and prelates) ought to set before
our eyes, as a principal patron to imytate and follow, desiring God, who
has styrred up in him the bold spirit of Helias, may daily more and more
augment the same in him, and may also provide many such preaching prelates,
which both so well could, and so willyngly would fra^kely utter the truth to the
extollinge of virtue, to the reward of well doers, the suppressyng of vice,
the abolyshmente of all papestrie. It is our part therefore to pray
diligently for his continual health and that he may live long among us in a
flourishing old age, and not (as some in grate and inhumayne persons) to malign
and deprave him for yt he so fra^kly and liberally taxed, perstringed, and
openly rebuked before the Kings Mayestie ye peculiar faults of certain of his
auditors, but it is our part, rather tha^kefully to accept in good part take
his godly aduertiseme^t onles we be minded to prefer our mucky monye and false
felicity before ye ioyse of heaven, or else believe (as yt Epecures do) that
after this life there is neither hell nor heaven. Receive tha^kfully
(ge^tlereader) these sermonnes faith fully colected without al sinistre suspicion
of any thing in the same added or ade^pt

FINIS
The *xxi. day of June
QVecunque scripta sutit: ad nostram doctrinam. etc. All things that are
written in Gods book, in the holy Bible, they were written before our time,
but yet to continue from age to age as long as the world does stand.

In this Book is contained doctrine for all estates, In gods book is contained
doctrine for all estates.
even for kings. A king herein may learn how to guide him self, I told
you in my last sermon much of the duty of a king. And there is one place
behind yet, and it follows in the text.

Postquam autem sederit in solio regni sui. etc. Deute. xvii
And when the King is set in the seat of his kingdom, he shall write him
out a book and take a copy of y^ pryestes or Levites. He shall have the book
with him, and why? to read in it all the days of his life, to learn to fear
God, and learn his Laws, and other things, as it follows in the text with
the appurtenaunces and ha^gynges on, that he turn not from God, neither to
the right hand, nor to the left. And wherefore shall he do this? that he may
live long, he and his children. Hitherto goes the text. That I may declare
this the better to the edifiynge of your souls and the glory of God, I shall
desire you to pray. etc. Et posquam sederit etc. Before I enter into this
place (right honorable audyence) to furnyshe it accordyngly, which by the
grace of god I shall do at leisure, I would repete the place I was in last, and
furnyshe it with an history or two which I left out in my last sermon. I was
in a matter concerning the sturdines of the Jews, The styfnecked Jews and our
Englysh men compared to gether.
a froward and styfnecked kind of people, much like our English men now a
days, that in the minoritye of a King, take upon them to break laws and to
go by ways. For when god had promised the^ a king, when it came to the point
they refused him. These men walked by walckes, and the sayynge is, many
bywalkes, An English adage otherwise called an old said say
many balckes, many balckes much stumblynge, and where much stumblynge is,
there is sometime a fall, how be it there were some good walkers among the^, that
walked in the kings high way ordinarilye, vpryghtlye, plain Dunstable way,
and for this purpose, I would show you an hystorye which is written in the
third of the kings.

King David being in his chyldhode, ^ij. of kings, the first Chapt.
an old man, in his second chyldhode, for all old men are twyse children, as
the Proverb is. Senex his puer. An old manne, twyse a child, it happened
with him, as it does oftentimes, when wicked men, of a Kings chyldhode take
occasyon of evil.

This King David being weak of nature and impotente, in so much that when he
was covered with clothes, he could take no heat, was counsayled of his
servants to take a fair young maid to nouryshe him, and to keep him warm
in his body, I suppose she was his wife. How be it he had no bodilye
company with her, and well she might be his wife. For though the scripture
does say: Non cognouit ^am. He knew her not, he had no carnal copulation
with her yet it says not: Non duxit eam vxorem. He married her not. And I
can not think that king David would have her to warm his bosom in bed,
except she had been his wife, having a dispensatyon of God to have as
many wives as he would.

For God had dispensed with them to have many wives. Well: what happened to
king David in his chyldhode, by the child of the devil? Ye shall hear.
King David had a proud son, whose name was Adonias, Adonias. iij. of
Kings the first.
a man full of ambition, desyrouse of honor, always clymbyng, climbinge.
Now, whylse the time was of his fathers childhode, he would depose his father,
not knoweyng of his fathers mind, saiing. Ego regnabo. I will reign, I will be
king, he was a stout stomacked child, a biwalker, of an ambitious mind, he
would not consent to his fathers fre^des, but gate him a charret, and me^ to
run before it, and diverse other adherentes to help him forthward, worldely
wise men, such as had been before of his fathers counsel, great men in the
world, and some no doubt of it, came of good will thinking no harm, for they
would not think, that he did it without his fathers will, having such
great men to set him forth, for every man ca^ not have access at al times to
the king, to know his pleasure, well: algates he would be King, he makes a
great feast, Ioab captain general of David's army.
and thither he called Ioab the ryngleader of his fathers army, a worldly
wise man, a bywalker, that would not walk the Kings hye way, and one
Abiathar the high priest. For it is maruayle if any michyefe be inhand, if a
priest be not at some end of it, they took him as King, and cried, Viuat rex
Adonias. God save king Adonias, David suffered all this, and let him alone,
for he was in his chyldhode a bedred man.

But se how God ordered the matter, Nathan the Prophet and Sadoc a priest,
and Banayah, and Crethytes, and Phelethytes the Kings guard, they were not
called to the feast.

These were good, men, and would not walk bywayes, therefore it was folly to
break the matter to them, they were not called to counsel.

Therefore Nathan when he hard of this, he comes to Bethsabe Salomons mother
and says. Hear ye not how Adonias the son of Ageth, raygneth king, David
not knowing? And he bad her put the king in mind of his oath that he swear
that her son Salomo^ should be king after him, this was wise counsel
according to the Proverb. Qui vadit plane, vadit sane.

He that walks in the hye plain vaye, walks safelye. Upon this the went
and brake the matter to David, Bethsabe sueth to David and sollicites her
sons Salomo^s matter.
and desyered him to show woe should raygne after him in Jerusalem, adding
that if Adonias were king, she and her son after his death should be
destroyed, saying: Nos erimus peccatores. We shall be sy^^^ers, we shall be taken
for traitors, for though we meant no harm but walked vpryghtly yet because we
went not the by way with him he being in authority will destroy us, And by
and by comes in Natha^, and takes her tale by the end, and shows him how
Adonias was saluted king, and that he had bid to dynner the Kings
servants, al sauinge him and Sadoc, and Banaiah and al his brethren the kings
sons save Solomon. King David remembryng him self, swore, as sure as God
lives, Salomo^ my son shall raygne after me, and by and by commanded Nathan
and Sadoc and his guard the Cerithes and Phelites, to take Salomo^ his son
and set, him upon his mule, and an^^^it him King* and so they did criynge,
Vi^at Salomo^ Rex. Thus was Salomo^ throned, by the advise and will of his
father, and though he were a child, yet was his will to be obeyed and
fulfilled, and they ought to have known his pleasure. Whylse this was a doing
there was such a Joy and outecrye of the people, The Joy of the people for
their new king.
for their new King, and blowynge of trompettes, ye Ioab and the other
company being in their iolytye, and keeping good cheer. heard it, and
sodaynlye asked what is this ado? And when they perceived, yt Salomo^, by ye
advise of his father was anointed King, by and by there was all whysht. all
their good chere was done, and al yt were with Adonias went away, and let
him raygne alone. if he would, and why? He walked a bywaye and God would not
prospere it.

God is against private authoryte and inordinate doings.
God will not work with pryuate authority, nor with any thing done
inordinatlye. When Adonias saw this that he was left alone, he took
sanctuarye, and held by the horns of the aultare, and swear that he would
not depart thence, till Solomon would swear that he should not lease his
life. Here is to be noted the notable sentence, and great mercy of King
Solomon. The mercy of Solomon is notable.


Let him (says he) order him self like a quyete man, and there shall not one
hear fall from his head. Sed si inuentum fuerit, malum in eo. But if there
shall be any evil found in him, if he has gone about any myschyefe, he
shall dye for it. Upon this he was brought in to Solomon, and as the book
says, he did homage unto him, and Solomon said to him. Vade in domum tuam.

Get the into thy house, bylyke he meante to ward, and there to se his
wearynge, as if he should say, Time tries traitors from the trusty.
show thy self without gal of ambicion, to be a quiet subject, and I will
pardone the for this time. But I will se the wearynge of the.

Here we may se the wonderful great mercy of Solomon for this notoryous
treason, yt Adonias had committed, it was a plain matter, for he suffered him
self to be called king, it hu^g not of vehement suspision or conjecture nor
sequel or co^seque^t yet notwythstandynge Solomon for that present, forgave
him, saying. I will not forget it utterly, but I will keep it in suspense, I
will take no advantage of the at this time. This Adonias and Absolon were
brethren, and came boeth of a strange mother, and Absolon like wise was a
traytoure and made an insurrection against his father. Beware therefore these
mothers, and let kings take heed how they marye, in what housses, in what
fayeth. For strange bringyng up brings strange manners. ^ote of what force
education is.
Now gives David an exhortacion to Salomo^, and teaches him the duty of a
King, and gives him a lesson, as it follows at large in the book, and he
that list to read it, may se it there at full. But what does Adonias all
this while? Adonias schrinkes in ye wetyng and prouethnogth in the wearyng.
He must yet clymbe again, yt gal of ambition was not out of his heart. He will
now mary Abisaas the yo^ge queen that warmed king David's bosom, as I told you,
and comes me to Bethsabe, desyering her to be a mean to Salamon her son
that he might obtain his purpose. And brings me out a couple of lies at a
clappe, and co^mytteth me two unlawful acts. For first he would have been
King without his fathers consent, and now he will mary his fathers wife, and
the.ii. lies are these. First, said he to Bethsabe, thou know that the
Kingdom belongs to me, for I am the elder. The kyngedom was mine, ij. loud
lies at a clap made by Ambitious a Adonias.
he lied falsely it was none of his. Then said he all the eyes of Israel were
cast upon me, that is to say, all Israel consented to it, and there he lied
falslye. For Natha^, Sadoc, and other wise men, never agreede to it. Here was a
great enterprise of Adonias, he will be climbing still. Well Bethsabe went at
his request to her son Solomon, and asked a boune, and he granted her what
so ever she did ask. Notwythstanding he brake his promis afterward and that
rightwell, for all promysses are not to kept, specially if they be against
the word of God. When promises may not be performed
Or not standing with a commune profit, and therefore, as soon as Solomon
heard that Adonias would have married the young queen Abisaak: nay then let him
be king to, said he. I perceive now that he is a naughty man, a proud herted
fellow, the gal of ambition is not yet out of his heart, and so commanded him
to be put to death. Thus was Adonias put to execution, Adonias put to death
iij. King. ij.
whereas if he had kept his house and not broken his iniunction, he might have
lived still. Abiathar deposed and made a quondam.iij. King. ij
Abiathar, what became of him? The king (because he had served his father
before him) would not put him to death, but made him as it were a quondam.
Because thou have been with my father said he, and did carry the arck
before him I will not kill the.

But I will promise the, thou shalt never mynyster any moore. Vade in agrum
tuum. Get the to thy land, and live theare. A great matter of pittye and
compassyo^, so God grant us al, such mercy. And here was the end of Elis
stock, according to the promise and threatenyng of God. As for the Phelethites
we do not read that they were punyshed. Mary Semey traunsgressed his Iniunction
for he kept not his house, but went out of Hyerusalem to seek two servants
of his, that had run from him, and when it came to Salomons ear, it cost
him his life. I have rypt the matter now to the pyll, and have told you of
plain walkers, and of bywalkers, and how a king in his chyldehode is a
king, as well, Ioas was but vij years old when he was made King, iiij. King.
xij. Josias was viij.iiij. King. xxij
as in any other age. We read in scripture of such as were but.xii. or.viii.
years old, and yet the word of the holy Ghost called them kings, saying:
Cepitr^ guare. He began to raygne, or he began to be king. Here is of
bywalkers. This hystorye would be remembered, the Proverb is: Felir que^
faciunt aliena pericula cautu^.

Happy is he that can beware by an other man's ieoperdy. For if we offend not
as other do, it is not our own deserts. If we fall not, it is Gods
preservation. We are al offenders. For auther we may do, or have done, or
shall do (except God preserve us) as evil as the worste of them. I pray God
we may all amend and repent. But we will all amend now I trust. We must
neades amend our lives every man. The holy communion is at hand, and we may
not receive it unworthily.

Well, to return to my hystory. King David (I say) was a king in his second
chyldhode And so, Kings though they be children yet they are kings.
young kings though they be children, yet are they kings notwythstandyng,
and though it be written in scripture: Ve tibi O terra vbi puer est Rex. Woe to
the, O Land, where the king is a child: it follows in an other place. Beata
terra vbi rex nobilis. Blessed is the Land, where there is a noble King.
Where Kings be no banketers, no players, and they spend not the time in
haukynge, and hunting.

And when had the Kings mayestye a Council that took more pain boeth night
and day for the setting forth of Gods word, The kings honorable council
worthily commended*
and profyt of the common wealth? And yet there be some wicked people that
will say.

Tushe, this gear will not tarry, The comune saying of the popyshe hope days.
it is but my Lord Protertours, and my Lord of Canterburyes doing. The King
is a child, he knows not of it.

Jesus mercy, how like are we English men to the Jews, Englysh men worsse
then the Jews.
ever stubburne, styfnecked, and walking of bye ways. Yea I think no Jew
would at any time say. This gear will not tarry. I never heard nor read at
any time that they said.

These laws were made in such a kings days, when he was but a child. Let us
alter them. O Lord what pittye is this, that we should be worsse then the
Jews?

Blessed be the land says the word of God, where the King is noble. What
people are they that say, the King is but a child? Have not we a noble
King? Was there ever King so noble? So Godly? brought up with so noble
counsaylours? so excellent, and well learned Scolemaysters? I will tell you
this, and I speak it even as I think. His majesty has more Godly wit and
understanding, A true and hearty report of M.L. by ye kings majesty.
more learning and knowledge at this age, then xx. of his progenitors, that I
could name, had at any time of their life.

I told you in my last sermon of minysters of the kings people, and had
occasyon to show you, how few noble men were good preachers, and I left out
an hystory then which I will now tell you.

There was a bishop of Winchester in King Henry the.vi. days, The hystorye of
a bishop of Winchester in King Henry the.vi. time.
which king was but a child, and yet were there many good Acts made in his
chyldehode, and I do not read that they were broken.

This bishop was a great man borne, and did bear such a stroke, that he was
able to shoulder the Lord Protector. Well, it chanced that the Lord Protector
and he fell out, and the bishop would bear nothing at all with him, but
played me the Satrapa, so that the Regente of France was feign to be sent for
from beyond the Seas, to set them at one, and to go between them.

For the bishop was as able and ready to buccle with the Lord Protectoure,
as he was with him.

Was not this a good prelate? he should have been at home a preaching in his
Dioces in a waniant. This Protector was so noble and Godly a man, that he was
called of every man the good Duke Humfrey. The good Duke Humfrey.
He kept such a housse, as never was kept since in England, without any
enhaunsyng of rentes I warrant you, or any such matter. And the bishop for
standing so styflye by the matter, and bearing up the order of our mother ye
holy church, The bishop had a cardynall hat but a tyburne typpet would a be
come him better.
was made Cardinal at Calice, and thither the bishop of Rome sent him a
cardinals hatte. He should have had a tiburne tippet, a halpeny halter, and
allsuche proud prelates. These Romish hattes never brought good into England.

Upon this the bishop goes me to the queen Katherin the kings wife, aproud
woman and a stout, and persuaded her, that if the duke were in such authority
still, and lived, the people would honor him, more the^ they did the king. And
the king should not be set by, and so between the^, I ca^ not tell how it came to
pas, but at.s. Edmundesbury in a parliament the good Duke Humfrey was
smothered. Duke Humfrey was smothered.


But now to return to my text, and to make further rehearsal of the same,
the matter begi^neth thus. Et pasqua^ sederit rex And when the king is set in
the seat of his Kyngedome, what shall he do? shall he dance, and dally? What is
the office ofaking newly chosen
banquet? hawk and hunte? No forsothe sir. For as God set an order in the
Kings stable as I told you in my last Sermon, so will he apoynte what pastyme
a King shall have. What must he do then? He must be a student. He must write
Gods aboke him self. Not thinking because he is a king, be has license to
do what he will, as these worldly flatterers are wont to say. Yea, trouble not
your self sir, ye may hawk and hunt, and take your pleasure. As for the
guydinge of your kingdom and people, let us alone with it.

These flatteryng clawbackes are original rotes of all myschyefe, Flatteryng
clawbackes
and yet a King may take his pastyme in haukinge or hunting or such like
pleasures. How a king may take his pastyme.
But he must use them for recreation when he is weary of weighty affairs, that
he may return to the^ the moore lustye. and this is called pastime with good
company. The king must write ye book of Deutero. him self Deuteronomy. xvij
He must write out a book him self. He speaks of writing because printynge
was not used at ye time.

And shall the King write it out him self? He means he shall se it written,
and rather then he should be without it, write it him self.

Jesus mercy, is God so chary with a king to have him well brought up and
instructed? Yea forsooth. For if the king be well ordered, the realm is well
ordered. Where shall he have a copye of this book? of the Levites. And why?
Because it shall be a true copye, not falsified.

Moses left the book in an old cheste, and the Levites had it in keeping. And
because there should be no error, no addition, nor taking away from it, he
byddeth him fetch the copye of the Levites. And was not here a great miracle
of God. how this book was preserved? It had layne hyd many years and the Jews
knew not of it.

Therefore at length when they had found it and knew it: they lamented for
their ignorance, that had so long been without it, and rent their clothes,
repentyng their unfaithfulness, and the holy bible Gods book, Gods book has
been preserved hither to by a wonderful miracle, no God a mercy unto the
bysshoppes*
that we have among us, it has been preserved hitherto by wonderful miracle
of God (though the kepers of it were never so malitiouse) first ever sithe the
byshope of Rome was first in authorytye, they have gone about to destroy it,
but God works wonderfully, he has preserved it mauger their beardes, and
yet are we unthankful that we can not consider it. I will tell you, what a
bishop of this realm said once to me, he sent for me and meruayled that I
would not consent to such tradytyones, What a bishop said to M. L.
as were then set out.

And I answered him, that I would be ruled by Gods book, and rather then I
would dissent one jot from it, I would be torn with wild horses. And I
chanced in our communication, to name the Lords supper. Tushe says the
Bishop. What do ye call the Lords supper? What new term is that? There stood
by him a dubber, one Doctor Dubber he dubbed him by and by, and said that
this term was seldom red in the doctors. And I made answer, yt I would
rather follow Paul in vsyng his terms, then them, though, they had all the
doctors on their side. Why said the bishop, A Bishop yt asked wheather ye
people might not be ordered with outscriptures
can not we without scriptures order ye people? how did they before the
scripture was first written and copied out? But God knows, full ill yet would
they have ordered them. For seeing that having it, they have deceived us. in
what case should we have been now without it? But thanks be to God, yt by so
wonderful a miracle has preserved ye book still. It follows in the text.
Habebit secum etc. The Bible must not be forgotten in time of progress and
pastyme.
He shall have it with him in his progress, he must have a man to carrye it,
that when he is haukynge and hunting or in any pastyme, he may always comune
with them of it. He shall read in it not once a year, for a time, or for his
recreation when he is weary of haukyng or huntyng but Cunctis diebus vite sue.
All the days of his life. Where are those worldlynges now? These bledder
puffed up wylye men? Woe worth them that ever they were about any King. But how
shall he read this book? as the Homilies are read. How homely they handle the
godly homylies.
Some call them homlyes, and in deed so they may be well called, for they are
homely handeled. For though the Priests read them never so well, yet if the
Paryshe like them not, there is such talking and babbling in the Church, that
nothing can be heard, and if the paryshe be good, and the pryest naught he
will so hacke it, and choppe it, that it were as good for them to be without
it, for any word that shall be understand. And yet (the more pytye) this is
suffered of your graces bishops in their diocesses unpunished. But I will be a
suter to your grace, M. L. request to the kings grace.
that ye will give your bishops charge year they go home, upon their
allegiaunce to look better to their flock, and to se your majesty's
iniunctio^s better kept, and send your visitours in their tails.

And if they be found negligent or fauty in their deuties out with them. Out
with the neglygent bishops.
I require it in Gods behalf, make the^ quondams all the pack of them. But
peradventure ye will say Where shall we have any to put in their rowmys?

In deed I were a presumptuous fellow to move your grace to put them out, if
there were not other to put in their places. But your mayestye has diverse of
your chaplayns, well learned men, and of good knowledge, and yet ye have some
that be bad enough, Hangers of ye court.
ha^gers on of the court, I mean not those. But if your mayesties chaplayns,
and my Lord Protectours be no^ able to furnyshe their places, there is in this
realm, thanks be to GOD, a great syghte of lay men well learned in the
scryptures, and of virtuous and Godly conversation, better learned then a
great sight of us, of the clergy.

I can name a number of them that are able and would he glad (I dare say) to
minister the function, if they be called to it. M. L. would have learned laymen
to furnyshe the rowmes of bysshoppes.
I move it of conscience to your grace, let them be called to it orderly, let
them have institution, and give them the names of the cleargye. I mean not the
name only, but let them, do the function of a bishop, and live of the same.
Not as it is in many places, that one should have the name, and cyghte other
the profit.

For what an enormitye is this in a chrystian realm to serve in a ciuilitye,
An enormytie in a comune wealth whereby the clargy is like to be brogth into
slauerye.
having the profyt of a Prouostshyp and a Deanery, and a Personage?

But I will tell you what is like to come of it. It will bring the clergy
shortly into a very slauerye. I may not forget here my Scala celi, that I
spoke of in my last sermon. I will repete it now again, desyering your grace
in Gods behalf that ye will remember it.

The Bishop of Rome had a Scala celi, but his was a mas matter. This Scala
celi, is the true ladder that brings a man to heaven, The Scala celi and
his.v. steps.
the top of the ladder or first greese, is this.

Who so ever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. The second
step. How shall they call upon him, in whom they have no believe? The third
stayer is this. How shall they believe in him of who^ they never heard? The
fourth step. How shall they hear without a preacher? Now the nether end
of the ladder is. How shall they preach, except they be sent? This is the
foot of the ladder, so that we may goo backward now, and use the schole
argument. A primo ad vltimum. Take away preaching, take away salvation.

But I fear one thing, The fear is past for it is done all ready.
and it is: lest for a salfety of a little money, you will put in chauntrye
Pryestes, to save their pentions.

But I will tell you, Christ boughte Souls with his blood, and will ye sell
them for gold or silver?

I would not that ye should do with chauntrye pryestes, as ye did with the
Abbottes, when Abbeyes were put down. For when their enormities were first red
in the parliament house, they were so great and abominable, that there was
nothing but down with them. But within a while after, New bishops of old
Abbottes.
the same Abbottes were made bishops as there be some of them yet a live to
save and redeem their pentio^s. O Lord, think ye, that God is a fool, and
sees it not, and if he se it, will he not punyshe it. And so now for salfety
of money, I would not yt ye should put in chauntrey priests, I speak not now
against such chauntrey priests as are able to preach, but those that are not
able, I will not have them put in. For if ye do this, ye shall answer for it.

It is in the text, that a king ought to fear god, he shall have the dread of
God before his eyes, work not by wordlye polycye, Wordly polycye fears not
God.
for worldly policy fears not God.

Take heed of these claubackes, these venemouse people that will come to you,
that will follow like Gnatoes and Parasites, if you follow them, Smell feasts
or flatter^rs.
you are out of your book. If it be not according to Gods words that they
counsel you, do it not for any worldle policye, for then ye fear not God.

It follows in the text. Vt no^ eleuetur coz eius. That he be not proud
above his brethreen. A king must not be proud, for God might have made him a
shepherd, when he made him a king, and done him no wrong.

There be many examples of proud kings in scripture.

Pharao Exodus vij.viij ix.x.
As Pharao that would not hear the message of God. Herod also, yt put John
Baptiste to death, and would not hear him, he told him, that it was not
lawefull for him to marye his brothers wife.

Jeroboam also was a proud king. Jeroboam iij. King. xij
An other king there was that worshipped strange Gods and Idols, of those men
who^ he had over come before in battle, and when a Prophet told him of it.
What said he. Who made you one of my counsel? These were proud kings, their
examples are not to be followed.

But wherefore shall a king fear God, and turn neither to the right hand,
nor to the left? Wherefore shall he do all this? vt longo te^pore reg^et ipse,
et filii tius. That he may reign long, he and his children. Though his terms
are homely yet are the good inogh for the persons that etc.
Remember this I beseech your grace. And when these flatterers, and
flybbergybbes another day shall come and clawe you by the back and say.

Sir trouble not your self. What should you study? Why should you do this or
that? Your grace may answer them thus. and say. What Syrra, I perceive you are
weary of us, Such an answer would cut his comb and make him to go away as he
had a flea in his ear.
and our posteritye. Does not God sai in such a place. That a king should write
out a book of gods law, and read it? learn to fear God. And why? That he
and his, might raygne long I perceive now thou art a traitor.

Tell him this tale once, and I warrant you he will come no more to you, ^
charm to chase away claubackes.
neither he, nor any other after such a sort.

And this shall your grace drive these flatterers and claubackes away. And I am
afraid I have troubled you to long. Therefore I will furnyshe the text now
with an hystory or two, and then I will leave you to God. Ye have heard how a
king ought to pass the time. He must read the book of God, and it is not
inoughe for him to read, but he must be acquainted with all scripture, he
must study, and he must pray, and how shall he do both these. ^^j. of king.
iij


He may learn at Solomon, GOD spoke unto Solomon, ij. of Chrenicles, i, b
when he was made a king, and bade him ask of him what he would, and he
should have it. Make thy peticion said God, and thou shall obtain.

Now mark Salomo^s prayer: Domine, o Domine deus, said he: O Lord GOD, it is
thou that have caused me to reign, and haste set me in my fathers seat,
Solomon is a president of prayer for kings.
for thou GOD only do make kings. Thus should Kings praise God, and
thank god as Solomon did.

But what was his petycion? Lord, said he: Da mihi cor docile^ He asked a
docyble heart, a wise heart, Solomon asks wisdom
and wisdom to go in and to go out, that is to begin all mine affairs well,
and to bring them to good effect and purpose, that I may learn to guide and
govern my people. When he had made his petycio^ it pleased God well that
Solomon asked wisdom, and neither rytches nor long life, and therefore GOD
made him this answer. Because thou have chosen wisdom above all things, I
will give the it, and thou shall be the wysest king that ever was before the,
and so he was, and the wisest in all ki^des of knowledge, that ever was sith.
And though he did not ask riches, yet God gave him both rytches and honor,
more then ever any of his auncetours had.

So your grace must learn how to do, of Solomon. Ye must make your peticion,
Study and prayer must be coupled to geather.
now study, now pray. They must be yoked to gether, and this is called
pastyme with good company. Now when God had given Solomon wisdom, he sent
him by and by occasyon to occupy his wit. God minystres occasion to use his
gifts at one time or other.
For God gave never a gift, but he sent occasyon at one time or another to
show it to Gods glory. As if he sent rytches, he sends pore me^ to be helped
with it. But now must men occupy their goods otherwise. They will not look on
the poor, they must help their children, How should we have mo vpskypped
gentlemen were it not for their purchasyng.
and purchase them more la^d the^ ever their grandfathers had before the^. But
I shall tell you what Christ said. He that loves his child better the^ me, is
not worthy to be my dysciple. I ca^ not se how ye shall stand before God at
the later day, when this sentence shall be laid against you.

But to return to my purpose, iij. of king. iij
there were two pore women came before Solomon to complain. They were two
harlots, The co^playnt of the two harlottes to Solomon.
and dwelled together in one house, and it chanced with in.ii. days they
chylded both. The one of these women by chance in the night, had killed her
child, and rose pryuely and went to the other woman, and took her live child
away, and left her dead child in his place.

Upon that they came both before Solomon to have the matter judged, whose the
child was. And the one said: it is my child. Nay says the other, it is
mine. So there was yea, and nay, between them, and they held up the matter
with skoldynge after a womanly fashyo^. At the length Salomo^ repeted their
tale as a good judge ought to do, and said to the one woman.

Thou say the child is thine, yea said she. And thou say, it is thine to
the other. Well, fetch me a swerd said he. For there was no way now to try,
which was the true mother, but by natural inclinacyon.

And so he said to one of his servants. Fetch me a sword and deuyde the
child between them. When the mother of the child that accused the other.
heard him say so. Nay for Gods sake said she, let her have the whole
child, and kill it not. Nay quod the other, neither thine, nor mine, but let
it be divided.

Then said Solomon. Give this woman the child, this is the mother of the
child. What come of this? Audiuit omnis Israel. When al Israel heard of this
judgment, they feared the king. Wisdom causes a king to be feared.
It is wisdom and Godly knowledge that causes a king to be feared. One word
note here for Gods sake, and I will trouble you no longer.

Would Solomon being so noble a king hear.ii. poor women? They were poor,
for as the scripture says. They were to geather alone in a house, they had
not so much as one servant between them boeth.

Would king Solomon I say hear them in his own person? Yea forsothe. And yet
I hear of many matters before my Lord Protectoure, M.L. request to my Lord
Protectours grace.
and my Lord Chaunceloure that can not be heard. I must desire my Lord
protectours grace to hear me in this matter, that your grace would hear
poor men's suits your self. M. Money will be herd she soundes so shyrle and
speaks so pleasantly yt every man is glad to have her and take her in their
hands.
Put the^ to none other to hear, let them not be delayed. The saying is
now that money is heard every where if he be rich he shall soon have an end
of his matter. Other are feign to go home with wepi^g tears for any healp they
can optaine at any Judges hand. Hear menes suetes your self I require you in
gods be half and put it not to the hearing of these veluette cotes. these
vpskippes. Velvet cotes and vpskyppes
Now a man can skarse know them from an ancient Knight of the country.

I can not go to my book for poor folks come unto me, M.L. is troubled in
solycytyng poor men's suytes.
desirynge me that I will speak yt their matters may be heard. I trouble my
Lord of Canterburye, and being at his house now and then I walk in the
garden lokyng in my book, as I can do but little good at it. But some thing
I must needs do to satisfye this place.

I am no sooner in the garden and have red a while, but by and by comes there
some one or other knocking at the gate.

Anon comes my man and says. Sir, there is one at the gate would speak
with you When I come there, then is it some one or other yt desires me that I
will speak that his matter might be heard, and that he has layne this long
at great costs and charges, and can not once have his matter come to the
hearing, but among all other, one specially moved me at this time to speak.
This it is sir. The gentylwoma^nes co^playnt to M. L.
A gentylwoman came to me and told me, that a great man keeps certain
lands of hyrs from her, and will be her tenaunte in the spite of her tethe. And
that in a whole twelve month she could not get but one day for the
hearing of her matter, Lawyers are like Swytcheners that serve where they may
have most money.
and the same day when the matter should be heard, the great manne brought
on his side a great syghte of Lawyers for his counsel, the gentilwoman had
but one man of law: and the great man shakes him so that he can not tell what
to do, so that when the matter came to the point, the Judge was a mean to the
Gentyl woman, that she would let the great man have a quietness in her land. I
beseech your grace that ye will look to these matters. Hear them your self.
Uyeue your Judges? And hear poor men's causes. And you proud Judges harken
what God says in his holy book: Audite illos, ita paruum vt magnum. Hear
them says he, the small as well as the great, the pore as well as the rich.
Regard no person, fear no man. Why? Quia domini iudicium est. The judgment
is Gods.

Marcke this saytnge thou proud Judge? The devil will bring this sentence at
the day of Dome. Hell will be full of these Judges if they repent not and amend.

They are worsse then the wicked Judge that Christ speaks of, Luke ye.xvi^^
that neither feared God, nor the world. There was a certain wyddowe that was
a suter to a Judge, and she met him in every corner of the streate, criynge. I
pray you hear me, I beseech you hear me, I ask nothing but right

When the Judge saw her so importunate, though I fear neither God, says he,
nor the world, yet because of her importunatnes I will grant her request.

But owr Judges are worsse then this Judge was. For they will neither hear men
for Gods sake, Except before except that is to say except yt be for money.
nor fear of ye world, nor importunatenes, nor any thing else. Yea some of
them will command them to ward, if they be importunate. I heard say, that
when a suter came to one of them, he said: What fellow is it that gives these
folk counsayll to be so importunate? he would be punished and committed
toward. Mary sir, punyshe me then, it is even I that gave them counsayll, I
would gladlye be punyshed in such a a cause. And if ye amend not, I will cause
the^ to cry out upon you still: eue^ as long as I live. I will do it in deed,
but I have troubled you long. As I began with this sentence. Quecunque scripta
sunt, etc. So will I end now with this text. Beati qui audiu^t verbu^ dei, et
custodiunt illud: Blessed are they that hear the word of god and keeps it.
There was an other suit, and I had almost forgotten it. There is a poor woman
yt lies in the Flete, The poor woman lyinge in the Flete.
and can not come by any means that she can make, to her answer, and would
feign be baylled, offering to put in suerties worth a thousand pound and yet
she can not be heard. He thynk this is a reasonable cause, it is great pity yt
such things should so be. I beseech God, that he will grant that all that is
amysse may be amended yt we may hear his word, and keep it, that we may come
to the eternal bliss, to the which bliss I beseech GOD to bring both you and
me. Amen.

The third Sermon of Master Hughe Latymer, which he preached before the King
within his graces Palayce at Westminster the.xxij. day of March.
QVecunque scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Al things that are
written, are written to be our doctrine. All things that be written in Gods
holy Book, the Bible, were written to be our doctrine long before our time,
to serve from time to time, and so forth to the worlds end.

Ye shall have in Remembrance, most benynge and gracious Audience, that a
preacher has.ii. offices, A preacher has two offices.
and the one to be used orderly after an other.

The first is Exhortari per sana^ doctrinam. i. To teach true doctrine
To teach true doctrine He shall have also occasion oftentimes to use an other,
and that is. Contradicentes conuincere. ij. To confute gaynsayers and spurners
against ye troth
To reprehende to conuynce, to confute gaynesayers and spurners against the
truth.

Why? you will say, will any body again say true doctrine, and sound
doctrine? Well, let a preacher be sure, that his doctrine be true, and it is
not to be thought, that any body will gain say it. If. S. Paul had not
forsene that there should be gain sayers, he had not neadde to have appointed
the confutacion of gain saying.

Preachers have ever had gaynsayers
Was there ever yet preachers, but there were gayn sayars? that spurned? that
winste? that whympered against him? that blasphemed, that gaynesayed it?

Exo. vij. vist. ix.x.
When Moses came to Egypt with sound doctrine, he had Pharao to gain say
him. Jeremy was the minister of the true word of God, he had gain sayers the
priests, and the false Prophets borne up by Achab,

iij. King. xviij
Ely had all Bals priests supported by Iesabel to speak against him.

Math. xij.xv.xvi.
John Baptiste and our Savior Jesus Christ, had the Pharseis, the Scribes,
and the priests gayn sayers to them. The Apostles, had gayn sayers also,
Acts. xxviij.
for it was said to saynct Paul at Rome:

Notum est nobis quod vbique sect huic contradicitur: We know that every man
does gain say this learning. Eusebius de temporibus. Hystoria ecclesiastica.
Antonius sabellicus.
After the Apostles time the truth was gain said with tyrants, as Nero,
Maxentius, Domicianus, and such like, and also by the doctrine of wicked
heretics.

In the popysh mass time, We were the^ at a peace with the devil and at debate
with God.
there was no gayn saying, all things seemed to be in peace, in a concord, in
a quiet agreement. So long as we had in adoration, in admiration, the popyshe
mass, we were then without gaynsayinge. What was that? The Same yt Christ
speaks of. Cu^ fortis armatus custodierit atriu^ etc. When Satan the devil
has the guydynge of the house, he keeps al in peace that is in his
possessyon: when Satan rules, and bears dominion in open Religion, as he
did with us when we preached pardon matters, purgatory matters, and pylgremage
matters, all was quiet. He is ware inoughe, he is wily, and circu^spect for
stiryng up and sedicion. When he keeps his terrytory al is in peace.

If there were any manne that preached in England in times past, in the popes
times, (as peradventure there was.ii or.iii) straight ways he was taken and
napped in ye head with the title of an heretic. When he has the religyon in
possessyon, he sturreth up no sedycyon, I warrant you.

How many discentyons have we heard of in Turkye? But a few I warrant you.
The devil makes no dissension in Turkye
He busyeth him self there with no discention. For he has there dominion in
the open Relygion, and neadeth not to trouble him self any further.

The Jews like ronnagates where so ever they dwell (for they be dispersed and
be trybutaryes in all contryes where they inhabyte) look wheather ye here of
any heresies among them? No heresies amongst the Jews.
But when fortis superuenerit, when one stronger then the Devil, comes in
place, which is our Savior Jesus Christ, and reueleth his word, When ye
devil bestyrreth him and plaieth his part.
then the Devil roareth, then he bestyrreth him, then he rayseth diuersytye of
opinions to sclaunder Gods word. And if ever concord should have been in
Religyon. when should it have been but when Christ was here? Preachers are
noted to be the cause of sedition.
Ye find fault with preachers, and say, they cause sedition. We are noted to
be rassh, and indiscreet in our preaching. Yet as discrete as Christ was there
was diversity, yea, what he was him self. The.xvi. of Mat. Mark. viij. Luk, ix.
For when he asked what men called him. His Apostles answered him. Some say,
you are Johan Baptiste. some say, you are Helias, and some say, you are one
of the prophets, and these were they that spoke best of him. For some said,
he was a Samaritane, that he had a Devil within him, a gloser, a drincker, a
pot-companion.

There was never Prophet to be compared to him, and yet was there never more
dyssentio^ then when he was, They was never so great dissension as when Christ
preached.
and preached him self.

If it were contraried the^, will ye think it shall not be contraried now, when
charity is so cold and iniquitye so strong? Thus these backebyters, and
sclaunderers must be convinced.

Saint Paul said: There shall be intractabiles, that will whympe and whyne,
ij. Tymo. iij.
there shall be also Vaniloqui, vain speakers. For the which Sayncte Paul
appoynteth the preacher to stop their mouths and it is a preachers office to
be a mouth stopper. A preacher office is to be a mouth stopper. But not to
have his one mouth stopped with a benefice or a bishop rike


This day I must somewhat do in the second office, I must be again sayer,
and I must stop their mouths, conuynce, refell, and confute that they speak
sclau^derousely of me.

There be some gain sayers gain sayers, for there be some sclaunderouse
people, vaynespeakers, and intractabiles which I must needs speak against.

But first I will make a short rehersall to put you in memory of that, that I
spoke in my last Sermon. And that done, I will confute one that sclau^dereth
me. For one there is yt I must needs aunswre unto, for he sclaundreth me for my
preaching before the kings majesty. There be some to blame, that when a
preacher is wearye, yet they will have him speak all at once.

Ye must tarry till he here more. Ye must not be offended till ye here the rest.
Here all and then judge al. What ye are very hasty, very quick with your
preachers? But before I enter further into this matter I shall desire you to
pray. etc.

First of all as touching my first sermon, I will run it over cursorie. The
Epiloge, or rehearsal of the first sermon.
ryppynge alittle the matter. I brought in an hystorye of the Bible, excytynge
my audience to beware of by walkynges, to walk ordinatlye, plainly, the kings
high way, and a gre to that, which stands with the order of a Realm. I
showed you how we were under the blessing of God, for our king is Nobilis, I
showed you we have a noble King. True in heritoure to the crown with out
doubt. I showed furthermore of his godly educacion. He has such schole
Maiesters as can not be gotten in all the Realm again. Wherefore we may be
suer that God blessed this realm, The Kings Scole masteres are praised
worthily.
all though he curssed the realm, whose ruler is a child, under who^ the
officres be clymbynge, and gleyynge, flurynge, scratchyng, and scrapynge, and
volupteously set on banketyng and for the maynetenaunce of their volupteousnes,
go by walks. And although he be young he has as good, and as sage acounsayle,
as ever was in England, The Counsel of England have their co^dyng and worthy
praise
which we may well know by their godly procedinges, and setting fourth of
the word of God: Therefore let us not be worse? then the styffe necked
Jews. In king Josias time, (who being young did alter, The people did not
repyne against King Iosyas in his minorite.
change and correct wonderfully the religion) it was never heard in Iewry
that the people repyned or said, The King is a child. This gear will not last
long. It is but one or two men's doings. It will not but for a time. The king
knows it not. Woe worth that ever such men were borne. Take heed lest for our
rebellion God take his blessyng a way from us. I entered into the place of the
kings pastyme. I told you how he must pass his time in reading the book
of God (for that is the kings pastime by gods appoyntemente) in the which
book he shall learn to fear god, What is a Prince like pastme.


Oh how careful God is to set in an order all things that belong to a king
in his chamber, God is careful for a kings house and the order of ye same.
in his stable in his treasure house.

These peuishe people in this Realm have nothing but the king, The king is
in every man's mouth when it makes for their purpose.
the king in their mouths, when it makes for their purpose. As there was a
doctor that preached, the kings majesty has his holy water, he crepeth to
the cross, and the^ they have nothing but the King the king in their
mouths. These be my good people that must have their mouths stopte, but if a
man tell them of the kings proceadynges, now they have their shyftes, Mayn
for shyftes and put offes.
and their puto^^ saying, we may not go before a law, we may break no order.
These be the wicked preachers, there mouths must be stopte, these be the
gaynesayers. Another thing there is yt I told you of Ne eleuetur cor regis. etc.
The king must not be proud over his brethren. A king must not be proud
He must order his people with brotherly love and charity. Here I brought in
ex^mples of proud Kings. It is a great pride in kings and maiestrates when
they will not hear, iii. Kinds of pride in a king
nor be confortable to the ^ound doctrine of God. It is an other kind of pride
in kings when they think them selves so high, so lofty, that they disdain
and think it not for their honor to hear poor men's causes the^ selves.
Kings have clawe backs and docter pycke mote and his fellow a boute him.
They have claubackes yt say unto the^. What sir? What need you to trouble your
self? take you your pleasure, hunte, Hawk, Clawbackes counsel.
dance, and dallye, let us a lone: we will govern and order the commune weal
matters well enough. We worth them, they have been the rote of al myschiefe
and destruction in this Realm. A King must pray as well as read,
A king ought not only for to read and study, but also to pray. Let him
borowe example at Solomon, who pleased God hyghlye with his peticion, Solomon
prayed for wisdom.
desyringe no worldely things, but wysdom, which God did not only grant him,
but because he asked wisdom, he gave him many mo things. As riches, honor
and such like. Oh, how it pleased God that he asked wysdom^ And after he had
given him this wisdom he sent him also occasion to use the same by a couple of
strumpets. Here I told an example of a meke king, who, so continued, until he
came into the company of strange women He herd them not by means, or by any
other, Solomon herd the causes and co^plaintes of his people in his own person.
but in his own person, and I think verily the natural mother had never had
her own child if he had not herd the cause him self, They were ^eritrices.
Hoores although some excuses the matter, and say they were but typplers,
such as keep alehouses. But it is but folly to excuse the^, seeing the Jews
were such, and not unlike, but they had their stews and the mayntenau^ce of
whordom as they had of other vices. One thing I must here desire you to
reform my lords. You have put down the Stues. But I pray you what is the
matter a mended? M Latimers request to the lords for the abolisheme^t of
whordome.
what a uayleth that? ye have but changed the place, and not taken the whordome
away. God should be honored every where For the scripture says. Domini es
terra et plenitudo eius. The earth and the la^d is the Lords. What place
should be then within a Christian realm left, for to dishonor God. I must
needs show you such news as I here. For though I se it not my self, not
withstanding it comes faster to me then I would wyshe. I do as s. Paul does to
the Corinthia^s Auditur in uos stuprum. There is such a whordome among you as
is not among the gentiles. So likewise. Auditu, I here say hate there is such
whordome in England as never was seen the like. He charged all the Corinthians
for one man's offense saying. All the Corinthyans charged for one man's sin.
They were al gilty for one man's sin, if they would not correct and
redress it, but wynke at it. Lo, here may you se how that one man's sin
poluted al Corinth. A little leaven as S. Paulle says, corrupts a great
deal of dowe. This is, Communicare alienis pecatis, to be partaker of other
men's sines I advertise you in Gods nanie look to it. I here sai, there is now
more whoredom in London, the^ ever there was on the bank. More whoredom in
london the^ ever there was on the bank.
These be the news I have to tell you. I fear they be true. Ye ought to here
of it, and redress it, I here of it, and as Paul says, Aliqua ex par^e credo.

There is more open whordome more stuede whoredom then ever was before. For
Gods sake let it be looked upon. It is your office to se unto it. Now to my
confutacion. There is a certain man that shortly after my first sermon, being
asked if he had been at the sermon that day, answered, yea: I pray you said he
how lyked you him? mary said he even as I lyked him always, Of one that
reported M. Latimer to be a sedicio^s fellow.
a sedicious fellow. Oh lord he pinched me their in deed Nay he had rather a
full bitte at me. Yet I comfort my self with that, Christ was noted for a
sediciouse styrrer of the people.
that Christ him self was noted to be a sturrer up of the people against the
Emperor, and was contented to be called sediclouse. It be commech me to take
it in good worth, I am not better then he was. In the kings days that dead is,
a meanye of us were called together before him to say our minds in certain
matters. How M, Latimer was accused to our sat King of famous memory King
Henry the eight and his answer
In the end one kneleth me down, and accuses me of sedicio^, that I had
preached sediciouse doctrine. A heavy salutacion, and a hard point of such a
man's doing, as if I should name him, ye would not think it. The king turned
to me and said. What say you to that sir? The^ I kneled down, and turned me
first to mine accuser, and required him.

Sir what form of preachinge would you appoint me to preach before a king?
Would you have me for to preach nothing as concerning a King, in the Kings
sermon? Have you any commission to a point me what I shall preach? Besides
this, I asked him diverse other questions, and he would make no answer to none
of them all. He had nothing to say. Then I turned me to the King, and
submitted my self to his Grace and said I never thought my self worthy, nor
I never sued to be a preacher before your Grace, His answer to the king
but I was called to it, and would be will lyng (if you mislyke me) to give
place to my betters. For I gru^t there be a great many more worthy of the room
the^ I am. And if it be your graces pleasure so to allow the^ for preachers, I
could be content to bear their books after them. But if your Grace allow me
for a preacher I would desire your grace to give me leave to discharge my
co^cie^ce. Give me leave to frame my doctrine according to mine audience. I had
byne a very dolt to have preached so, In preaching we must have respect to the
place and to the persons
at the borders of your realm, as I preach before your grace. And I thank
almyghtye God, which has al ways byne remedy, that my sayings were well
accepted of the king, for like a gracious Lord he turned into a another
communicacyon. It is even as the scripture says. Cor Regis in manu domini,
the Lord dyrected the^ kings heart. Certain of my friends came to me with
tears in their eyes, and told me they looked I should have been in the tower
the same night. Thus have I ever more been burdened with the word of
sedition. I have offended God greuouslye, transgressyng his law, and but for
his remedy and his mercy, I would not look to be saved. As for sedicion, for
ought that I know, me thynkes, I should not need Christ, if I might so say.
M. Latimer was ever void of sedicion and yet still charged and burdened there
with.
But if I be clear in any thing, I am clear in this. So far as I know
mine own heart, there is no man further from sedicion then I, which I have
declared in all my doings, and yet it has been ever laid to me. An othher
time, when I gave over mine office, I should have received a certain duty
that they call a Pentecostall it came to the sum of fyftye and five pound, I
sent my commissarye to gather it, but he could not be suffered. How. M.
Latimer his pe^tecostal was detained and upon what skyll.
For it was said a sedicion should rise upon it. Thus they burdened me ever
with sedicion. So this gentilman comes up now with sedicion. And wott ye
what? I chanced in my last Sermon to speak a merry word of the new shilling
(to refreshe my auditory) how I was like to put away my new shillynge for an
old grote, Of the new shyllynge.
I was herein noted to speak sediciously. Yet I comfort my self in one thing,
that I am not alone, and that I have a fellow. For it is, Consolatio
miserorom. It is the comfort of the wretched to have company. When I was in
trouble, it was objected an said unto me that I was syngular, M. Latimer noted
of a syngalaritie.
that no man thought as I thought, that ^ loved a syngularyte in all tha^ I
did, and that I took away. contrary to the king, and the whole parliamente,
and that I was trauayled with them, that had better wits then I, that I was
contrary to the^ al. Marye sir this was a sore thunder bolte. I thought it an
yrksome thing to be a lone, and to have no fellow. I thought it was possible
it might not be true that they told me. In the.vii. of John the Priests
sent out certain of the Jews to bring Christ unto them vyolentlye. When
they came into the temple and hard him preach, they were so moved with his
preaching, that they returned home again, and said to them that sent them.
Nunquam sic locutus est homo vt hic homo. There was never man spoke like this
man. Then answered the Pharyses: Number et vos seducti estis? What ye braynsycke
fools, Ye hoddy peckes. Ye doddye poulles, A paraphrastical exposition.
ye huddes, do ye believe him? are you seduced also? Nunquis ex Principibus
credidit in eum.

Did ye se any great man, or any great offycer take his part? do ye se any
boddy follow him, but beggerlye fyshers, and such as have nothing to take to?
Numquis ex Phariseis? Do ye se any holy man? any perfect man? any learned man
take his part? Curba que ignorant legem execrabilis est. This lay people is
accursed, it is they that know not the law, that takes his part, and none
else.

Lo here the Pharisees had nothing to choke the people, The bishops called
the people ignoraunte and they were ye cause of it the^ selus
with al, but ignorance. They did as our bishops of England, who vpbrayded
the people always with ignorance, where they were the cause of it them
selues^ There were says saint John. Multi ex principibus qui crediderunt in
eu^. Many of the chyefe men believed in him, and that was contrary to the
Pharisyes saying, Oh then by like they belyed him, he was not alone.

M. Latimer has gotten Esaias the prophet to be his companion in sedicion
So thought I, there bemore of mine opinion then I, I thought I was not alone.
I have now gotten one fellow more, a companyon of sedytyon, and wot ye who is
my fellow? Esaye the Prophet, I spoke but of a little preaty shyllynge. But he
speaks to Jerusalem after an other sort, Mark well his terms.
and was so bold to meddle with their coin Thou proud, thou couetouse, thou
hautye city of Jerusalem. Esaias meddled with the coin of the mynte
Argentum tuum uersum est inscoriam. Thy silver is turned into, what? into
testyons? Scoriam, in to dross. Ah sediciouse wrecthe, what had he to do
with the mynte? Why should not he have left that matter to some master of
policy to reprove? Thy silver is dross, it is not fine, it is counterfaite,
thy silver is turned, thou had good silver What pertayned that to Esaias?
Mary he espied a piece of divinity in that polici, he threatens the^ goods
vengeance for it. He went to the rote of the matter, which was covetousness.
Two causes why money in Esayes time was more basor and worse
He espied two points in it, that eythere it came of covetousness, which
became him to reprove, or else that it tended to the hurt of the pore people,
for the noughtynes of the silver was the occasyon of dearth of all things in
the Realm. He imputes it to them as a great crime. He may be called a
master of sedicion in deed. Was not this a sedyciouse harlot to tell them this
to their beardes? to their face?

This sedicyouse man goes also forth, saying: Vinum tuum mixtum est aqua. Thy
wine is myngled with water. Esaye medeleth with vinteners.
Here he medeleth with vinteners, be like there were bruers in those days, as
there be now.

It had been good for our missal pryestes to have dwelled in that co^trye, for
they might have been sure to have had their wine well myngled with water. M.
L. was sumthynge scrupulous, when he was a mass sayet, in delayinge of his
wine with water.
I remember how Scrupulouse I was in my tym of blyndnesse and ignorauncye, when
I should say mass, I have put in water twyse or thryse for faylyng, in so
much when I have been at my Meme^to, I have had a grudge in my consyence,
fearing that I had not put in Watter enough.

And that which is here spoken of wine, Esaye spoke of one vice but he mente yt
of mo,
he means it of al arts in the cyty, of al kinds of faculties, for they
have al their medles and mynglynges. That he speaks of one thing, he menneth
generally of al. I must tell you more news yet.

Cloth makers are become Poticaryes, and yet profess them selves to be
Gospellers.
I here say, there is a certain conning come up in myxynge of wares.

How say, you were it no wonder to here that clothe makers should be come
poticaries.

Yea and as I hear say, in such a place, where as they have professed the
Gospel, and the word of God most earnestly of a long time. Se how busy the
Devil is to sclaunder the word of god? Thus the pore gospel goes to wrack.
If his clothe be.xviii. ye ardes long, he will set him on a rack, and streatch
him out with ropes, and rack him till the senewes shryncke again, whiles he
has brought him to.xxvii. yardes. A pretti kind of mlutipliing.
When they have brought him to that perfection, they have a pretye feate to
thycke him again. He makes me a powther for it, an plays the poticary, Folcke
powther.
they call it floke pouther they do so in corporate it to the cloth, that it is
wonder full to consider, truly a goodly inuencion.

Oh that so goodly wits should be so ill applied, they may well deceive the
people but they can not deceive God. They, were wont to make beds of flocks
and it was a good bed to. Now they have turned their flocks into pouther to
play the false thieves with it. O wicked devil what can he invent to blaspheme
Gods word? These mixturs come of covetousness. They are plain theft. These
mixtures and multipliynges are theft.
Woo worth that these flocks should so slander the word of God.

As he said to the Jews, thy wine is myngled with water, so might he have
said to us of this Land. Thy clothe is myngeled with flockepouder. He goes
yet on. This sedicyouse man reproves this honorable city, and said:
Principes tui infideles. Thou land of Hyerusalem, thy magystrates, thy Judges
are unfaithful, they keep no touch, they will talk of many gaye things,
they will pretend this and that, but they keep no promise. They be worsse then
unfaithful, Esaye was sumwhat homely: when he calls the magystrates,
unfaithful and fellows of thieves.
he was not afraid to call the officers unfaithful. Et socij furum. Fellows of
thieves, for thieves and thieves fellows, be all of one sort. They were wont to
say. Ask my fellow if I be a thyefe. He calls Princes thieves. What? Princes
thieves? What a sedycyouse harlot was this? was he worthy to live in a commune
wealth that would call Princes on this wise, fellows of thieves? Had they a
standing at shooters hill, or Stangat hoole to take a purse? Why? did they
stand by the high way side? Did they rob? or break open any man's house or
door? No, There are two kind of theuynges, a gross kind of theuyng and a
pryncely kind of theuynge. Brybery is a kind of theauynge.
no. That a is gross kind of theuynge. They were princes, they had apryncelye
kind of theueynge. Omnes diligunt munera.

They all love brybes. Brybery is a pryncely kind of theuyng. They will be
waged by the rich, either to give sentence against the poor, or to put of the
poor man's causes. This is the noble theft of princes, and of magistrates.
They are bribetakers Now a days they call them gentle rewards, Brybes have
gotten a new name and under a color are called ge^til rewards, but that is
not their christen name.
let them leave their colourynge, and call them by their Chrstian name. Brybes.
Omnes diligunt munera. All all the princes, all the Judges, all the Priests,
all rulers are brybers. What? were all the magistrates in Jerusalem, all brybe
takers? none good? No doubt there were some good, This word omnes, signifies
the most part, and so there be some good I doubt not of it in England. But
yet we be far worsse then those styfnecked Jews. We are worsse then the
styffe necked Jews.
For we read of none of the^ ye winsed, nor kicked against Esaies preachinge,
or said yt he was a seditiouse fellow. It behooves the magistrates to be in
credit and therefore it might seem yt Esaias was to blame to speak ope^li
against the Magystrates. It is very sure that they that be good will bear, The
good will not spurn nor kycke at the preacher.
and not spourne at the preachers, they that be faultye they must amend, and
neither spourne, nor wynse, nor whyne. He that fyndeth him self toeched or
galled, So it faryth by a galled Horse.
he declares him self not to be vpryght.

Woe worth these gifts, they subuerte justice every where. Sequuntur
retributiones. They follow brybes. Some what was given to them before, and they
must needs give somewhat again, Gyffe Gaffe was a good fellow.
for giffe gaffe was a good fellow, this gyffe gaffe led them clean from
justice. They follow gifts.

A good fellow on a time bad an other of his friends to a breakefaste, and
said: If you will come you shall be welcome, but I tell you before hand, you shall
have but slender fare, one dysh and that is al, A good fellow was bidde^ to
breakfast to a puddynge.
what is that said he? A puddynge, and nothing else. Mary said he, you can
not please me better, of all meats that is for mine own toth, you may draw me
round a boute the town with a pudding. These brybynge magystrates, They follow
brybes as fast as the fellow did the puddynge
and judges follow giftesfaster, then the fellow would follow the puddynge,

I am content to bear the title of sedicio^ with Esaias. Thanks be to God, I
am mot alone I am in no syngularitye. This same man that laid sedycyon thus to
my charge, was asked an other time, whether he were at the sermon at Paul's
cross he au^swered that he was there, Of the stout ^ horneful ge^tilman which
said yt he and his mule had full absolucio^ at Paul's cross.
and being asked what news there. Mary quod he wonderful news, we were there
clean absolved, my Mule and al had full absolution, ye may se by this, that he
was such a one that rode on a mule and that he was a gentylman.

In deed his Mule was wyser then he, for I dare say, the Mule never
sclaundered the Preacher. Oh what an unhappy chance had this Mule to carye
such an Ass upon his back. I was there at the sermon my self. In the end
of his sermon he gave a general absolucion, and as far as I remember these,
or such other like were his words, but at the least I am sure, this was his
meaning, As many as do knowledge your selves to be sinners, The preachers
words in his absolucion
and confess the same and stands not in defense of it, and hartelye abhors
it, and will believe in the death of christ, and be conformable thereunto, Ego
absoluo uos, quod he. Now saeyth this gentylma^, his mule was absolved. The
preacher absolved but such as were sorye, and did repent. Be like then she
did repent her stumblynge, his Mule was wyser then he a great deal. Mule.
I speak not of worldely wisdom, for therein he is to wise, yea, he is so
wise, that wise men maruayle, how he came truly by tenth part of that he
has. But in wysdom which consists In rebus dei, The mysreporte of M^ Latimar
is worldly wise but in godly matters as blind as a beatael.
In rebus salutis, in godelye matters, and appartaynynge to our scluacio^, in
this wisdom he is as blind as a beatle. They be. Tanquam equus et Multus, in
quibus non est intellectus. Like Horses and Mules, that have no understanding.
If it were true that the Mule repented her of her stumbling I think she was
better absolved then he. A charytable whyshe of M, Latimar
I pray God stop his mouth, or else to open it to speak better, and more to
his glory: How tender and deyntey eared men of these days be, that had rather
commyt.xx. faults then here tell of one
An other man quickened with a word I spoke (as he sayeed opprobriouslye
against the nobilitye that their children did not set fourth Gods word, but
were vnpreachynge prelates) was offended with me.

Poor men's sons for the most part have ever traueled about the setting
forth of Gods word. Johannes Alasco*
I did not mean so, but that some noble men's children had set forth Gods
word, how be it the poor menes sons have done it always for the most
part. Johannes Alasco was here a great learned man and as they say a noble
man in his contrye, and is gone his way again, if it be for lack of
intertaynemente, the more pytye. I would wyshe such men as he to be in the
realm, for the reame should prospere in receyuynge of them. Qui uos recipit,
me recipit. Who receives you receives me (said Christ) and it should be for
the kings honor to receive the^ and keep them. Yt is honorable for the King
to be munificial and lyberal toward the learned.
I heard say Master Melancton, that great clarke, should come hither. I
would wyshe him, and such as he is to have CC. pound a year. The king should
never want it in his coffers at the years end. There is yet among us.ii.
great learned men Petrus Martyr, and Bernardyne, which have a. C. Petrus martyr
and Bernardine Ochiue.
marks a piece. I would the King would bestow a thousand pound on that sort.
Now I will to my place again. In the later end of my sermon I exhorted judges
to hear the small as well as the great. Just quod iustum est iudicate. You
must not only do tustyce, but do it iustlye. You must observe all
circumstances, You must give justice, and minister just judgment in time.

For the delaynge of matters of the poor folk, is as sinful before the face
of god as wrong judgment. I rehearsed here a parable of a wicked Judge, The
parable of the wicked Judge.
which for importunities sake herd the poor woman's cause, and. cetera. Here
is a comfortable place, for all you that cry out and are oppressed. For you
have not a wicked judge, but a merciful judge to call unto I am not so full of
folyshe pytye, but I can consider well enough, that some of you compain with
out a cause. They weep, they wayle, they mourn I am sure some not with out a
cause. I did not here reprove all judges, and find fault with all. I think we
have some as painful magistrates, Some as paynefull magystrates in England an
ever was,
as ever was in England, but I will not swear they be all so, and they that
be not of the best, must be content to be taught, and not disdain to be
reprehended, A good leasson for such as are magistrates, but none of the best.


David says: Erudimini qui iudicatis terram. I referr it to your conscience.

Vos qui iudicatis terram. Ye that be judges on the earth, whether ye have
heard poor me^nes causes with expedience or no, If ye have not, the^
erudimini, be content to be touched, to be told. You wydowes you orphans you
poor people, here is a confortable place for you. Though these Judges of the
world will not hear you there is one will be content with your importunytye,
he will remedy you, if you come after a right sort unto him.

Ye say. The Judge does blame you for your importunitye, it is yrckesome unto
him. He entered into this parable to teach you to be importune in your
petityon. How and by what means we should resort to God in aduersitye
Non defatigari. Not to be weary. Here he teaches you, how to come to god in
adversity, and by what means, which is by prayer. I do not speak of the
merit of Christ, For he says: Ego sum via, I am the way, Qui credit in me,
habet vitam eternam. Who so believes in me has everlasting life. But when we
are come to Christ, what is our way to remedy aduersytie? in an guyshe? in
tribulacions: in our necessytes? in our injuries? The way is prayer.

We are taught by the commandment of GOD. Inuoca me in die tribulationis et
ego eripia^te. Thou wyddowe, thou orphane, thou fatherles child, I speak to
the that haste no friends to healpe the, The swete^^ promysse of Christ.
call upon me in the day of thy tribulacion, call upon me, Ego eripiam te.

I will pluck the away, I will deliver the, I will take the away, I will
releue the, thou shalt have thy hearts desire. Here is the promise, here is
the comfort. Glorificabis me. Thank me, accept me for the author of it, and
thank not this creature or that for it. Here is the Judge of all Judges, come
unto him, and he will hear you. For he says: Quicquid petieritis patrem in
nomine meo etc.

What so ever ye ask my father in my name, shall be given you thorough my
merytes. You miserable people that are wronged in the world, ask of my father
in your dystresses, but put me a fore, The order of our prayer and asking.
look you come not with bragges of your own merytes but come in my name, and
by my merit.

He has not the propertye of this stout judge, he will bear your
importunatenes, he will not be angrye at your cryinge and calling. The prophet
says: Sperauerunt in te Patres nostri, et exaudinisti illos. Thou GOD thou
God, our fathers did cry upon the, and thou heardest them. Art thou not our
GOD as well as theyres? There is nothing more pleasant to God, then for to
put him in remembrance of his goodness showed unto our forefathers. What God
would hear of us and where in he delytes.
It is a pleasant thing to tell God of the benefytes that he has done
before our time.

Go to Moses, Moses used prrayer as an instrument in aduersyte.
who had the guydynge of Gods people, se how he used prayer, as an
instrumente to be delivered out of aduersytye, when he had great roughe
mountains on every side of him, and before him the red sea, Pharaos host
behind him, peril of death round about him. What did he? dispayred he? no,
Whyther went he? He repaired to God with this prayer, and said nothing. Yet
with a great arde^cy of spirit he perced gods ears Now help or never good
Lord, now help, but in thy hand quod he. Though he never moved his lyppes, yet
the scripture says: he cried out and the lord heard him, and said: quid
clamas ad me? Why crieste thou out so loud? The people heard him say
nothing, and yet GOD said. Whi cryest thou out? Straight ways he stroke the
water with his rod, Exodus xiiij
and divided it, and it stood up like two walls on either side, between the
which gods people passed, and the persecutours were drowned. Iosue was in
angwyshe, Iosue was in anguyshe and dystresse and prayed.
and like distress at Jericho, that true captain, that fayethfull Judge no
follower of retributions, no brybetaker, he was no money manne, who made his
peticion to almighty God to show him the cause of his wrath toward him when
his army was plaged after the taking of Ierycho. So he obtained his prayer,
and learned, that for one man's fault all the rest were punyshed. For Achans
covetousness many a thousand punyshed. Iosue. vij.
For Achans couetuousnes many a thousand were in agonye, and fear of death,
who hid his money, as he thought from God. But God saw it well enough, and
brought it to light.

This Acan was abywalker^ Well, it came to pass, when Joshua knew it, straight
ways he purged the army, and took away. Malum de Israel, that is wyckednes
from the people. Iosue put Achanto death Iosue. vij.
For Joshua called him before the people, and said, Da gloriam deo, Give praise
to God, tell trothe man, and forth with he told it. And then he and all his
house suffered death.

A goodly ensample for all magystrates to follow. Here was the execution of a
true Judge he was no gift taker, Paral. xx.
he was no wynker, he was no bywalker. Also when the Assiria^s with and
innumerable power of men in Iosaphates time ouerflowed the land of Israel.
Iosaphat that good king goes me straight to god, and made his prayer Non est
in nostra fortitudine, (said he) huic populo resistere, it is not in our
strength, O Lord, to resyst this people, and after his prayer god delivered
him, and at the same time.x.M. were destroyed. So ye miserable people, you must
go to God in anguyshes, and make your prayer to him.

Arm your selves with prayer in your aduersytyes. Many begin to pray, Many
beg^^ to pray, but few persevere and continue in prayer.
and sodaynelye cast away prayer, the Devil puts such phantasyes in
their heads, as though GOD could not entend them, or had somewhat else to do.

But you must be importune and not werye, nor cast away prayer. Cast away
sin and then pray.
Nay you must cast away sin. GOD will hear your prayer, albeit, you be
sinners, I send you a judge yt will be glad to hear you. You that are
oppressed, I speak to you* Christ in this parable does painte the good will of
god toward you, o miserable people, A notable lesson for him which prays.
he that is not received, let him not dyspayre, nor think yt god had forsaken
him, For god tarieth till he seith a time, and better ca^ do al things for us,
the^ we our selves ca^ wish.

There was a wicked Judge, etc. What means it that God boroweth this parable
rather of a wicked Judge, then of a good? Belike good judges were rare at that
time, and trow ye the devil has been a sleep ever sense? No, no. He is as
busy as ever he was. The commune manner of a wicked Judge is, The common manner
of a wicked Judge.
neither to fear God nor man. He consydereth what a man he is, and therefore
he cares not for man because of his pride.

He looks hye over the poor, he will be had in admiration in adoration. He
seems to be in a protection. Well, shall he escape? Ho, ho, est Deus in celo.
There is a GOD in heaven, he accepts no persons, he will punysh them.

There was a pore woman came to this judge, and said: Vindica me de
aduersario. Se that mine aduersarye do me no wrong. He would not hear her
but drove her of. She had no money to wage either him either them that were
about him. Whether Chrystyan people may seek to be avenged.
Did this woman well to be avenged of her aduersarye? may Chrystyan people seek
vengeance? The Lord says: Mihi vindictam et ego retribuam: When ye reueng ye
take mine office upon you. This is to be understand of private vengeance. It
is lawful for gods flock to use means to put away wrongs, to resort to
judges, to require to have sentence given of right. Saint Paul sent to
Lisyas the trybune to have this ordynary, Acts. xxij.
remedy, and Chyrste also said. Si male locutus sum, et ceter. If I have
spoken evil rebuke me? christ here a^swered for him self. Note here my Lords
and masters what case poor wydowes and orphans be in. Math. xxvi


I will tell you my Lords Judges, if ye consider this matter well, ye should
be more afraid of the pore wyddowe, then of a noble manne with all the friends
and power that he can make. But now a days the Judges be. a fraied to hear a
poor man against the rich, The manner of our Judges now a days in hearing
the poor against the rich.
in so much, they will either pronounce against him, or so drive of the poor
man's suit, that he shall not be able to go through with it. The greatest man
in a realm ca^ not so hurt a Judge as the poor wyddow, such a shrewede
turn she can do him. And with what armure I pray you? How god te^dreth and
regardes the cause of the wyddow and the poor.


She can bring the Judges skin over his ears, and never lay hands upon
him. And how is that? Lachrime miserorum descendunt ad maxillas. The tears of
the poor fall down upon their cheeks, Et ascendunt ad celu^, and go up to
heaven, and cry for vengeance before god, the judge of wyddowes, the father of
widows and orphans. Pore people be opressed even by laws. Veijs qui condunt
leges iniquas. Woe worth to the^ that make evil laws. If woe be to the^ yt make
laws against ye poor, what shall be to the^ yt hinder and mar good laws?
Quid facietis in die vltionis. What will ye do in the day of vengeance, when
God will visyt you? he says, he will hear the tears of poor women when he
goes on visitacio^. For their sakes he will hurt the Judge, be he never so
high. Deus transfert regna. He will for wyddowes sakes change Realms, bring
them into temptacyon. pluck ye Judges skins over their heads.

Cambises.
Cambises was a great Emperor such an other as our master is, he had many
Lord deputies, Lord presidentes, and Leuetenauntes under him. It is a great
while a go sithe I read the hystorye. It chanced he had under him in one of
his dominions a bryber, a gift taker, a gratifier of rytchemen, he followed
gifts, as fast as he that followed the puddynge a hand maker in his office,
And old soth say, but though y^ saying be none of ye newist I fear me yet it
is it one of the t^west.
to make his son a great man, as the old saying is. Happy is the child,
whose father goes to the Devil.

The cry of the poor widow came to the Emperors ear, and caused him to
flay the Judge quycke, The brybing Judge was flayed quick and his skyn laid
in his chapre.
and laid his skin in his chair of Judgment, that all Judges, that should
give Judgment afterward, should sytte in the same skin Surely it was a
goodly sign, a goodly monument, the sign of the Judges skin, Amen. or else I
pray god we may have such incorruptible Judges which will not deserve it*
I pray God we may once se the sign of the skin, in England. Ye will say
peradventure that this is cruellye and vncharitablye this is cruellye and
uncharitably spoken, no, no, I do it charitably for a love I bear to my
contrye. God says. God has.ij. vysitations.
Ego visitabo, I will visit. God has two visitacions. The first is when he
reueleth his word by preachers and where the first is accepted, the second
comes not The second visitacion is vengeance. He went a visitacion, when he
brought the judges skin over his ears. If his word be dispysed he comes
with his second visitasion with vengeance.

Noe preached gods word an. C. years and was called a fool for his labor.
Noe preached gods word an. C. years, and was laughte to sckorne, and called
an old dotynge fool. Because they would not accept this first visitation, God
visited the second time he poured down showeres of rain till all the world
was drowned,

Loath was a visitoure of Sodom, and Gomorre, Give. xix.
but because they regarded not his preaching, God visited them the second
time, and burnt them all up with brymstone saving Loath. Moses came first a
visitacion into Egypt with gods word, Exodus vij.
and because they would not here him, God visited them again, and drowned
them in the red sea, God likewise with his first visitacio^ visited ye
Israelites by his prophets, but because they would not hear his Prophets,
he visited them the second time, and dispersed them in Assiria and Babylon
John Baptyste lybewyse and our Savior Christ visited them afterward
declarynge to them Gods will, and because they despised these vysytours he
destroyed Hiesrusalem by Titus and Uespasianus. Germany was vysyted.xx. years
with gods word, Germany made a myngle mangle of their relygyon.
but they did not earnestlye embrace it, and in life follow it, but made a
myngle mangle and a hotchpotch of it.

I can not tell what, partly poperye, partelye true religion mi^gled to
geather. They say in my contrye, when they call their hogs to the swyne
troughe. Come to thy myngle mangle, come pyr, come pyr, even so they made
mingle mangle of it. They could clatter and prate of the Gospel, but when all
comes to al, they joined poperye so with it, that they marde all to gether,
covetousness cloked under a couloure of relygyon amongst the Germaynes provoked
Gods wrath toward them.
they scratched and scraped all the lyuynges of the church, and under a
couloure of relygyon turned it to their own proper gain and lucre. God,
seeing that they would not come unto his word, now he visits them in the
second time of his visitacion with his wrath. For the taking away of Gods
word, is a manyfeste token of his wrath. We have now a first visitation in
England, let us beware of the second. We have the mynystracyon of his word,
we are yet well, but the house is not clean swepte yet.

Good has sent us A noble King in this his vysytacyon, let us not provoke
him against us, let us beware, let us not dysplease him, Godly
aduertisementes.
let us not be unthankful, and unkind, let us beware of bywalkynge and
contemnynge of gods word, let us pray dylygently for our king, let us
receive with all obedience and prayer, the word of GOD. A word or two more
and I commytte you to God. I will monyshe you of a thing, I hear say ye walk
inordinatelye, ye talk unseemly other ways then it becomes Christian
subjects.

Ye take upon you to Judge the Judgments of Judges. I will not make the King
a Pope, for the Pope will have al things that he does, taken for an Article of
our faith.

I will not say but that the King, and his, council may err, the
Parliamente housses, both the high and low may err. I pray daily that they
may not err.

It becomes us what soever they decree to stand unto it, and receive it
obedyentlye, Let us learn here our allegyance and duty toward the Kyngethe
laws and ordinances of the Realm.
as far forth as it is not manifest wicked, and dyrectlye against the word
of GOD. Yt pertayneth unto us to think the best, though we can not render a
cause for the doing of every thing.

For Charitas omnia credit, omnia sperat. Charity does believe and trust all
things. We ought to expound to the best al things al though we can not
yield a reason.

Therefore I exhort you good people pronounce in good part all the fact and
deeds of the magystrates and judges. Charity judges the best of all men, and
specyallye of magystrates S. Paul says: Nulite iudicare ante tempus donec
Dominus aduenerit. Judge not before the time of the Lords coming. Prauum cor
hominis. Man's heart is unsearchable, it is a ragged piece of work, no man
knows his own heart, and therefore David prays and says: Ab occultis meis
munda me. Psalm. l.
Deliver me from my unknown faults. I am a further offender then I can se. A
man shall be blinded in love of him self, and not se so much in him self as in
other men, let us not therefore judge judges. We are co^ptable to God, and so be
they. Let them alone, they have their cou^tes to make. If we have charytie in
us we shall do this. For Charitas operatur. Charytye works. What works it?
marye Omnia credere, omnia sperare. To accept all things in good part. Nolite
iudicare ante tempus.

Judge not before the Lords coming. How Antychryst is known.
In this we learn to know Antichryst, which does eleuate him self in the
church, and judges at his pleasure before the time. His canonizasyo^s and
judging of men before the lords judgment, be a manifest token of Antichrist.
How can he know Saynctes? He knows not his own heart, and he can not know
them by miracles. For some miracle workers shall go to the devil. I will tell
you what I remembered yester night in my bed. A meruaylous tale to perceive,
how inscrutable a man's heart is. I was once at Oxford, (for I had occasyon
to come that way, when I was in my office,) they told me it was a gayner way,
and afayrer way, and by that occasyon I lay there a night. Being there, I heard
of an execution that was done upon one that suffered for treason. what he saw
and hard once at Oxforde.
It was as (ye know) a dangerous world, for it might soon cost a man his
life for awordes speaking.

I can not tell what the matter was, but the judge set it so out that the man
was condemned. The.xii. men came in, and said gyltye, and upon that, he was
judged to be hanged, drawn, and quartred. When the rope was about his neck,
no man could persuade him that he was in any fault, and stood there a great
while in the protestation of his innocence. They hanged him and cut him down
somewhat to soon before he was clean dead, then they drew him to the fire,
and he revived, and then he coming to his remembrance confessed his fault and
said he was gyltye. O a wonderful example, it may well be said: Prauu^ cor
hominis et inscrutabile. A crabbed peace of work and unsearchable. I will leave
here, for I think you know what I mean well enough.

I shall not need to apply this example any further. As I began ever with
this saying: Quecunque scripta sunt, like a trouant and so I have a commune
place to the end, if my memory fail me, Beati qui audiunt verbu^ dei, et
custodiunt illud. Blessed be they that hear the word of God, and keep it. It
must be kept in memory, in living, and in our conversation. And if we so do,
we shall come to the blessedness, which god prepared for us through his son
Jesus Christ, to the which he bring us al Amen.

The fourth Sermon of Master Hughe Latymer, which he preached before the King
within his graces Palayce at Westminster the.xxix. day of March.
QVecunque scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Al things that are
written, are written to be our doctrine. The Parable that I took to begin with
(most honorable audience) is written in the.xviii Chapter of S. Luke, and there
is a certain remnaunt of it behynd yet. The Parable is this: There was a
certain Judge in a city, that feared neither God nor man.

And in the same city there was a wyddowe that required Justice at his hands,
but he would not hear her, but put her of and delayed the matter.

In process the Judge seeing her importunitye, said, though I fear neither
God nor manne, yet for the importunitye of the womann, I will hear her least
she rail upon me and moleste me with exclamations, and out cries I will hear
her matter, I will make an end of it.

Our Sauyoure Christ added more unto this and said. Audite quid iudex dicat,
et cetera. Hear you said Christ, what the wicked judge said.

And shall not God revenge his eiecte, that cry upon him day and night? Al
though he tarry and dyfferre them. I say unto you, he will revenge them and
that shortelye. But when the son of man shall come, shall he find faith in
the earth.

That I may have grace so to open the remnaunte of this parable that it may
be to the glory of God, and edifyinge of your souls, I shall desire you to
pray. In the which prayer. etc.

I showed you the last day. (most honorable Audience) the cause why our
Savior Christ, rather used the example of a wicked Judge then of a good.

And the cause was for that in those days there was great plentye of wicked
Judges, Why Christ used rather the example of a wicked Judge, then of a good.
so that he might borrowe an example among them well enough. For there was
much scarsitie of good Judges. I did excuse the wyddowe also for coming to
the Judge against her adversary, because she did it not of malice: she did it
not for appetite of vengeance.

A brefe rehearsal of things toched and spoken of, in his third sermon.
And I told you that it was good and lawefull, for honest vertuose folk, for
Gods people, to use the laws of the realm, as an ordinari help against
their adversaries, and ought to take them as Gods holy ordinances, for the
remedies of their iniuryes and wrongs. when they are distressed

So that they do it charitablye louyngelye, not of malice, not vengeablye, not
couetouslye.

I should have told you here of a certain sect of herytykes that speak
against this order and doctrine, He means ye Annabaptystes, for this is one
of their detestable and pernicyouse errores.
they will have no magystrates nor Judges on the earth.

Here I have to tell you, what I heard of late by the relation of a credible
person, and a worshypful man, of a town in this realm of England, How busye
ye Devil is to hinder ye word and sclaunder ye Gospel.
that has above.v.C. herytykes of this erroniouse opinion in it as he said.
Oh so busy the Devil is now to hinder the word coming out, and to
sclaunder the Gospel. A sure argument and an euydent demonstration, that the
light of Gods word is a board, and that this is a true doctrine that we are
taught now, The devil is busi sturring, is an euidente argument that this
doctrine is true.
else he would not tore and stir about as he does when he has the upper
hand. He will keep his possession quyetly as he did in the popyshe days, when
he bare a rule of supremacye in peaceable possession. If he reigned now in open
relygion, in open doctrine as he did than, he would not stir up erroniouse
opynyons, he would have kept us without contencyon, without dyssencion.
There is no such dyuersytie of opynions among the Turks, nor among ye Jews
And why? For there he reigns peaceably in the hole relygyon, Christ says. Cum
fortis armatus custodierit atrium: et cet. When the strong armid man keeps
his house, those things that he has in possessyon, are in a quyetnes, he
does enjoy them peaceably. Sed cum fortior eo superuenerit. But when a
stronger than he comes upon him, when the light of gods word is ones
reveled, tha^ he is busi, the^ he rores then he fyskes abroad, and styrreth up
erronius opinions, to sclau^der godds word. And this is an argument that we
have the true doctrine. I beseech God continewe us and keep us in it. The
devil declares the same, and therefore he rores thus and goes about to stir up
these wanton headdes and busye brains. And will you know where this town is?
I will not tell you dyrectlye. I will put you to muse a little. I will utter the
matter by a cyrcumloqution. Where is it? Where the bishop of the dioces is an
vnpreachynge prelate. Who is that? If there be but one such in all England, it
is easi to guess. And if there were no mo but one, yet it were to many by one.
And if there be more, they have the more to answer for, that they suffer in
this Realm an vnpreachyng prealeatye vnrefourmed I remember well what. S. Paul
says to a bishop. And though he spoke it to Timothe being a bishop, yet I
may say it now to the magistrates for all is one ^ase, al is one matter. Non
co^municabis peccatis alienis. i. Timoth. v
Thou shall not be partaker of other men's faults. Lay not thy hands
rashely upon any, be not hastye in making of curates, in receyuinge men to
have cure of Souls that are not worthy of the office, that either, can not
or will not do their duty. Do it not. Why? Quia communicabis peccatis alienis.
Thou shall be partaker of other men's sins. Now me think it needs not to be
partaker of other men's sins we shall find enough of our own. And what is
Communicare peccatis alienis. To be partaker of other me^nes evils, if this be
not, to make unpreaching prealates, and to suffer them to continue still in
their vnpreachynge prelacye?

If the king and his council should suffer evil Judges of this realm to take
bribes, to defeat justice and suffer the great, to over go the poor, Kings
and rulars must wake and not wy^ke and leave lokynge through their fyngers.
and should look through his fingers, and wynk at it, should not the king be
partaker of their naughtynes? And why? Is he not supreme head of the church?
what? is the supremacye a dygnytye and nothing else? A dygnity with a charge.
is it not comptable? I think it wylbe a chargeable dygnitye when account
shall be asked of it. Oh what a vauntage has the Devil? what entrye has the
wolf when the shepard tends not his flock, and leads them not to good
pasture? Saint Paul does say Qui been presunt presbiteri duplici honor digni
sunt. ^. Timothe. v
What is this preesse. It is as much to say as to take charge and cure of
souls we say ille priest, he is set over the flock. He has taken charge
upon him. And what is, Been preesse? To rule well* what that is*
To discharg the cure To rule well, to feed the flock with pure food, and
good example of life. Well then, Qui been presunt duplici honor digni sunt.
What is double honor
They that dyscharge their cure well, are worthy duble honor. What is this duble
honor? The first is to be reuerensed, to be had in estimacion and reputacion
with the people, and to be regarded as good pastors. A another honor is, to
have al things necessary for their state, mynystred unto them. This is the
double honor that they ought to have. Qui presunt Been, that discharge the
cure if they do it Been.

There was a merye moncke in Cambrydge in the College that I was in, The merye
monk of Cambryge.
and it chanced a great company if us to be together, entendynge to make good
cheer, and to be merye (as sholers will be merry when they are disposed) One of
the company brought out this sentence. Nil melius quam lee ari et facere been.
There is nothing better then to be merye and to do well. A ve^geaunce of that
Been (quod the Monk) I would that, Been had been banyshed beyond the sea, and
that Been were out, it were well. For I could be merry, and I could do, but I
love not to do well That, Been marres altogether. I would Been were out quod
the merry monk for it, imports many things to live well, to dyscharge the
cure. In deed it were better for them if it were out, And it were as good to
be out as to be ordered as it is. It will be a heavy Been. to some of them, when
they shall come to their account. But perauenture you will say, What and they
preach not at al? Yet, presunte. Are they not worthy double honor? is it
not an honorable order they be in? Nay an horrible misorder it is an horror
rather then and honor, Where the preacher does not his duty, there the order
is not honorable, but horrible.
and horrible rather, then honorable, if the preacher be naught, and do not
his duty. And thus go these prelates about too wreastle for honor that the
Devil may take his pleasure in sclaunderynge the realm, and that it may be
reported a board that we bread, herisyes among our selves. It is to be
thought that some of them would have it so, The intent of vnpreachyng prelates.
to bring in poperye again.

This I fear me is their entente, And it shall be blown abroad to our holy
father of Romes ears, and he shall send forth his thonderboltes upon these
brutes, and al this does come ta pass through their vnpreachynge prelacye.

Are they not worthy double honor? Nay rather double dyshonore, not to be
regarded, not to be esteemed among the people, and to have no living at their
hands? For as good preachers be worthy double honor: so unpreaching prelates
be worthy double dishonor. An argument of co^gruans.
They must be at their doublets. But now these.ii dishonoures what be they? Our
savior christ does show. Si sal infatuatus fuerit ad nihil ultra valet nisi vt
proiiciatur for as. Math. v.
If the salt be vnsauarye it is good for nothing, but to be cast out and
trodden of men. By this salt? is understand preachers, and such as have cure of
souls. What be they worthy then? wherefore serve they? For nothing else but to
be cast out. Make them quo^dammes, out with the^ cast them out of there
office, what should they do with cure yt will not look to the^? An other dishonor
is this Vt conculcentur ab hominibus. To be trode^ under men's fete, not to be
regarded, not to be esteemed They be at their doublets still. S. Paul in his
epistle qualifieth a bishop, and says that he must be Aptus ad docendum, ad
refellendum apt. To teach and to confute all manner of false doctrine But what
shall a man do with aptenes, if he do not use it? It were as good for us to be
without it. A Ayshop angry with M. L. and why: because he would have ye King
make of vnprechyng prelates quonda^mes, dominus regnauit
A bishop came to me the last day, and was angry with me for a certain
Sermon that I made in this place. His chaplayne had complained against me
because I hade spoken against vnpreachinge prelates.

Nay quod the bishop, he made so indifferente a Sermon the first day, that
I thought he would mar all the second day. He will have every man a
quondam as he is. As for my quondamshype I thancke God that he gave me ye grace
to come by it by so honest a means as I did. I thank him for, mine own
quondamshyppe, and as for them I will not have them made quonndams, if they
dyscharge their office. I would have them do their duty. I would have no
more quo^dams as God healpe me. I owe them no other malice then this, and that
is none at al. The bishops answer to his chaplayn


This bishop answered his chaplayne, well (says he) well, I did wisely to day,
for as I was going to his Sermon, I remembered me that I had neither said
mass, nor mattens. A wise answer of master bishop to his chaplayn.
And homewarde I gate as fast as I could, and I thank god I have said both,
and let his unfruitful Sermon alone. Unfruitefull says one, an other says
sedicion. Well, unfruitful is the best, and whether it be unfruitful or no,
I can not tell, it lies not in me to make it fruitful. And God work not in
your hearts: my preaching can do you but little good. Preachers ar Gods
instrumen^es.
I am gods instrument but for a time. It is he that must give the increase,
and yet preaching is necessary.

For take a way preachinge, and take a way salvation. I told you of Scala
cely and I made it a preaching matter, not a massyng matter. Christ is the
preacher of al prachers, the patron and the exemplar, that all preachers
ought to follow. For it was he by whom the father of heaven said, Hic est
filius meus dilectus, ipsum audite, This is my well-beloved son, hear him,
Eue^ he when he was here on the earth, as wisely, Though Christ preachyd, yet
his sede fell into three parts
as learnedlye as circumspectli as he preached yet his sede fell in three parts
so that the fourth part only was fruiteful. And if he had no better luck
that was preacher of all preachers, what shall we look for? Yet was there no
lack in him, but in the ground: And so now there is no fault in preaching, the
lack is in the people that have stoni hertes, and thorny hearts. I beseech God
to amend the^. And as for these folk that spoke against me I never look to
have their good word as long as I live. Yet will I spoke of their wickedness,
as long as I shall be permitted to spoke As long as I live, I will be an enemy to
it. No preachers can pass it over with silence. It is the original root of
all myschiefe. As for me I owe them no other ill will, but I pray God amend
them, He returns to the Parable.
when it pleases him. Now to the parable, What did the wicked Judge in the
e^de of the tale? The love of god moved him not, the law of god was this, and
it is writ in the first of Deuteronomye, Audite eos. Hear them. These two
words wylbe heavy words to wicked judges another day. But some of them
peradventure will say. I will hear them, but I will hear such as will give
brybes, and these that will do me good tournes. Nayeye, be hedged out of that
liberty. He says: Ita paruum vt magnum. The small as well as the great. Ye
must do iustum, deal Iustelye? mynister justice, and that to al me^, Justice
must be ministered without delays.
and you must do it just. In time conueniente, without any delays, or
dryuyng of with expedycyon.

Well, I say, neither this law, nor the word and commandment of God
moved this wicked Judge, What moved, the wicked judge to hear the co^playnte
of the wydowe.
nor the myserye of this wyddowe, nor the vpryghteousnes of her cause, nor the
wrong which shetoke, moved him, but to avoid importunytye, and clamoure, and
exclamatyon, he gave her the hearing, he gave her fynal sentence, and so she
had her request.

This place of Judgment it has been ever imperfect, it was never seen that
all Judges did their duty, All judges have not done their duty at all times.
that they would hear the small as well as the great. I will not prove this
by the wytnes of any private magistrate, but by the wyseste Kings saying
that ever was. Vibi subsole (says Salomo^) In loco iusticie, impietatem, et in
loco equitatis iniquitatem. The lack of minystracyon of Justice what Solomon
did se in his time in Judges.
I have seen under the sun, that is to say, over all, in every place where
right judgment should have been, wickedness, as who would say brybes taking,
defeatinge of justice, oppressyng of ye poor. Men sent away with weeping
tears, without any hearing of their causes, and in the place of equitye
says he: I have seen iniquity. No equity. No justice a sore word for
Solomon to pronounce universally, gene. rallye. And if Solomon said it, there
is a matter in it.

I wene he said it not only for his own time, but he saw it both in those
that were before him, and also that were to come after him.

Now comes Esaias and he affyrmeth ye same speaking of the judgments done in
his time in the commune place, as it might be Westminster hall, the gylde
hall, the Judges hall, the pretpro house.

Call it what you will. In the open place. Judges sat in the gates. of the cyty
in the hie way.
For iudgs at that time (according to the manner) sat in the gates of che
city in the hye way.

A goodly and Godly order for to sit, This was done for the ease of ye
people, for maiestrates must be endued with affability.
so that the poor people may easelye come to them. But what says Esaye that
seditiouse fellow? He says of his country this Expectaui ut facere
tiuditium, et fecit iniquitatem I looked the judges should do their duty, and I
saw them work iniquitye.

There was bribes and bribers as well the^ as now.
There was brybes walking money making, making of hands (quod the Prophet)
or rather almyghtye God by the Prophet) such is their parcialitye, affeccion,
and brybes They be such money makers, inhauncers, and promoters of them selves.

Esaias knew this by the cryynge of the people Ecce clamor populi says he. And
though some a monge them be unreasonable people (as many be now adays) yet
no doubt of it some cries not without a cause. And why? Their matters are not
heard, The tears of the pore whose cause is not according to equity and
justice herd, cry for ve^geau^ce to God.
they are feign to go home with weping tears, that fall down by their chekes,
and ascend up to heaven and cry for vengeance, Let Judges look a boute them
for surely God will revenge his elect one day.

And suerlye me think, if a Judge would follow but a worldelye reason, An
aduertisemente to our Judges.
and wey the matter politickelye, without these examples of scripture, he
should fear more the hurt that may be done him by a poor wyddowe, or a
miserable man, then by the greateste Gentle man of them all, God has pulled
ye judges skins over their heads, for the poor ma^s sake, yea, the pore
wyddowe may do him more hurt with her poor pater noster in her mouth, then
any other weapon, and with.ii. or three words shall bring him down to the
ground, and destroy his iollitye, and cause him to lose more in one day, then
he gate in seven years. For God will revenge these miserable folks that can not
help them selves. He says. Ego in diei visitationis. etc. In the day of
visitatyon I will revenge them. An non ulcisceturanima mea? Shall not my soul
be reue^ged? As who should say.

I must needs take their part Veniens ueniam et non tardabo, Yes, though I
tarry, and though I seem to linger never so long yet I will come at the length,
and that shortly.

And if god spoke this, he will perform his promise. He has for their sakes
(as I told you) pulled the^ skin over the judges ears or this.

King David trusted some in his old age, David was deceived in puttyng trust
in his judges when he waxed old him self.
that did him no very good seruece.

Now if in the people of God there were some folks that fell to brybing, the^
what was their among the Heathen?

Absalon David's son was a by walker, Absalo^ was a bywalker.
and made disturbaunce among the people in his fathers time.

And though he were a wicked man, and a by walker, yet some there were in that
time that were good, and walked up ryghtlye.

I speak not this against the Judges seat. I speak not as though all judges
were naught, and as though I did not hold with the Judges, maiestrates, and
officers, as the Anabaptystes these faulse heretykes do. Judges are honorable
necessary, and Gods ordinances concerning their offices.
But I Judge them honorable, necessary, and Gods ordinance, I speak it as
scripture speaks to give a Caveat, and a warning to all magistrates, to
cause them to look to their offices, for the devil, the great magistrate, is
very busy now, he is ever doing, he never cease to go about to make the^
like him self The proverb is Simele gaudet simili Like would have like: If
the judge be good, and upright he will assaye to deceive him either by the
subtle suggestyon of crafty laywers or else by false witness, The craft of
the devil.
and subtle vtterynge of a wrong matter. He goes about as much as he can to
corrupt the men of law, to make them fall to brybery, to lay burdens on pore
men's backs. and to make them fall to periurye, and to bring into the place of
judgment al corruptyon, iniquytye, and impietye. I have spoken thus much, to
occasyon al Judges and magystrates to look to their offices. Lest the devil be
behind the^ to make them peruerte Justice.
They had need to look about them.

This gear moved saint Christome to speak this sentence. Miror sialiquis
rectoru^ potest saluari. I marvel (said this doctor) if any of these
rulers or great magistrates can be saved. A notable and bold saying of
Chrysostom.


He spoke it not for the impossibility of the thing (God forbid that all the
magistrates and judges should be condemned) but for the difficultye.

If the devil would allow a man to look into hell what he should se.
Oh that a man might have the contemplation of hell, that the devil would a
low a man to look into hell, to se the state of it, as he showed all the world
when he tempted Christ, in the wilderness. Commonstrat illi omnia regna mundi.
He showed him all the kyngedomes of the world, and al their iollytye, and told
him that he would give him all, Math* iiii*
if he would knele down and worship him. He lied like a faulse harlot, he
could not give them he was not able to give so much as a gose wynge: for they
were none of his to give.

The other that he promised them unto: had more right to them then he.

But I say if one were admytted to view hell thus, and behold it thorowelye,
the devil wolude say. On yonder side are punyshed unpreaching prelates. I
think a man should se as far as a kenninge and se nothing but vnpreachynge
Prealates. vnpreachinge prelates are with the devil in hell (god save us) but
they be not there a love, for brybyng Judges are with them for company.


He might look as far as Calice I warrant you. And tha^ if he would go on the
other side, and show where that brybynge judges were, I think he should se so
many, that there were scant room for any other. Our Lord amend it. Well to
our matter. This Judge I speak of, said. Though I fear neither God, He
returns to his f^^mer matter.
nor man. and.c. And did he think thus? Is it the manner of wiked Judges to
confess, their faults nay he thought not so.

And a man had come to him, and called him wicked, he would forth with have
commanded him to ward, he would have defended him self stoutly.

Whi the judge was forsed then to confess his faults.
It was God that spoke in his conscience. God puts him to utter such things
as he saw in his heart, and were hid to him self.

And there be like things in the scripture. as. Dixit insipieus in cord suo
non est deus The unwise man said in his heart, there is no God, and yet if he
should have been asked the question, he would have denied it.

Esaias the prophet says also. Ma^datio protectisumus. We are defended with
lies. We have put our trust in lies,

And in an other place he says Ambulabo in prauitate cordis mei. I will walcke
in the wyckednes of my heart. He utters what lies in his heart, not known to
him self, but to God.

It was not for naught that Ezechiel describes man's heart in his colors.
Ezechiel described the heart of man Iere. xvii.
Pranum corhominis et inscrutabile. The heart of man is naughty, a crooked, and
a froward piece of work.

Let every man humble him self, and acknowledge his fault and do as saint
Paul did.

When the people to whom he had preached, had said many things in his
commendation, yet he durst not iustifye him self. Paul would not praise him
self, Paul durst not iustyfye him self
to his own justification, and therefore when they had spoken those things by
him, I pass not at all says he. what ye say by me, I will not stand to your
report, and yet he was not forward that when he herd the truth reported of
him, he would say it to be false, but he said, I will neither stand to your
report, though it be good and just, neither yet I will say that it is untrue.
He was. bonus Pastor.

A good shepeheard. He was one of the^. qui been presu^t. yt discharged his
cure, and yet he thought yt there might be a farther thing in him self then he
saw in him self.

And therefore he said. The Lord shall Judge me. I will stand only to the
Judgment of the Lord. For look whom he judges to be good, he is sure he is
safe, he is cock sure. I spoke of this gear the last day, The truth gettes
hatred.
and of some I had little thank for my labor. I smelled some folks that were
greaued with me for it, because I spoke against Temerarius judgment. What has
he to do with judgment (say they. I went about to keep you from arroga^t
judgment. Well I could have said more the^ I did, and I can say much more
now. For why? I know more of my Lord admirals death sith that time, then I
did know before. O say they. The man dyed very boldly, he would not have
done so, had he not been in a just quarrel.

The argument of such men as though the Lord admirals cause to be good
because he took his death so boldli is confuted.
This is no good argument my friends. A man seems not to fear death, therefore
his cause is good. This is a deceauable argument. He went to his death
boldly. ergo he stands in a just quarrel.

The Anabaptists that were burnt here in diverse towns in England (as I heard
of credyble men I saw them not my self) went to their death, The
Anabaptists how they took their death.
even Intrepide As ye will say without any fear in the world chearfullye.
Well, let them go

There was in the old doctoures times an other kind of poisoned heretics,
The Donatistes and how they dyed.
that were called Donatistes. And these heretics went to their execution as
though they should have gone to some Ioylle recreacion or banquet, to some
bealye chere, or to a play. And will ye argue then? He goes to his death
boldly, or chearefullye, Ergo he dies in a just cause. Nay that sequel
foloueth no more then this.

A man semes to be a frayed of death, Ergo he dies evil. And yet our Savior
Christ was afraid of death him self.

I warn you therefore, Judge not them in authority rashlye.
and charge you not to judge them yt be in authority, but to pray for them.
It becomes us not to Judge great maiestrates, nor to condemn their doings,
unless their deeds be openly and apparantlye wicked. Charytye requires the
same, for charity judges no man, but well of every body. And thus we may
try whether we have charity or no, Charity is ye cognysau^ce and badge of a
christen man.
and if we have not charity we are not Gods disciples, for they are known by
that badge. He that is his disciple, has the work of charity in his breast.

It is a worthy saying of a clarke, Charitas si est, operatur, si no^
operatur, no^ est. If there be charity it works. Omnia credere omnia sperare.
To believe all things, to hope all, to say the best of the maiestrates, and not
to stand to ye defending of a wicked matter. I will go farther with you now If I
should have said all that I knew, M.L. said not all that he knew co^cerninge
the lord admiralles cause.
your ears would have yrked, to have heard it, and now God has brought
more to light. And as touching the kind of his death, whether he be saved or
no, I refer that to God only. What God can do I can tell. I will not deny
but that he may in the twynkeling of an eye, save a man, and turn his heart.
What he did I can not tell. And when a man has two strokes with an axe, whoo
ca^ tell that between two strokes he does repent. It is very hard to judge,
Well, I will not go so nigh to work, but this I will say, if they ask me what I
think of his death? that he dyed very daungerously, yrkesomlye, horryblye.

The man being in the tower wrote certain papers which I saw my self.
The.ii. little papers which the Lord admiral wrote in the tower.
They were two lyttleones, one to my Lady Maryes grace, and another to my
Lady Elizabethe grace, tendynge to this end, that they should conspyre
against my Lord protectours grace. Surely so seditiously as could be^ Now
what a kind of death was this, that when he was ready to lay his head upon
the block, he turns me to the leuetenauntes servant and says, bid my
servant speed ye thing that he wottes of? The words he spoke to the
leuetenauntes servant.
Well, the word was over heard. His servant confessed these two Papers, and
they were found in a shoe of his. They were sown between the souls of a
velued shoe. He made his ynke so craftily, and with such workmanship as the
like has not been seen.

I was prisoner in the tower miselfe, and I could never inuente to make ynke
so. It is a wonder to hear of his subtilitie. He made his pen of the aglet of
a point that he plucked from his hose, The pen of the aglet of a point.
and thus wrote these letters so seditiouslye, as ye have heard, enforsynge
many matters against my Lord protectours grace, and so forth. God had left
him to him self, he had clean forsaken him. What would he have done if he
had lived still? that were a bout this gear, when he laid his head on the
block at the end of his life. Charytye (they say) works but Godly, not
after this sort. Well, he is gone, he knows his fare by this, he is either
in joy or in pain. There is but two states if we be once gone. There is no
change. There is but two states The state of salvation and ye state of
da^nacion.
This is the speech of the scripture. Vbicu^que lignu^ ceciderit ibi erit, sieve
in austru^, sieve in aquilone. Wheresoever the tree falls, either into the
southe or in to the north, there it shall rest.

By the falling of the tree, is signified the death of man. If he fall into the
Southe he shall be saved.

For the Southe is whote, and betokens Charity or salvation. If he fall in
the North in the cold of infidelity, he shall be dampened. There are but two
states, the state of salvation, and the state of damnacion.

There is no repentance after this life, but if he dye in the state of
damnacion, he shall rise in the same. Yea though he have a whole Monkerye to
sing for him. He shall have his fynall Sentence when he dies.

And that servant of his, that confessed and uttered this gere was an honest
manne. The servant which uttered the secrets of ye two letters is co^mendid
of M Latymer.
He did honestlye in it. God put it in his heart. And as for the to there
whether he be saved or no I leave it to God. But surely, he was a wicked man,
the realm is well rydde of him.

It has a treasure, that he is gone. He knows his fare by this.

A terrible example suerlye, and to be noted of every man. Now before he
should dye, I heard say he had commendacions to the king, The lord admiral
had co^mendations to the king before his death.
and spoke many words of his majesty. All is the king, the King. Yea Bona
verba. These were fair words the king the king I was travailed in the tower
my self (with the kings commandment, and the counsel) and there was sir
Roberte Cunstable, the Lord Hussye, the Lord Darsy. What the Lord Darsie
said to master Latimer in the tower.
And the Lord Darsye, was telling me of the fayethfull service that he had
done the kings majesty that dead is. And I had seen my Soueraygne Lord in
the fyeld (said he) and I had seen his grace come a gaynste us, I would have
lyghted from my horse, and taken my sword by the point, and yielded it into
his graces hands. Mary quod I but in the mean season ye played not the part
of a fayethfull subject in holding with the people in a co^motion, and a
disturbaunce. It has been the cast of al traitors to pretend nothing against
the kings person, The common cast of al traitors.
they never pretend the matter to the king, but to other. Subiectts may not
resyste any magistrates, The office and duty of subjects.
nor ought to do nothing contrary to the the kings laws. And therefore
these words, the king and so fourth, are of small effect. I heard once a
tale of a thing that was done at Oxforde.xx. A thing yt happened at Oxforde.
years a go. and the like has been sense in this realm as I was informed of
credible persons, and some of the^ that saw it be alive yet.

A pryest robbed of a great sum of money.
There was a priest that was robbed of a great some of money, and there
were.ii. or.iii. attached for the same robbery and to be brief were condemned
and brought to the place of execution. The first manne, when he was upon the
ladder denied the matter utterly, and took his death upon it that he never
consented to the robbery of the priest, nor never knew of it. When he was
dead, the second fellow comes and makes his protestation and acknoweleged
the fault, saying, that among other greuouse offenses that he had done he was
accessory to this robberye, and says he, I had my part of it, I cry God
mercy so had this fellow that dyed before me his part. Now who ca^ judge
whether this fellow dyed well or no? Who ca^ judge a ma^s heart? The one denied
the matter, It is hard to judge a ma^s heart.
and the the other confessed it, there is no Iudginge of such matters. I have
heard much wickedness of this manne, and I have thought often, Jesus, what will
worth, what will be the end of this manne.

When I was with the bishop of Chichester in ward (I was not so with him, but
my fre^des might come to me, The bishops be stirred them so then, that some
of them were never so dilygence since.
and talk with me) I was desirous to hear of execution done (as there was
every weke, some in on place of the city or other) for there was three wekes
sessions at newgate, and fourthnyghte Sessions at the Marshialshy, and so forth.

I was desirous I say to hear of execution, because I looked that my part
should have been theyrin, I looked every day to be called to it my self,

Among al other I heard of a wanton woman, The whore yt committed robbery.
a naughtye liver. a whore, a vain body, ^ was led from newgate to the
place of execution for a certain robberye that she had committed, and she
had a wicked communication by the way. Here I will take otcasio^ to move your
grace that such men as shall be put to death may have learned men to give
them instruction, M. Latimer exhorts the kings grace that learned men might
be appointed to such as shall suffer and are co^uict persons.
and exhortacion.

For the reverence of God when they be put to execution, let them have
instructours, for many of them are cast away for lack of instruction, and
dye miserably for lack of good preaching. This woman I say as she went by
the way, had wanton and folyshe talk, as this, that if good fellows had
kept touch with her, The whores words as she went to execucion.
she had not been at this time in that case, and amongeste al other talk,
she said, that such a one, and named this manne, had her maidenheade
first, and herynge this of him at that time, I looked ever what would be his
end, what would be come of him.

He was a man the fardest from the fear of God that ever I knew or heard
of in England. First, he was author of all this womannes whoredom. For if he
had not had her maydenhead, she might have been married, and become an honest
womanne, where as now being naught with him, she fell afterward by that
occasion to other. And they that were naught with her fell to robbery and she
followed, and thus was he author of all this.

This gear came by Sequels Peradventure this may seem to be a light matter,
but surely it is a gr^ate matter, and he by vnrepentaunce fell from evil to
worse, and from worse to worste of all, till at the length he was made a
spectacle to all the world. I have heard say, he was of the opinion that he
believed not the immortalytye of the soul, that he was not right in ye matter.
And it might well appear by the taking of his death. But ye will say. What
ye sclaunder him, ye break charity.

Nay it is charity that I do. We can have no better use of him now, then to
warn other to beware by him.

Christ says. Lottes wife is our example to content our selves with our state.
Memores estote vx oris Loath. Remember Lothes wife? She was a woman that would
not be content with her good state, but wresteled with Gods calling, and she
was for that cause turned into a salt stone, and therefore the scripture does
name her as an example for us to take heed by. Ye shall se also in ye second
Chapter, how that God almightye spared not a number of his Angels, God spared
not his aungellys.
which had sinned against him to make them examples to us to beware by. He
drowned the whole world in the time of Noe and destroyed for sin the Cities
of Sodom and Gomorhe. The whole world was drowned, Sodom and Gomor was
burned and all for our example. Gene. xviii.
And why? Fecit eos exemplum i^s qui impre forent acturi. He made them an
example to them that would do wyckedlye in time to come. If God would not spare
them, think ye he will favor us? Thus may this man be an example to us. Let
us all subjects judge well of our magistrates, in such matters and be content
with their doings. An exhortation to al subjects not to murmur misiudge nor
repy^e against the kings procedynges.
and look not to be of the counsel.

And thus took I occasion to speak of him, and to profyt you thereby, and I
beseech you so to take it. He may be a good warning to us, and this is the best
use that we can have of him now.

I will go on a word or two, in the applycacyon of the parable and then I will
make an end To what end, and to what purpose, brought Christ this parable
of the wicked judge? The end is, To what end ye parable of the wicked judge
te^deth.
that we should be continually in prayer. Prayer is never interrupte but by
wyckednes. We must therefore walk orderly, vpryghtly, calling upon God in all
our troubles, and aduersitytyes, and for this purpose there is not a more
comfortable lesson in all the scripture then here now in the lappynge up of
the matter. Therefore I will open it unto you. You miserable people, if there
be any here amongeste you, that are oppressed with great men and can get no
healpe, I speak for your comfort, To whom in distress and oppression we
shall resort.
I will open unto you, whyther ye shall resort, when ye be in any distres. His
good will is ready, always at hand, when so ever we shall call for it. And
therefore he calls us to him self. We shall not doubt if we come to him.
Mark what he says to cause us believe that our prayers shall be heard. Et deus
non faciet vindictam. He reasons after this fashyon Will not GOD, says he,
revenge his elect? and hear them? seeing the wicked judge heard the wydowe?
He seems to go plainly to work, he will leth us to pray to God, and to none
but to God. We have a manner of reasonynge in the schools, and it is called
Aminore ad main^. From the less to the more, An argument from the less to the
more.
and that may be used here The judge was a tirant, a wicked man, God is a
patron, a defender, father unto us. If the judge then, being a tirante would
here the poor wyddowe, much more God will here us in all dystresses. He
being a father unto us, he will hear us sooner, then the other being no
father having no fatherly affection. Moreover, God is naturallye merciful.

The judge was cruel, and yet he healped the wyddowe, much more then God will
help us at our need.

He says by the oppressed. ^um ipso sum in tribulatione. I am with him in his
trouble. His tribulacion is mine.

I am touched with his trouble. If the Judge then being a cruel manne heard
the wyddowe, much more GOD will healpe us, being touched with our affectyon.
Furthermore, this judge gave the wyddowe, no commandment to come to him we have
a commau^demente to resort to GOD for he says Inuoca mein die tribulationis:
we have a commandment to resort to God.
call upon me in the day of thy trybulacyons, which is as well a
commandment, as Non furaberis. Thou shall not steal.

He that spoke the one, spoke the other, and what so ever he be that is in
trouble, and calls not upon God, breaks his commandment. Take heed
therefore. The judge did not promise the widdowe help. God promised us help,
and will he not perform it? He will, he will. The Judge (I say) did not promise
the wyddowe healpe. God will give us boeth hering and helping. He has promised
it us with a dubble oath. Amen, amen, says he, verily, verily, he doubles it.

Quecu^que pecieritis etc, what soever ye shall are in my name, ye shall have
it. And though he put of some sinner for a time, and suffer him to byte on the
brydell, to prove him (for there be many begynners, but few continewars in
prayer) yet we may not thyncke that he has forgotten us, and will not healpe
us. Veuiens ueniet, non ^ardabit. When the healpe is most needful, the^ he
will come and not tarry, He knows when it shall be best for us to have healpe,
though he tarry he will come at the last. I will trouble you but half a
quarter of an hour, in ye application of the parable, and so commit you to God.

What should it mean that god would have us so dilygent and earnest in prayer?
why GOD would have us to be diligent and earnest in prayer.
Has he such pleasure in our worckes? Many talk of prayer, and make it a lyp
labourynge. Praying is not babbling, nor praying is not monkerye.

It is, to miserable folk that are oppressed a conforte, solace, and a remedy.

But what makes our prayer to be acceptable to God? It lies not in our
power. We must have it by an other mean. Remember what God said of his son:

Hic est filius meus dilectus 'in quo mihi been complacui. why our prayer is
acceptable to God.
This is my dear son in whom I delight. He has pleasure in nothing, but in him.

How comes it to pass then, that our piayer pleases God? Our prayer
pleases God, because Christ pleases God.

When we pray, we come unto him, in the confydence of Christ's merytestand
thus offering up our prayers, they shall be heard for Christ's sake. Yea,
Christ will offer them up for us, that offered up once his Sacryfyce to God,
which was acceptable, and he that comes with any other mean the^ this, god
knows him not.

This is not the Missal Sacrifice, the popyshe sacrifice to stand at the
aultare, and offer up Christ again. Out upon it that ever it was used.

I will not say nay, but that ye shall find in the old doctors this word
Sacrificiu^ but there is one general solution for all the doctors that. S.
Augustyne shows us.

The sign of a thing has often times ye name of the thing that it
signifies. As the supper of the Lord is the Sacrament of an other thing, it
is a commemoratio^ of his death which suffered once for us, and because it is a
sign of christ's offering up, therefore ye bears ye name thereof. And this
Sacrifyce a woman can offer as well as a man. Yea, a poor woman in the belfre
a has as good authority to offer up this sacrifyce, as has the bishop in his
pontificalibus, with his myter on his head, his rings on his fyngers, and
Sandales on his fete. And whosoever comes asking the father remedy in his
necessity for Christ's sake, he offers up as acceptable a sacrifice as any
bishop can do. And so to make an end.

This must be done with a constaunte fayeth, and a sure confidence in Christ.
Fayeth, fayeth, fayeth. We are undone for lack of fayeth. Christ names
fayeth here, Fayeth is altogyther. When the son of man shall come, shall he
find fayeth on the earth? Why speaks he so much of faith? because it is
hard to find a true faith. He speaks not of a political faith, a faith
set up for a time, but a constante, a permanent, a durable faith, as durable
as gods word. He came many times. First in the time of Noe, when he
preached, but he found little fayeth. He came also when Loath preached, when he
destroyed Sodom and Gomorhe.

But he found no faith, and to be short he shall come at the latter day, but
he shall find a little faith. And I wene the day be not far of. And when he
was here carnallye did he find any fayethe? Many speak of faith, but few
there be that has it

Christ mourns the lack of it. He complayneth that when he came, he found
no faith.

This faith is a great state a Lady, a Duchess, Faith is agreat stat and a
Duchess.
a great womanne, and she has ever a great company and train about her (as
a noble estat ought to have (first she has a Gentilman usher that goes
before her, and where he is not there is not Lady faith.

This Ge^tilman usher is called Agnitio pecctatoru^* knowledge of syn, when we
enter into our heart, and acknowledge our faults, and stand not about to
defend them He is none of these wynkers* Knowledge of sin is gentell man
usher to Lady fayeth.
he kyckes not when he hears his fault. Now as the Gentilma^ vshere goes
before her, so she has a train that comes be hynde her, and yet though
they come behind, they be all of faythes company, they are all with her, as
Christ when he counterfaited a state going to Jerusalem, some went before
him, and some after, yet all were of his company, so al these wait upon
fayeth. She has a great train after her besides her Gentylman Usher, her
whole household, and those be the works of our vocation, when every man
considers what vocation he is in, what calling he is in, and does the
worckes of the same, as to be good to his neighbor, to obey God. etc.

This is the train that follows Lady Faieth, as for anexemple. An unfaithful
Judge has first an heavy rekenyng of his fault, repenting him self of his
wickedness, and then forsakes his iniquity, his impeietie, fearring of no man,
walks upright, and he yt does not thus, has not Lady fayeth, but rather a
boldness of sin and abusing of Christ's passion. Lady faieth is never
without her Gentle man vshere. Fayeth is no ankers she (...) has many a
ate^dante upon her parson.
nor without her train, she is no Anckres, she dwelles not alone, she is
never a pryuate woman, she is never alone and yet many therbe that boste the^
selves that they have fayeth, and that when Christ shall come they shall do well
enough. Nay nay, these that be fayethfull shall be so few, that Christ shall
skarce se them. Many there be that runs says Sayncte Paul, but there is
but one that receives the reward, it shall be with the multitude when he
shall come, as it was in the time of Noe, and as it was in time of Loath.

The sodeyne coming of ye Lord in the time of Noe and Loath
In the time of Noe, they were eating and drynckynge, building planting, and
suddenly the water came upon the^, and drowned them.

In the time of Loathe also, they wear eating and drynckynge. etc. And
suddenly the fire came upon them, and devoured them. And now we are eating
and drinckynge. There was never such building then, as is now, plantynge, nor
maryinge. And thus it shall be even when Christ shall come, at the judgment.

Is eating and dryncking and mariyng, reproved in scripture? Is it not? Nay
he reproved not al kind of eating and drinking, he must be other ways
understand.

If the scripture be not truly expounded what is more erroneous? And though
there be complayninges of some eating or drynckynge in the scripture yet he
speaks not as though al were naught.

They may be well ordered, what eating and drinking is allowed and what is
disco^mended.
they are Gods allowaunce, but to eat and drink as they did in Noes time,
and as they did in Lothes time, This eating and drinking, and maryinge is
spoken against. To eat and drink in the forgetfulness of gods
commandment, voluptuously, in excess and glotonnie, this kind of eating and
drinking is naught, when it is not done moderatlye soberly, What kind of
marying is reproved worthily.
and with all circumspection. And likewise to marrye for fleshelye lust, and
for there own fantasye. There was never such marriynge in Engglande, as is
now. I here tell of stealing of wards to marye their children to. Stealing
of wards. nay rather of lands.
This is a strange kind of stealing but it is not the wards, it is the
lands that they steal. And some there be that knyt up marriages to gether not
for any love or Godliness in the parties, but to get frendshyppe, Another kind
of marriage and all^^egth.
and make them strong in the realm, to increase their possessions and to
join land to land. And other there be that enuegle men's daughters, The
inueglers of men's daughters are notyd.
in the contempt of their fathers, and go about to marrye them without their
consent. This marriynge is ungodly. The parents which forse their children
to marry who^ they love not are worthelye reprehendyd*
And many parents constrayne their sons and daughters to marrye where they
love not, and some are beaten and conpulsed. And they that marrye thus marrye
in a forgetfulness and obliuiousnes of gods commandments. A day will come
shall pay for all.
But as in the time of Noe, suddenly a clappe fell in their bosoms, so shall it
be with us at the latter day when Christ shall come. I fear it be so little
with some me^, that a man can neither feel it not yet se it.
We have as little conscience as may be, and when he shall come, he shall lack
Lady Fayeth, welis them that shall be of that little flock, that shall be set on
the right hand. etc.

I have troubled you long, partelye being out of my matter, partelye being
in. But now I will make an end. I began with this text. Quecunque scripta sunt.
etc. So will I end now for mine own ease, as an old treuaunte with this
sentence. Beati qui audiu ut Verbum dei. etc.

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keeps it. I told you in
the beginning of this parable of Been. Nil melius quam letari et facere. If I
had ceaceased there al had been well, quod the merye Moonke, so blessed are
they that hear the word of God. But what follows? and keep it.

Our blessedness comes of the keeping. Our blessedness comes of the
kepeynge.
It hanges all one the end of the tale, in crediting and assenting to the
word, and followynge of it. And thus we shall begin our bessednes here, and at
the length we shall come to the blessing that never shall have end, which
God grant both you and me Ame^.

The fyfte Sermon of Master Hughe Latymer, which he preached before the Kings
Majesty within his graces Palayce at Westminster the fyft. day of Apryll.
QVecunque scripta sunt a^ nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Al things that are
written, they are written to be our doctrine. What doctrine is written for us
in the parable of the Judge, and the wyddowe, I have opened it to you, most
honorable audience.

Some thing as concerning the Judge, I would wyshe and pray, that it might
be alytle better kept in memory. that in the seat of Justice, no more
iniquity and unrighteousness, might raygne. This I fear me is sooner wyshed
then often seen but yet let us pray.


Better a little well kept, then a great deal forgotten, I would the Judges
would take forth their lesson, that there might be no more iniquity used,
Some ca^ spell and spi out land and put together fast inoughe, but when they
read or hear a good lesson, that comes in at one ear and goes out at the
other.
nor brybetakynge, for if there shall be brybynge, they know the peril of it,
they know what shall follow. I would also they should take an example of this
Judge that did say, not that that he thought him self, but our savior
Christ puttes him to say that thing, that was hid unto him self. Wherefore I
would ye should keep in memory, how unsearchable a ma^s heart is. I would ye
should remember the fall of the Angles, and beware therebye, the fall of the
old world, and beware thereby The fall of Sodom and Gomorh, and beware thereby.
Mark many caueatis and beware byes.
The fall of Lothes wife, and beware thereby. The fall of the manne that
suffered of late, and beware therbye.

The argument of the wicked judges should induce us to prayer.
I would not that miserable folk should forget the argument of the wicked
Judge, to induce them to prayer, which argument is this. If the Judge being a
tyraunte, a cruel man, a wicked man, which did not call her to him, made her
no promise nor in herying nor helping of her cause, yet in the end of the
matter for the importunytyes sake did help her, much more almighty god which
is a fathec who bears a fatherlye affection, as the father does to the
child, and is naturallye merciful. and calls us to him with his Promise
that he will hear them that call upon him, that be in distres and burdened
with adversity. Remember this. You know where to have your remedy. What may
be wroughte by prayer.
You by your prayer can work great effycacye, and your prayer with tears
is an instrument of great efficacy. It can bring many things to pass. But
what thing is that that makes our prayer acceptable to god? is it our
babbling? What makes our prayer acceptable to God.
No, no, It it is not our babbling nor our long prayer. There is an other
thing then it.

The dignyty and worthiness of our words, is of no such virtue. For whosoever
resorteth unto God, not in the confidence of his own merits, but in the sure
trust of the deserving of our Savior Jesus Christ, and in his passion.

Our prayer pleases God for Christ's sake when we dystruste our own merits
and trust in his deseruinges.
Whosoever does invoke the father of heaven, in the trust of Christ's
merits, which offering is the most confortable and acceptable offering to
the father. Whosoever I say offers up Christ, which is a perfect
offering, he can not be denied the thing he desires so that it be expedyente
for him to have it. It is not the babbling of our lips, nor dignitye of our
words, but the prayer of the heart, is the offering that pleases through the
only means of his son. For our prayer profyteth us because we offer
Christ to his father.

Whosoever resorteth to god without Christ, In all our prays we must bring
a present with us to god and mark well who it is.
he resorteth in vain. Our prayer pleases, because of Jesus Christ, whom we
offer. So that it is faith, fayeth faith, is the matter. It is no prayer that
is without faith, it is but a lip laboring, and monkerye without faith. It
is but alytle babbling.

I spoke also of lack of faith and upon that also I said, the end of the
world is near at hand, For there is lack of faith now. Also the defectio^ is
come and swaruinge from the fayeth Antichriste the man of sin, Conjectures
why the end of the world is supposed to be nere at hand.
the son of iniquity is reveled, the latter day is at hand. Let us not
think his coming is far of. But when soever he comes he shall find
iniquitye enough, let him come when he will What is now behind? we be eating
and drynckynge as they were in Noes time, and Mariynge I think as wyckedly as
ever was. As much wickedness used in our time as ever was in the time of Noe.
We be buildynge, purchaching, plantynge in the contempt of Gooddes word. He
may come shortelye when he will, for there is so much mischief and swaruynge
from the fayeth (rayninge now in our days) as ever was in any age. It is a
good warnyng to us all to make ready against his coming. This little
rehearsalle I have made of the things I speak in my last sermon. M. Latimer
returns to his former question and to the dissolucion of the same.
I will now for this day return to my question and dissolve it, whether
gods people may be governed by a gouernoure that bears the name of a king
or no. Wether gods people may be governed by a King or no.
The Jews had a law that when they should have a king they should have
him according to the election of god, he would not leave the election of a
king to their own brains. The kings of the Jews were elected and chose^ of
God. i. Regu. viii.
There be some busy brains, wanton wits, that say, the name of a king is
an odyouse name and wrteth this text of the scripture, where god seems to be
angrye and displesed with the Israelites for askyng a king expou^ding it very
evil and odiously. As who would say a king were an odiouse thing. I co^mming
ridinge in my way, Our preaching must be framed according to the persons
before whom we preach.
and calli^g to remembrance wherefore I was sent, that I must preach and, preach
before the kings maiesti I thought it mete to frame my preaching according to a
king Musyng of this I remembered my self of a book that came from Cardinal
Pole, C. Pole the kings traitor, a traitor against kind and nature.
master Pole the kings traitor, which he sent to the kings, majesty I
never remember that man me thyncke, but I remember him with a heavy heart, a
wyttye man, a learned man, a man of a noble house, M. Latimer lamentes the
defection of C. Pole and the breche of his allegiaunce to his liege and Roiale
king.
so in favor that if he had tarried in the realm, and would have conformed
him self to the Kings procedynges. I heard say, and I believe it verelye,
that he had been bishop of Yorcke at this day, To be a bidden by, he would
have done much good in that part of the Realm. For those quarters have all
ways had great need of a learned man, They need as greatly at this day as
ever they did
and a preaching prelate. A thing to be much lamented that such a man
should take such away. I here say he reads much Saint Ieromes works, and
is well seen in them But I would he would follow sayncte Jerome, Cardinal Pole
vsyth (they say) to read much Saynct Ieromes worckes.
where he expounds this place of scripture. Exite de illa peopule meus.
Almightye god says. Get you from it, get you from Rome, he calls it, the
purple hoar of Babylon. It had been more co^me^dable to go from it, the^ to
come to it. Rome is called of Jerome the purple hoore of Babylon.
What his sayings be in his book. I do not well remember, it is in the
fartheste end of my memory. He declares him self in it, to have a corrupt
iudgmente, He means of the book that C. Pole did send to the king.
I have but a glymmerynge of it Yet in generally. I remember the scope of it.
He goes about to dissuade the king from his supremicie. The scope or state
of the book, tendes to disuade the king from his supremicye.
In his persuasions he is very whomlye, very quycke and sharp with the King
as these Cardinals will take well upon them. He says that a king is an
odiouse word and touched ye pl^ace how god was offended with the Israelites for
calling for a king, Well Spoken and like a Cardinal* who may lie by
authority because he dwells at Rome.


Uerely lyghtely he seems to set forth the title of a king. As though he
should mean: what is a King? What should a King take upon him to redress
matters of religiyn? It pertains to ovre holy father of Rome. A king is a
name and a title rather suffered of God as an evil thing, then allowed as a
good thing.

Calling this to remembrance it was an occasion that I speak altogether
before. Now I will answer to this For the answer I must some what ryppe the
ayght Chapter of the first book of the Kings And that I may have grace. etc.

TO come to ye opening of this matter. I must begyne at the beginning of the
Chapter. that the unlearned (although I am sure, here be a great meany well
learned (may the better come to the understanding of the matter Factum est
cum senuisset Samuel fecit filios suos iudices populo etc. i, Regu* viii.
It came to pass when Samuel was strycken in age, he made his sons Judges
over Israel. Of Samuel. I might fetch a process a far of, of the story of
Elcana, who was his father, and who was his mother. Elcana his father had two
wives. Atan^t (by the way) to such as use unlawful dis^orsementes.
Anna and Phenenna, and did not put them away, as do men now a days

There was debate between these two wives.

Phenenna in the doing of sacrifice, embrayded Anna because she was barren, and
not fruitful. I might take here occacion to entreat of the duty between man
and wife, which is a holy relygyon, but not religiouslye kept. Anna of barren
made frutful and mother to Samuel.
But I will not enter into that matter at this time. Well, in process of time,
God made Anna fruitful, through her devout prayer. She brought forth
Samuel, who by the ordinance of God, was made the high pryeste. Father
Samuel a good man, a singular example, and singular patron, a man a lone,
few such men as father Samuel was. Samuel being aged chose to him two
suffragenes to assyst him in his office.
To be short he was now come to age, he was an old man an impotente man, not
able to go from place to place to minyster justice, he elected and chose two
suffraganes, two coadiutours, two cohelpers, I mean not hallowers of belles,
nor Christiners of belles (that is a popysh suffraganship) he made the^ to
healpe him, Why he chose his own two sons rather then any other.
to dyscharge his office, he chose his two sons rather then other, because he
knew the^ to be well brought up in virtue, and learning, It was not for any
carnal affection, he cared not for his renown, Samuel tenderynge the ease of
his people appointed two officers.
or revenues, but he appointed them for the case of the people, the one for to
supply his place in Bethsabe, and the other in Bethlem.

As we have now in England, for the wealth of the Realm, two Lords
presidentes. Surely* it is well done, and a goodly order. I would there were a
third in an other place.

A third Lord presydent would do well
For the ease of his people, good father Samuel, and to discharge his office in
places where he could not come him self, he set his two sons in office
with him, as his suffragaynes, and as his Coadiutoures.

Here I might take occasyon to treat what old and impotente Bishops should
do, what old preachers should do, What the impote^t and old bishops should
do when they are not able to sustain the travail and pains of preaching
when they come to impotency, to join with them preachers preachers, not
Belhalowers, and to depart, part of their living with them.

I might have dylated this matter at large. But I am honestelye prevented of
this commune place, and I am very glad of it.

It was very well handeled the last Sunday. There are ^o many such flese
feders
They that will not for the office sake receive other, regard more the flese
then the flock.

Father Samuel, regarded not his revenues. Our Lord give them grace to be
affected as he was and to follow him. etc. Amen
Though I say that I would wish mo Lord presidentes. I mean not that I
would have prelates Lords presidentes, nor that Lord bishops should be Lord
presydentes. M Latimer would not have bishops and prelates Lord presidentes.
As touching that, I said my mind and conscience the last year. And all
though it is said, Presint, it is not mente that they should be Lord
presydentes, the office of a presidenship is a ciuyll office, and it can not
be, that one manne shall discharge both well. It follows in the text. The
office of a president-shyppe is a ciuell office and occupies a man, wholly.
Non ambulauerunt filii eius in (...) ei^s. etc. His sons walked not in his
ways, hear is the matter, here ye se the goodness of Samuel, how, when he was
not able to take the pains him self for their own ease, he appointed them
Judges nere unto them, as it were in ye further parts of his Realm, to have
Justice ryghtly ministered. But what followed? The world will corrupt and
deceive us or we beware of it, the dyuell is so crafty and lucre is so sweat.


Though Samuel were good, and his children well brought up, look what the
world can do? Ah crafty world. Whom shall not this world corrupt and deceive
at one time or other?

Samuel thought his sons should have proved well, but yet Samuels son
walked not in their fathers way, why? What then? Is the son always bound
to walk in the fathers way? The son is not always bound to walk in the
fathers ways.


No ye must not take it for a general rule. All sons are not to be blamed in
their fathers ways.

Ezechias did not follow the steps of his father Ahaz, Ezechias did not
follow the steps of his father Ahaz.

iiii. Reg. xviii Iosyas reformed the ways of his father Amon iiii. Re. xxii,
and.xxiii.


and was well allowed in it. Josias ye best king that ever was in Iewry,
reformed his fathers ways, who walked in worldly policye.

In his youth, he took away all Idolatrye, and purdged his Realm of it, and
set a good order in all his Dominions, wrestled with Idolatrye.

And although his father or his grande father Manasses (it makes no matter
whether) repented him in the end, He was but right year old when he began
to Raygne.
he had no time to refourme things, he left it to his son to be done

Josias began and made an alteracion in his chyldehode, he turned al
vpsydowne, he would suffer no Idolatry to stand.

Therefore, you must not take it for a general rule, yt the son must ever
walk in his fathers ways.

Here I will renew, that which I said before of the styfnecked Jews, the
rebellyouse people (that is their title) they never spoke so rebelliousslye, as
to say, We are more styffeneckyd more rebellyous and sturdyer the^ the Jews,
they would not receive any alteracion, till their king came to age. Much
less we English men (if there be any such in England) may be ashamed.

I wonder with what consience folk can hear such things, and allow it.

This Josias made an notable alteracion, and therefore take it not for a
general rule, that the son shall always walk in his fathers ways. This is
no rule to reke^ upon.


Think not because he was slain in battle, that God was displeased with him.
For herein God showed his gooodnes to him wonderfullye, who would not suffer
him to se the captivity that he would bring upon the Israelites. He would
not him to have the sight, the fealynge, and the beholdynge of his plage,
Josias was slain in battle of Pharao Necho king of Egypt at Ma^^d^o iiii.
Reg. xiii.
he suffered him to be taken away before, and to be slain of the king of
Egypt.

Wherefore a just man must be glad when he is taken from misery. Iustus si
morte preoccupatus fuerit in refri^erio erit.

If a ruste man be prevented with death, it shall be to his relyefe. He must
think that he is one of those, whom the world is not worthy to have, it
came of a singular goodness of god, that he was by death delivered from the
sight of that captivity. Therefore take it not for a general rule, that the
son be always bound to walk in the fathers ways.

Nolite in preceptis patrum ^estrorum incedere. Walk not in the
commandments of your fathers For so it is said in an other place of
scripture. It is spoken to the reproach of Samuels sons that they walked not
in his way, for he was a good man.

A wonderful thing that these children being so well brought up should so
fall and be corrupt. If the dyuell can prevail and has power against them,
that had so Godly education, what vauntage has he at the^ yt be brought up
iniquity and covetousness? It is a Proverb that magistratus virum commonstrat.
Authoryte and office tries what a man is.
Office and authority shows what a man is. A man knows not him self, till
he be tried. Many there be that being with out office can rebuke magistrates,
This has been often times verefyed and seen in preachers before they were
bishop pyd or benificed.
and find fault with men yt be in office and preeminince. After when it comes
to their chance to come to office them selves, the^ they have taken out a new
lesson. cum essem paruulus sapieham vt paruulus. When I was a child, I sauered
as a child.

They will do then as other men do, they are come to have experience, to be
practisioners. Do as the most do, and the fewest shall wonder at them.
The maids child is ever best taught, for he that stands up right in
office, he is the fellow, Samuel would never have thought that his sons should
have been so corrupted. The state of a Judge is dangerous and lucre is so
lickorous that he that once lykes of it, leketh it.
It is a perilous thing, a dangerous state to be a judge. They felt ye
smaker of this world, a perilous thing. And therefore Chrisostom says. Miror
si aliquis retrosum saluabitur. I marvel (says he) that any ruler can be
saved. If ye peril were well considered, me^ would not be so desirous as they
be. The good man nemo otherwise called nobody that dwells with vtopia.
The world y^ world has many subtle sleightes, it is a crafty thing and
very deceitful, a corrupter, and who is it who^ the world does not corrupt
and blind at one time or other? What was ye way they walked Declinauerunt
post a^aritiam. That is one. They stouped after gaynes, turned a side after
lucre. What followed Acceperunt munera They took rewards, They call the^
rewards but brybes is the first letter of their Christian name.
gifts, brybes (I should call them) for that is their right name.
Peruerterunt iudicium. They turned Justice vpsedowne. Either they would give
wrong judgment, or else put of and delay poor men's matters.

These were their ways, here is the Deuylles genealogye. The deuels genealogye
the ladder of hell.
A gradacion of the Deuilles making. This is, Scala inferni. The ladder of hell.

I told you before of Scala celi the ladder of heaven, I would you should
not forget it. The steps thereof are set forth in the tenth to the Romans.
The first is preaching, then hearing, Preaching Hearing Beleuynge and
salvation.
then beleuynge, and last of all Salvation. Scala celi. is a preaching matter
I tell you, and not a massyinge matter, gods instrument of salvation, is
preaching. Well moved and Godly exhorted of M. Latimer but little minded and
slowlye followed for all that.


Here I move you my Lords, not to be greadye and outragyouse in enhaunsynge,
and raysinge of your rentes, to the minishynge, of the office of salvation. It
would pytye a ma^s heart to hear that, that I hear of the state of Cambrige,
what it is in Oxforde I can not tell. The studi of divinity decayed in
Cambriege.
There be few do study divinity. but so many as of necessity must furnysh ye
Colleges. For their liuinges be so small, and ^ayles so dear, that they tarry
not there, but go other where to seek lyuynges and so they go about. Now
there be a few gentylmen and they study a little divinity. Alas what is that?
it will come to pass that we shall have nothing but a little English divinity,
The usurped supremytye of the bishop of Rome will not be kept out with a little
English dyuinitye.
that will bring the Realm into a very barbarousnes, and utter decay of
learning. It is not that I wise, that will keep out the supremacye of the
bishop of Rome.

Here I will make a supplycacion, M. Latimer his reaso^able request for poor
scholars exibycions.
that ye would bestow so much to the finding of scholars, of good wits, of
poor men's sons, to exercise the office of salvation, in releuing of
scholars, as ye were wont to bestow in Pylgrimage matters, in trentales, in
masses, in pardons, in purgatory matters, Ye bestowed that lyberallye,
bountyfully, but this was not well spente.

You had a zeal but not Secundum scientiam. Where upon we may bestow our
goods well and please God well.
Not according to knowledge. You may be sure if you bestow, your Gods on
this wise, ye shall bestow it well to supporte and uphold Gods word, wherein
ye shall please God.

I require no more, but that ye bestow so much Godly, as ye were wont to
bestow ungodly.

It is a reasonable peticion, for Gods sake, look upon it I say no more.

There be none now but great men's sons in Colleges, and their fathers look
not to have them preachers, They that have least need have most healpe.
so every way this office of preaching is pynchyt at.

I will speak no more of Scal^ celypunc; But I am sure this is Scala inferni,
the right way to hell, to be covetous, to take brybes, and peruerte justice.
If a judge should ask me the way to hell. I would show him this way. The
ready way down to the deuell in hell.
First let him be a couetouse man, let his heart be poisoned with covetousness.
Then let him go a little further and take brybes, and last peruerte judgment.
Loo, hear is the mother and the daughter, and the daughters daughter. Avarice
is the mother, she brynges for the brybe taking, and bribetakyng, peruertyng of
iugment

There lackes a fourth thing to make up the mess, A tiburne tippet for brybe
takers and peruerters of judgment.
which so god help me if I were judge should be Haugum tuum, a tiburne typpet
to take with him, and it were the judge of the kings bench, my Lord chyefe
judge of England, yea, and it were my Lord Chanceloure him self, to tiburne
with him.

There was with in these.xxx. years a certain widow, The wydow that was in
prison.
which suddenly was attached, had to prison, indyted, condemned, and there
were certain learned men that visited her in the prison. Oh I would ye would
resort to Prysonnes, A commendable thing in a christen realm, I would wyshe
there were curates for prisonnes, that we might say, There should be curates of
presones.
the curate of Newegat, the curate of the flete and I would have them well
waged for their labor. It is a holy day work to vyset the prisoners, A
holy day work to vysyt the presoners.
for they be kept from sermons. There was that resorted to this woman, who, when
she came to preson, was all on her beads, and nothing else, a popysh woman,
and sauered not of Jesus Christ. In process she was so applied that she
tasted. The woman turned from papyltrye by the diligent resort of, the learned
frequentyng the preson.
Quam suauis est dominus. She had such a sauoure, such a sweetness and
feeling that she thought it long to the day of execusion. She was with
Christ already, as touching fayeth.

She had such a desire that she said with saint Paul. Cupio dissolui et esse
cum christo. I desire to be ryd, and to be with Christ. The word of God had so
wrought in her. When she was brought to punishment, she desired to confess her
fault, she took of her death, that she was giltlesse in that thing she
suffered for, and her neighbors would have borne her wytnes in the same. She
was always an honest ciuell woman, her neighbors would have gone on her
purgacion a great way

They would needs have her confess, then says she. I am not gylty, would ye
have me to make me gyltye, where I am not? Yet for all this, she was a trespasar,
she had done a great offense. But before I go forward with this, I must first
tell you a tale.

I heard a good while ago, a tale of one (I saw the man that told me the tale
not long ago) in this auditorye. He has traueiled in mo countries the^ one.

He toulde me that there was once a pretour in Rome, Lord mayre of Rome, A
rich merchaunt cast in to the Castel-Aungell.
a rich manne, one of the richest merchants in all the city, and sodaynelye
he was cast in the castle Angel. It was herd of, and every man, whispered
in an others ear. What has he done? Has he killed any man? No. Has he
meddled with Alam, our holy fathers marcha^dice? No, Has he cou^terfaited our
holy fathers Bulls? No. For these were hye treasons*

One rowned an other in the ear and said. Erat Dives. He was a rich man. A
great fault. Here was a goodlye pray for that holy father. It was in Popes
Julius time, he was a great warrioure. This pray would healpe him to
maintain his wars, a ioly pray for our holy father.

So this woman was Dives She was a rych woman, A gentle man of a long nose from
such a nose, I pray God, Liberanos et saluanos.
she had her lands by the Shiriffes nose He was a gentil man of a long nose.
Such a cup, such a cover. She would not depart from her own. This Shyriffe was a
couetnouse man, a worldely man. The Judge at the enpanelyng of the queste,
had his grauelookes, and charged them with this. It was the Kings matter,
look well upon it.

When it makes for their purpurpose, they have the King, the king in their
mouths. Well, some what there was, there was walking of angels between them.
The sign of the Judges skin*
I would wish that of such a Judge in England now, we might have ye skin
hanged up. It were a goodly sign the sign of the judges skin. It should be
Lotis wife, to all Judges that should follow after. By this ye may perceive, it
is possible for a man to answer for him self, A man may answer for him
self and yet have wrong, and be absent, and yet have right.
and be arrained at the bar, and nevertheless to have wrong. Yea, ye shall
have it in form of law, and yet have wrong to. So it is possible* in a
case, for a man that has in his absence ataintement to have right, and no
wrong.

I will not say nay, but it is a good law for a man to answer for him self,
this is reasonable, alowable and good. And yet such an vrgente cause may be,
such a respect to a commune wealth, that a man may rightlye be condemned in
his absence. There be such causes that a man may in his absence be condemned,
but not often, except they be such cases that the reason of the general law
may be kept. I am provoked of some to conde^pne this law, but I am not able,
so it be but for a time, and upon wayghty consideracio^s, so that it be used
rarely, seldomly, for avoiding distrubaunce in the common wealth, such an
epiky and moderacion may be used in it.

And nevertheless it is very mete and requisite that a man should answer for
him self*

We must consider the ground of the law: The reason of the law is the soul of
the law.
for Ratio legis, anima legis. The reason of the law, is the soul of the
law. Why? what is the reason and end of the law? It is this, that no man
should be injured. A man may in his attayntmente have no more wrong done him
then if he answered for him self. Ah then I am not able to say, that in no
wise, and arraineme^t may be turned in to attaintement. A man may have
wrong (and that in open judgment) and in form of law, and yet allowed to
answer for him self, and even so is possible he may have right, though he
never answer for him self. I will not say but that the parliament houses
both hye and low, may err, and yet they may do well, and christen subjects
must take all things to the best, How we must take the doings of the
parliamente.
and expound their doings well, although they can not yield, a reason for
it, except their proceadings be manifestli wicked, For though they can not
attain to se for what purpose things be done, it is no good reasone that they
be called evil done therefore. An untrue argument.
And is this a good argument, he is not allowed to answer for him self in this
place or that place, where he will appoynte: Ergo, he is not allowed to answer
for him self? No. He might have answered the best he could for him self
before a great meanye, and have had more to, if he had required them. Yea,
and was commanded upon his allegiaunce to speak for him self, and to make
answer, but he would not needs he would come out to Judgment, and
appoynte the place him self.

A man that answers for him self at the bar, is not allowed his manne of
law to answer for him, but he must answer him self. Yet in the
Parliament, Fre lybertye is granted to speak in the Parlyemente house.
although he were not there him self, any friend he had, had lyberty to
answer for him, frank, and fre, I know of the old manner. The tenor of the
wryttes is this, Every man to speak the best he knows of his conscience,
for the kings magesties honor, and the wealth of the realm. There were in
the Paliamente in both houses, a great meanye learned men, conscionable men,
wise me^. When that man was attainted there, and they had lybertye, there to
say nay, to his attayntmente if they would. Sure I am the most allowed it,
or else it could not have gone forward.

These premises considered. I would have you to bear such a heart, as it be
comes christen subjects. I know what men say of me well enough, I could
pourge my self.

There is that prouokes me to speak against this law of attayntemente, they
say I am not indyfferente. Surely I would have it to be done rarely upon
some great respect to the commune wealth, for a uoiding of greater tumulte and
peril.

Paul was alowew to answer for him self.
Saynct Paul was allowed to answer for him self, if Lisias the tribune had
not plucte him away from showing of his matter, it had cost him his life.
Acts. xxi.
Where he was saved by the magystrate, being but a pryuate manne. Will ye not
allow that some thing be done as well for saving of the magistrates life? It be
houes them of the Parliament to look well upon the matter. And I for my part
thyncke not but they did well, else I should not yield the duty of a subject.

Some liken me to doctor Shaw, that preached at Paul's cross, M. Latimer
likened to doctoure Shaw.
that King Edwardes sons were bastardes. An easy matter for one of the
counsel to doctor Shaw did. Me think you being the kings servant and his
offycer, should think better on the King, and his council, though I were
light of belefe. If he had been a true man to his master, he would never have
spoken it.

The counsel needs not my lie, for the defense of that, that they do. I can
bear it of my self. Concerning my self, that which I have spoken, has done
some good.

You will say this. The Parliamente house are wyser then I am, you might leave
them to the defense of the^ selves. Although the men of the Parliment house
can defend them selves, yet have I spoken this of a good zeal, and a good
ground of the Admiralles writing, I have not feigned, nor lied one jot. Use
your Judgment and languages, as it becomes Christian subjects.

I will now leave the honorable counsel to answer for them selves. He
confessed one fact, One fact confessed of the Admyrall he would not have the
king brought up like a ward in his minority*
he would have had the governance of the kings majesty. And wot ye why?
He said he would not in his minority have him brought up like a ward. I am
sure he has been brought up so Godly, with such Scholemasters as never king
was in England, and so has prospered under them, as never none did. I wotte
not what he mente by his brynging up like a ward, onles he would have him not
to go his book and learn as he does. Now woo worth him, yet I will not say so
neither, Kings should be learned.
but I pray God amend him, or else God send him short life, that would have my
soueraygne not to be brought up in learning, and would pluck him from his
book. I aduertyse the therefore my fellow subject, use thy tongue better, and
expound well the doings of the magystrates.

Now to the purpose, for these things let me of my matter,

Some say preachers should not meddle with such matters, but did not our
Savior Jesus Christ meddle with matters of Judgment, when he spoke of the
wicked Judge, to leave ensample to us that follow, to do the same?

Ye se here, that Lady couetuousnes is a fruitful woman, Lady couetusnes is a
chyldynge woman
ever chyldynge, and ever bringing forth her fruits. It is a true saying.
Radi^ omnium maloru^ auaricia. Covetousness is the root of al wyckednes. One will
say paraduenture, you speak unseemly and in conuenyentlye so to be against
the officers* for taking of rewards in doing pleasures.

He that byeth dear must needs sell there after.
Ye consider not the matter to the bottom. Their offices be bought for great
sommes, now how shall they receive their money again, but by brybyng ye
would have them undone. Some of the^ gave.CC. pou^des some.v.C. pound,
some.ii.M pound. And how shall they gather up this monye again, but by healpyng
them selves in their office. And is it so trow ye? Ye must understand, yea,
as well as cyuyl oil to make the sentence perfect.
Are civil offices bought for monei? Lord God. Who would have thought that?
Let us not be to hasty to credit it. For then we have the old proverb, Omnia
^e^^lpa Roma. Althinges ar sold for money at Rome, and Rome is come home to our
own doors. If they by, they must needs sell, for it is wittely spoken. Vendere
iure potest emerat ille prius. He may lawefully sell it, he bought it before.
God forfend that ever any such enormitie should be in England, that civil
offices should be bought and soulde, where as men should have the^ given the^
for their worthiness, I would the kings majesty should seek through his real me
for mete men, Mete men able, are worthy to be put in office.
and able men, worthy to be in office, yea and give the^ liberally for their
pains, and rather give the^ monye to take the office in hand, then they to
give money for it. This byinge of offices is a making of bryberye, it is an
enducinge, and enforsyng, It is a brybery to bye offices.
and compelling of men to briberye. Holy scripture qualyfieth the officers and
shows what manner of me^ they should be and of what qualites, Vi^os fortes.
What m^nner of men officers should be.
Some Translacyons have Viros sapientes. The English translacio^ has it very
welll. Men of actyuitye that have stomakes to do their office, they must not
be milk soppes, They must have.iiii. properties.
nor white leuered knights. they must be wise, hartye, hardye men of a good
stomach. Seco^darely, he qualifieth them with the fear of god. He says they
must be Timentes deum. fearyng God. For if he fear God he shall be no briber, no
peruerter of judgment, faithful. Thyrdly they must be chosen officers. In
quibus est veritatis. In whom is truth. If he say it, it shall be done.
Fourthly. Qui oderunt auaritiam. Hatynge covetousness, far from it, he will
not come ^ere it, that hates it. Five.C. pound, given for an office.
It is not he that will give.v C pound for an office. With these qualityes
Gods wisdom would have magistrates to be qualyfied. This comes from the
deuilles co^sistoroy to pay.v.C. pounds for one office. If they pay so much,
it must needs follow that they take bribes, They that are mete to bear office
would be sought out and lyberally feed. Sellyng of offices and selling of
binefyces are both one. that is to say Symony otherwise called Symonye
that they be bribe takers. Such as be mete to bear office seek them out,
hyere them, give them compotente and lyberall fees that they shall not need to
take any bribes. And if ye be at selling civil offices, ye ar as they which
sell their benefyces, and so we shall have Omnia ue^^lia. Al things boughte for
monye. I marvel the ground gapes not and deuours us, how be it, we ought not
to maruayle, surely it is, the great lenity of god that suffers it. Oh Lord in
what case are we If the great me^ in Turkey should use in their religion of
Mahomete to sell as our patrons co^monlye sell benefyces here, the office of
preaching, The Turk would not suffer that we do,
the office of salvation it should be taken as an intolerable thing. The turk
would not suffer it in his common wealth. Patrons be charged to se ye office
done, The patro^s deutye, in bestowynge of his benefyce
and not to seek a lucre and a gain by his patro^ ship. There was a patro^ in
England (when it was) that had a benefyce fallen into his hand and a good
brother of mine came unto him and brought him.xxx. Apples in a dysh, The merye
tale of the patron that sold a benefyce for a deputye dyshe of Apples.
and gave the^ his man to carrye them to his master. It is like he gave one to
his man for his labor to make up the game, and so there was.xxxi This man
comes to his master and presented him with the dyshe of Apples, saying. Sir
such a man has sent you a dyshe of fruit, and desires you to be good unto
him for such a benefice. Tushe tushe (quod he) this is no apple matter, I will
none of his apples. I have as good as these (or as he has any) in mine own
orcheard. The man came to the pryest again, and toulde him what his master
said. Then quod the priest desire him yet to prove one of the^ for my sake, he
shall find the^ much better the^ they look for. He cut one of them and found
ten pieces of gold in it. Mary quod he, this is a good apple. The pryest
standing not far of, heringe what the Gentle man said, cried out and
answered, they are all one apples I warrante you Sir, they grew al on one
tree, and have all one taste. Well, he is a good fellow, let him have it quod
the patron. etc. Get you a grafte of this tree and I warraunt you it shall
stand you in better stead then all Sayncte Paul's learning. A graft of gold
to get a benefyce with all, is worth a great deal of learning.
Well, let patrons take heed for they shall answer for all the souls that
peryshe through their defaute. There is a saying that there be a great maenye
in England that say there is no soul, The error of such as believe not the
immortalytie of Souls.
that believe not in the immortalitye of ma^s soul, that thyncke it is not
eternal, but like a dogs soul, that think there is neither heaven nor hell.
Oh Lord, what a wayghtye matter is this? What a lamentable thing in a
christen common wealth? I can not tell what they say, but I perceive by their
worckes that they thyncke so, or else they would never do as they do. These
sellers of offices show that they believe that there is neither hell nor heaven.
It is taken for a laughing matter, well, I will gooe on. Now to the Chapter.
The children of Israel came to Samuel and said S^^^uisti. Thou art grown
into age. Give us a King? Thy sons walk not in thy ways. What a heauenes
was this to father Samuels heart, Samuel was sorry for the warnyng of his son
from his ways.
to here that his sons (whom he had so well brought up) should swerve from
his ways that he had walked in. Father Sa^uel go^th to God to know his will
and pleasure in this matter, God answered, let them have a King. They have not
cast the a way but me, that I should not raygne over them.

This is their ground that i. Sam. viii.
say a king is an odiouse thing and not acceptable before the face of God. A
place vyolentyd and forsyd to serve for other purpose then it was ever meante.
Thus they forcr and violent this place to make for their purpose, where no such
thing is mente. Show the Israelites (says God) and testify to them a kings
authorite and what a thing a king is, and what a king will do. And ye will not
persuade them, I will not here them hear after, when they shall try unto me.
I must needs confess that the Jews trespassed against almighty God in aski^g
of a King. Wherein the intent of the Jews, did consyst.
But hear is ye matter, in what thing there offense stood, whether absolutely
in asking a king, or in any other circumstaunce. It was in a circumstaunce.
They said not. Ask us a king of God: but make us a king to judge us, The
Jews offendyd in three things
as all other nations have. They would have a king of their own swinge and
of their own election, as though they paste not of God. In a another point
there was pride. They would be like the heathen and judged under kings as they
were. Thyrdly, they offended God because they asked a king to the injury and
wrong of good father Samuel to depose him, A comparion between Samuel and
his sons, and Ely and his sons.
so this was a wrong toward Samuel. It was not with Samuel and his children like
as with Ealy and his children, Ophenes and Phines. They were cruel, who with
hokes taken the flesh out of the pottes when that sacrifyce was offered to
god, brought the people in to a co^te^pt of Gods word They were lecherers.
Their s^nne were manifestlye and notoriously knowyn: Ely sons were leacherers
and manifest offe^ders. i. Samuel.
but their father Elye knowing and herynge of it did blame them, but nothing
to purpose, he did not ernestly and substancially chastise them, and therefore
he was iustlye deposed of God The sins of Samuelles sons were not known,
they were not so notorious, wherefore, it was not with father Samuel as it was
with Elye, Samuels Sons were brybers and peruerters of Judgment,
his sons fautes were taking of brybes and peruertynge of judgments. Ye
know that brybery is a secret fault, and therefore it was not known.

It was done under a color and a pretense of justice, hidlye and covertly
done. Therefore because it stood in brybes it was not like in Samuel as in Ely.
It is a dangerous thing to be in office for qui attingit pice^ coinquinabitur
ad ea He that medleth with pitch is like to be spotted with it. Brybes are like
pyche.
Brybes may be assembled to pitch, for even as pitch does pollute their hands
ye meddle with it: so bribes will bring you to peruertinge of justice. Beware
of pitch, you judges of ye world, bribes will make you peruerte justice. Why
you will say. We touch none. Anglice a receyuer of his master brybes,
No mary. But my Mystres your wife has a fine fing^r, she touches it for you
or else you have a servant a ^^^eribus, he will say if you will come to my
master and offer him a yoke of oxen, you shall speed never the worsse, but I
think my Master will take none, when he has offered the^ to ye master,
then co^mes another servant and says. If you will bring the^ to the clarke of
the kichen, you shallbe remembered the better. This is a fryerly fassion that
will receive no monye in their hands, A fryerly fashion in refusing of
brybes. A goodly radg of papysh religion.
but will have it put upon their sleues. A goodly rage of popyshe religyon.
They be like graye friars, they will not be seen to receive no brybes them
selves but have other to receive for them. Though Samuel sons were preuye
brybers and kept the thing very close, yet the cry of the people brought it
to Samuel, It was a hyd kind of sin. For me^ in this point, would face it
and brace it and make a show of vpryghte dealing, when they be most gyltye.
But such ^orn carrye bryde in their bosoms that accused them
Nevertheless this gere came out. Oh wicked sons, that brought both their
father to deposicio^ and the^ selves, to shame. When Samuel herd of their faut,
he went not about to excuse their fautes. He would not bear with his sons.
He would not. Communicari peccates alienis. Samuel would not be partaker of
his sons offenses.
Be partaker with his sons offenses he said Ego senui, ecce filii mei
vobiscu^ sunt. As soon as he heard of it, he delivered his sons to the
people to be punyshed, He went not about to excuse them* nor said not, this
is the first time, bear with them, but presented them by and by to the
people, saying: Lo, here they be, take them, do with them according to their
deserts. Oh I would there were no more bearers of other men's sins, the^ this
good father Samuel was. I heard of late of a notable bloodshed. A^dio. says
S. Paul and so do I. I know it not, but I hear of it. There was a searcher i^
london, which executing his office displeased a merchant man, in so much that
when he was doing his office, they ware at words, the marcha^t man threatened
him, the searcher said* the king should not lose his custom. The merchant goes
me home and sharpes his woodknife, and comes again and knockes him on ye head
and killes him, they yt told me the tale sai it is winked at, they look through
there fyngers and will not se it.

Wheyther it be taken up with a pardon or no I ca^ not tell, but this I am sure,
Ye but it were better to go to God then to be borne to the devil.
and if ye bear with such matters the devil shall bear you away to hell. Bloodshed
and murder would have no bearing It is a heinous thing bloudshedynge and
especially voluntary murder and prepensed murder. Form Numerye God says it
poluteth the whole realm* Bludsheding ^ prepensed murder would not be borne
with all
Polluitur illa terra, et ^^non potest expiari sine sanguine. The land can not
be purged nor cleansed again till his blood be shed that shed it. It is the
office of a king to se such murders punished with death. The king bears a
swerd before him and not a Pecokes fether.
Non frustra gesta gladiu^ What will ye make of a king? He bears a swerd
before him, (not a Pecokes fether) I go not about to styrrc you now to
crudelitye, but I spoke against bearing of bloodshed. This bearing must be
looked upon. In certain causes of murder such great circumstaunces may be,
that the king may pardon a murderer. But if I were worthy to be of
counsaylle, or if I were asked mine advice, I would not have the king to
pardon a voluntary murderer, a prepe^sed murder.

I can tell where one man slew an other, in a tounshyp, and was attached upon
the same.xii. men were impaneled, the man had friends, the Shirife labored
the bench, the.xii. men stacke at it and said, except he would disburse.xii.
crowns they would find him gyltie.

Means were found that the xii. crowns was paid. The quest commes in and
says not giltye.

Here was a not gyltye, for xii. crowns. This is bearing, And some of the
bench were hanged, they were well served. This makes men bold to do murder and
slaughter. We should reserve murdering till, we come to our enemies, and
while the King bydde us fight. He that would be stur him than, were a pretty
fellow in deed. Crowenes?

If their crowns were shaven to the shoulders they were served well inoughe. I
knew where a womanne was gotwyth child, and was a shamed at the matter, and
went into a secreate place, where she had no women at her trauail and was
delivered of three children at a birth.

She wrounge their necks and cast them into a water, and so kylde her
children. Sodaynelye, she was gaunte again, and her neighbors suspectynge
the matter, caused her to be examened, and she granted all. Afterward she was
rayned at the bar for it, and dyspatched and found not giltye, through
bearing of friends and brybynge of the judge.

Where at the same sessions, another poor womanne was hanged for stealing a
few rags of a hedge, that were not worth a crown.

There was a certain gentle, man a professor of the word of God (he spedde
never the better for that ye may besure) whoo was accused for murtheryng of a man, where upon he was cast into prison. And by chance as he was in prison
one of his friends came unto him for to visit him, and he declared to his
friend that he was never gylty in the murtheryng of the man. So he went his
ways, the gentle man was arayned and condemned, and as he went to his
execusion, he saw his friends servant, and said unto him. Commend me to thy
master, and I pray the tell him, I am the same man still I was when he was with
me.

And if thou tarry a while, thou shall se me dye. There was suit made for this
man's pardon, but it could not be gotten. An evil Shirife may do some what
for his friend in a Shyre, he may help to hang up the gyltles.
Bilike the Shiriues or some other bare him no good will. But he dyed for it.
And afterward I being in the Tower, having leave to come to the
Lieuetenauntes table. I heard him say that there was a man hanged afterward,
that killed the same manne for whom this Gentle man was put to death. O Lord
what bearyng, what bolsteryng of naughtye matters is this in a Chrystian
realm? I desire your Majesty to remedy the matter, An Apostrophe to the
king for redress of learning and bolsterynge of naughty matters.
and God grant you to se a redres in this realm in your own person.

Although my Lord Protector I doubt not and the rest of the counsel do in
the mean while all that lies in them to redress things. I would such as
be rulers, A Godly aduertiseme^t for noble me^ and masters but I fear me it
is to Godly to be followed
noble men and masters should be at this point with their servants to certify
them on this sort. If any man go about to do you wrong I will do my best to
help you in your right. But if thou break the law thou shalt have justice.
If ye will be manquellers, murderers, and transgressoures, look for no bearing
at my hands. A strange thing. What need we in the vengaunce to burden our
selves with other me^nes sins? Have we not sins inowe of our own? what
neade have I to burden my self with other men's sins? I have burdens
and.ii. heaps of sins. One hepe of known sins, an other of unknown
sins. I hade need to say. Aboccultis meis mu^dame domine O Lord deliver me
from my hidden and my unknown sins,

Then if I bear with other men's sins, I must say Deliver me from my
other men's sins. A strange saying, from my other men's sins. Who
bears with other folks offenses, he communycateth with other folks sins.
Men have sins inoughe of their own, although they bear not and bolster up
other men in their naughtynes, this bearinge, this bolsteryng and lokyng
through their fingers: is naught. What the fair hap should I (or any else)
increase my burden. Mine other men's sins for give me o Lord. A strange
language they have hid sins of their own enough, although they bear not
with gyltines of other men's sins

Oh father Samuel would not bear his own sons. He offered his own sons
to punishment. And said. Ecce filli mei vobiscum sunt. Even at the first time
he said. Lo, here they be. I discharge my self, take them unto you, and as
for my part.

Prest^ sum loqui coram domino et Christo eius. I am here ready to answer for
my self, before the Lord and his anointed. Behold here I am, record of me
before the Lord. Vtrum cuiusqua^ bona. etc. Whether I have taken any man's ox,
any man's ass, or wether I have done any man wrong, or hurt any man, or
taken any bribes at any man's hand. I can commend the English traslation
that does interpret munera, bribes, not gifts. They answered, nay forsooth.
We know no such things in you. Testis est michi deus, says he, God is
witness, Quod nihil inueneritis in manu mea, That you have found naught in my
hands. Few such Samuels are in England nor in the world. Why did Samuel
this? marye to purge himself, he was enforced to it, for he was wro^gfullye
deposed.

The^ by this ye may perceive the fault of the Jews, for they offended not God
in askyng of a king, but for asking for a king to the wronging and desposicio^
of good father Samuel, If after Samuels death the people had asked of God a
king they had not faulted, but it is no small fault to put an innocente out
of his office. King Dauyd likewise commanded his people to be numbered, and
therewyth offended God greuouslye Why? might he not know the number of his
people? Yes, it was not the numbrynge of the people that offended God, for a
king may number his people, but he did it of a pride, of an elacion of mind,
not according to Gods ordinance, but as having a trust in the number of his
men, this offended God.

Likewise the Jews asked a king, and there with they offended not God. But
they asked him with such cyrcumstaunces, that God was offended with them.

It is no small fault to put a just man out of his office, and to depose
him unworthily.

To chose a King contraryinge the ordinance of God is a casting away of God
and not of a king.

Therefore doubt not, but the title of a king, is a lawefull thing, is a
lawefull title, as of other maiestrates. Only, let ye kings take heed, that
they do as it becomes Kings to do, that they do their office well. It is a
great thing, a chargeable thing. Let them beware that they do not.
Communicare peccatis alienis.

That they bear not with other men's faults for they shall give a strayte
accounte for all that perishes, through their necligence. We perceive now
what this text means.

It is written in the last of Iudicum. Iu diebus illis no^ erat rex in Israel.
In those days there was no king in Israel, every manne did that which seemed
right in his own eyes. Men were then allowed to do what they would. When men
may be allowed to do what they will, then is it as good to have no king at al.
Here is a wonderful matter, yt vnprechinge prelates should be suffered so long.
They can allege for them selves.vii C. years. This while the Realm had been
as good to have no king, likewise these brybing judges has been suffered of a
long time, and then it was, Quasi non fuisset rex in anglia. To suffer this is
as much to say. There is no king in England. Yt is the duty of a king to have
al states set in order to do their office. I have troubled you to long. I will
make an end brefly. Beati qui audi u^t verbu^ dei. Blessed be they yt here the
word of god, but so that they follow it, and keep it in credit, in memori, not
to deprave it and slander it, and bring the preachers out of credit, but that
follow it in their life, and live after it. He grant you all that blessinge
that made both you and me. Amen.

The sixte Sermon of Master Hughe Latymer, which he preached before the Kings
Majesty within his graces Palayce at Westminster the.xii. day of Apryll.
QVecunque scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Al things that are
written, they are written to be our doctrine. What doctrine is written for us
in the.viii. Chapter of the first book of the Kings, I did partelye show unto
you (most honorable audience) this day sennyght, of that good man father
Samuel, ye good judge how good a man he was, what helpers, and coadiutours,
he took unto him, to have his office well discharged. I toulde you also of the
wyckednes of his sons, how they took bribes, and lived wyckedlye, and by that
means, brought both their father, and them selves to deposition. And how the
people did offend God in askyng a King in father Samuelles time. And how
father Samuel was put from his office, who deserved it not. I opened to you
also, how father Samuel cleares him self, that he knew not ye fautes of his
sons he was no bearer with his sons, he was sorry for it, when he herd it,
but he would not bear with the^ in their wickedness. Filii mei vobiscu^ sunt my
so^s ar with you says he Do with them according to their deserts, I will not
maintain them, nor bear with the^. After that he cleares him self at the
kings fete, that the people had nothing to burden him with all, neither monye,
nor money worth. In treatinge of that part, I chanced to show you, what I
heard of a man that was slain, and I hear say it was not well taken.

For soth I entend not to empayre any man's estimacion or honestye, and they
that enforce it to that, enforce it not to my meaning, I said I heard, but of
such a thing, and took occasion by that, that I heard, to speak against the
thing, that I knew to be naught, that no man should bear with any man to
the mayntenaunce of voluntary and prepensed murder. And I hear say syns, the
man was other wise an honest man, and they that spoke for him, are honest
men. I am inclinable inoughe to credit it. I spoke not because I would have
any man's honestye impaired. Only I did as Saynct Paul did, Theprachers
are occasyoned by hering to invehe against such vice as ye people are infected
with as paul to the corinth. ye.i.x.xi. Cha.
who heerynge, of the Corinthyans, that there should be contencyons and
mysordre among them, did write unto them that he hard, and there upon by
occasion of heerynge he set furthe very wholesome doctrine of the supper of the
Lord. We might not have lacked that doctrine I tell you. Be it so the
Corinthians had no such contencyons among the^, as Paul wrote of, Be it so,
they had not misordred them selves, it was neither of, nor on, to that that
Paul said. The matter lay in that, that upon hearing he would take
occasion to set out the good and true doctrine. So, I did not affirm it to be
true that I hard. I spoke it to aduertis you, Why M. L. used this example and
to what end and purpose.
to be ware of bearinge, with wylful and prepensed murder. I would have nothing
enforsed against any man. This was mine intent and meaning. I do not know,
what ye call chaunche medly in the law, it is not for my study. Chance med^^.
I am a scholar in scripture in gods book, I study that. I know what voluntary
murder is before God. If I shall fall out with a man He is angrye with me, and I
with him, and lacking opportunity and place, Voluntary murder mystermed
chanche medly.
we shall put it of for that time, in the mean season I prepare my weapon, and
sharp it against a another time, I swell and boil in this passion toward
him. I seek him, we meddle together, it is my chance by reason my weapon is
better then his, and so fourth, to kyl him, I give him his deaths stroke, in
my vengeance and anger. This call I voluntarye murder in scripture, what it is
in the law I can not tell. It is agreate sin, and therefore I call it
voluntarye. I remember what a great Clarke writes of this.

Omne peccatu^ adeo est voluntarium, vt nisi sit voluntarium, non sit peccatum.
Every sin (says he) is so voluntarye, He means anstyn.
that if it be not voluntarye, it can not be called sin. Sin is no actual
sin, if it be not voluntarye. I would we would all know ou^e faults and
repent, that that is done, is done, it can not be called back again. God is
merciful, The time of repentance is here.
the King is merciful, hear we may repent, this is the place of
repentance When we are gone hence, it is to late then to repent. And let us
be content with such order as the magystrates shall take. But suer it is a
perilous thing to bear with any such matter. I toulde you what I hard say,
I would have no man's honestye empayred by my telling. I hard say since of
another murder, that a Spanyarde should kyl an English man, The spaniard that
killed ye Englyshman
and run him through with his sword: they say he was a tall man. But I here
it not that the Spanyarde was hanged for his labor. If I had, I would have
toulde you it to. They fell out. as the tale goes, a bont a whore. O Lord
what whordom is used now a days. As I here by the relacion of honest men,
which tell it not after a worldly sort, as though they reioysed at it, but
heauely, with heavy hertes how GOD is dyshonored by whordome in this city of
London. As abominable whordom used in london as ever was upon ye banck
Yea the bancke, when it stood, was never so commune. If it be true that is
toulde, it is marvel that it does not sinck, and that the earth gapeth not
and swalloweth it up. Let us fear the one and put no doubt but that the other
is to foul a tale to be a lie
It is wonderful that the City of London does suffer such whordom
unpunished. God has suffered long of his great lenity, mercy, and
benygnitie, but he will punish sharply at the length, if we do not repent.
There is sum place in London, There be places in London priueleged where
whoredom is haunted.
as they say: Immunitie, Impunitie. What should I call it? a pryueledged place
for whoredom. The Lord Mayer has nothing to do there, the Shiriffes, they
can not meddle with it. And the queste, A laulesse place of lyce^tiose lybertye.
they do not inquire of it and there men do bring their whores: yea, other
men's wives, and there is no reformacio^ of it.

There is such dysynge howses also, they say, Dysyng houses.
as has not been wont to be, where young Gentelmen dyse away their thrifte,
and where dysynge is, there are other folyes also For the love of God let
remedy be had, let us wrestele and strive against sin? Men of
England in times paste, when they would exercise them selves (for we must
needs have some recreacion, Shoting was wont to be ye old exercise of England
but the pastime is to paynful for our deyntye dys^rs.
our bodies can not endure without some exercise) they were wont to goo a
broad in the fyeldes a shootynge* but now it is turned in to glossing, gullyng,
and whoringe within the housse.

The art of shutyng has been in times past much esteemed in this realm,
Shoting has been set by in times past.
it is a gift of God that he has given us to excel all other nations with
all, It has been gods instrumente whereby he has given us many victoryes
against our enemies. Whoryng in the tounes in stead of shutyng in the
feeldes.
But now we have taken up whoryng in tounes, in stead of shutyng in the
feeldes. A wondrous thing, that so excellent a gift of God should be so
little esteemed. I desyer you my Lords, even as ye love the honor, and glory
of GOD, and entende to remove his indignacion, let there be sent fourth some
proclamacion, some sharp proclamacion to the justices of peace, for they do
not their duty. Justices now be no justices, there be many good acts made
for this matter already. Charge them upon their allegiaunce that this singular
benefit of god may be practiced, and that it be not turned into bollyng,
glossyng and whoryng within the towns, for they be negligente in excecutyng
these laws of shoting. In my time, my poor father, M. L. father taght him the
feayte of shoting in a long bow.
was as diligent to teach me to shote, as to learn me any other thing, and so
I think other men did their children. He taught me how to draw, how to
lay my body in my bow, and not to draw with strength of arms as other
nations do, but with strength of the body I had my bows boughte me according
to my age and strength as I increased in them, so my bows were made bigger,
and bigger, for men shall never sho^e well, except they be brought up in it.
It is a goodli art, a hol some kind of exercise, and much commended in
phisike. Shotyng is commended of Marcilius Phicinus.
Marcilius Phicinus in his book de triplici vita (it is a great while since I
red him now) but I remember he commends this kind of exercise, and says,
that it wresteleth a gaynste many kinds of diseases. In the reverence of God,
let it be continued. Let a Proclamation go fourth, chargynge the Justices of
Peace, that they se such Acts and statutes kept, as were made for this
purpose. I will to my matter. I intend this day to entreat of a piece of
scripture, written in the beginning of the fyft Chapter of Luke. I am
occasyoned to take this place by a book sent, to the Kings Mayestye that dead
is, by Master Pole. It is a text, Regynald Pole the Cardinal.
that he does greatelye abuse, for the supremicye. He rackes it, and vyolentes
it, to serve for the mayntenaunce of the bishop of Rome. And as he did enforce
the other place, that I entreated of last, so did he enforce this also, to
serve his matter. The storye is this.

Our Sauyoure Christ was come now to the bancke of the water of Genezareth.

The people were come to him, and flocked about him, to here him preach.

And Jesus took a boot that was standing at the poole, it was Symones bote,
Jesus sat in symones bote
and went into it. And sittyng in the boat he preached to them that were on
the bancke. And when he had preached and taught them, he spoke to Simon and bad
him launche out further into the deep, and louse his nets, to catch fyshe.
And Simon made answer, and said. Master, we have labored all night. but we
caught nothing how be it at thy commandment because thou byddeste us. we
will go to it again. And so they did, and caughte a great draught, a
myraculus draught so much that the net brake, and they called to their
fellows that were by, for they had two boots to come to healpe them, and they
came and filled both their boots so full, that they were nygh drounynge. This
is the storye: That I may declare this text so, that it may be to the
honor of God and edifycacion of your souls and mine both. I shall desyer
you to healpe me with your prayer in the which. etc.

Factum est autem. (Says the text) Cum turba irrueret in eum. In the.v. of
Luke.
Sayncte Luke tells the storye, and it came to pass, when the people preased
upon him, so that he was in peril to be cast into the pond they rushed so fast
upon him and made such throng to him. A wondrous thing, what a desire the
people had in those days to hear our sauyoure Christ preach, and the cause
may be gathered of the latter end of the Chapter that went before. iiij. of
Luke.
Our Savior Christ had preached unto them, and healed the sick folks of
such dyseases and maladyes as they had, and therefore the people would have
retained him still. But he made them answer, and said.

Et alijs ciuitatibus oportet me eua^ge lizare regnum dei, na^ in hoc missus
sum. I must preach the kingdom of GOD to other cities also, I must show the^
my fathers will: for I came for that purpose. I was sent to preach the word
of God. An example of Christ for our vnpreachinge prelates.
Our Savior Christ said, how he must not tarry in one place, for he was sent
to the world to preach every where. Is it not a maruaylous thing, that our
vnpreachyng prelates can read this place, and yet preach no more then they
do. I marvel, that they can go quyetly to bed, and se how he allureth the^
with his example, to be diligente in their, office. A godly lesson how our
Savior Christ fled from glory.
Here is a godly lesson also how our Sayuoure Christ fled from glory. If
these ambyciouse parsons, that climb to honor by by walks inordinatly, would
consider this example of Jesus christ, they should come to more honor the^ they
do: for when they seek honor by such by walks, they come to confusion honor
follows the^ that fle from it. Our savior Christ, Honor follows them ye fle
from it.
gat him away earlye in the morning, and went unto the wyldernes. I would
they would folow^ this example of Christ, and noc seek honor by such by
walks as they do. But wha^ did the people? when he had hyd him self, The
comen people smelled Christ out in the wilderness and followed him thither but so
did not the Scrybes ye Pharisees nor the Bishops.
they smelled him out in the Wylldernes, and came unto him by flocks, and
followed him a great nombre. But where reed you that a great number of
scrybes and Pharyses, and Bishops followed him. There is a doctoure that
writes of this place his name is Doctoure Gorrham, Nycolas Gorrham, I knew
him to be a school Docture agreate while a go. but I never knew him to be an
interpreter of scripture till now of late* he says thus, mayor deuocio in
laicis Vetulis quam in clericis etc. There is more devotion says he, in lay
folk, and old Wives, These simple folk* the vulgar people, the^ in the
clerks, they be better affected to the word of God, then those, that be of
the clergy, I maruayle not at the sentence, but I maruayle to find such a
sentence in such a doctor. If I should say so much, it would be said to
me, that it is an evil bird that defiles his own neste, and Nemo leditur
nisi a ^epso. There is no man hurt, but of his own self. There was veryfyed
the saying of our Sauoure Christ Which he spoke in an other place.
Vbicun^ue fuerit cada^^^, ibi eo^ gregabuntur a^nile. Wheresoever a dead
carionis, thither will ye egles gather. Our savior christ compares him self
to a dead^ carrion, Christ compares him self to a dead carrion
for where the carryon is there will the Egles be, and though it be an evil
smell to us and stinckes in a man's noose yet it is a sweet smelle to the
Egles, they will seek it out. So the the people sought out Christ, they smelt
his sauoure, he was a swet smell to them. He is. Odor nite aduitam. the smell of
life to life They flocked about him like Egles. Christ was the carrio^, and the
people were the Egles. They had no pleasure to hear the Scribes, and the
Pharisees they stanke in their nose, their doctrine was unsavory, it was but of
Loliones, of decimacio^s of Anets seade, and Cummyn and such gere. There was
no comfort in it forsore consciences ^es, there was no consolatyon for wounded
souls, there was no remedy for sins, The Pharisees doctrine was void of
remedy for sin.
as was in Christ's doctrine. His doctrine eased the burden of the soul, it
was sweet to the common people, and sower to ye Scribes. It was such comfort
and pleasure to them, that they came flockynge about him. Where fore came
they? Vt audire^t uerbu^ dei it was a good coming. They came to hear the word
of God. It was not to be thought that they came all of one mind to here the
word of GOD. It is likely that in so great a multitud some came of curiosity,
to here some nouelles, and some ca^ smelli^g a sweet savor, to have consolaon
and comfort of gods word, We can not be saved with out heryng (...) the word
(...) God.
for we cannot be saved without hering of the word. It is a necessary way to
salvation.

We can not be saved without fayeth, and fayeth comes by herynge of the
word. Fides exa^ ditu. And how shall they hear without a preacher? I tell
you it is the fotesteppes of the ladder of heaven, The fotesteppes of the
ladder of salvation.
of our salvation. There must be preachers if we look to be saved. I toulde you
of this gradacion before in the tenth to the Romans. Consider it well. I had
rather ye should come of a naughtye mind, to hear the word of God, for
novelty, or for curiosite to hear some pastyme, then to be a way. I had
rather ye should come as the tale is by the^ Gentylwoman of London. One of her
neighbors met her in the streate, and said mestres whether go ye, Marye
said she, I am going to S. Thomas of Acres to the sermon I could not sleep
al this last night, M. L exhortes them to resort to the herynge of sermons
notwtsta^dinge they purpose of their coming is not all of ye best.
and I am going now thither, I never failed of a good nap there. And so I had
rather ye should go a nappyng to the sermons, than not to go at al. For with
what mind so ever ye come, though ye come for an ill purpose, yet peradventure
ye may chance to be caughte or ye go, the preacher may chance to catch you
on his hoke. Rather then ye should not come at al, I would have you come of
curiosity, as Sayncte Augustyne came to hear Saint Ambrose. S. Augustine
came of curiosity to Millane to here Ambrose.
When Sayncte Augustyne came to Myllane, (he tells the storye him self in the
end of his book of confessio^s) he was very desirous to here S. Ambrose, not
for any love he had to the doctrine that he taught, but to here his eloquence,
whether it was so great, as the speech was and as the brute went. Well,
before he departed Sayncte Ambrose caught him on his hoke and converted him so,
that he became of a Manyche, and of a Platonist a good christen, S Agustine be
came of a Maniche a christian.
a defender of christ's religyon, and of the fayeth afterward. So I would
have you come to sermones, It is declared in many mo places of scripture, how
necessary preaching is, as this Euangelium est potentia dei. adsalutem omni
credenti. The preaching of the Gospel, is the power of god to every man that
does believe He means gods word opened It is the instrument, and the thing
whereby we are saved. Beware of diminishing the office of preaching.
Beware beware ye dyminyshe not this office, for if ye do, ye decay gods
power to all that do believe. Christ says consonaunte to the same. Nisiquis
renatus fuerit esuper ^is, non potest uidere regnum dei. Except a man be borne
again from above, he cannot se the kyngedome of God. He must have
a-regeneracion: and what is this regeneracyon? What is regeneracion or to be
borne from above
It is not to be Christened in water (as these fire brandes expound it) and
nothynyge else. How is it to be expounded the^? Saynct. Peter shows. That
one place of Scripture declares anothere. It is the circumstaunce, One place
of scripture declares another.
and collacyon of places that make scripture plain. Regeue^^ mur autem (says
Sayncte Peter) and we be borne again. How? Non ex semine mortali, sed
immortali. Not by a mortal sede, but by animmortall. What is this immortal
seade? persermone^ dei viuentis. By the word of the living God, How necessary
the office of preaching is to our salvation.
by the word of God preached and opened. Thus comes in our new birth. Here
you may se how necessary this office is to our salvation. This is the thing
that the devil wrastleth most against. Yt has been all his study to decay
this office. The devil is diligent to decai preaching
He works against it as much as he can he has prevailed to much, to much
in it. He has set up a state of vnpreachynge prelacye in this Realm
this.vii.c. year, A state of vnprechynge prelacy He has made vnpreachynge
prelates, He has styrred up by heaps to persecute this office in ye title of
heresy. He has sturred up the Magystrates to persecute it in the title of
sedicion. And he has styrred up the people to persecute it with exprobacions
and sclau^derous words, as by the name of new learnenynge strange
preacheynge: If a priest had left mass undone on a sunday he would have
though him self undone on mondaye.
and with impropriacions he has turned preaching in to private Masses. If a
priest should have left Mass undone On a sunday within these te^ years, all
England should have wondered at it, but they might have left of the
sermon.xx. sondayes and never have been blamed. Note the propostorous judgment
of the priests.
And thus by these impropriations private Masses were set up, and preparynge of
gods word trodden under foot. Bu^ what does he now? The devil be sterres him
still he is never idle though he be never mell occupied.
what does he now? he sturres me^ up to outrageous rearyng of rentes, that
pore me^ shall not be able to find their children at the schole to be divines.
What an unreasonable devil is this? he prouides a great while before hand for
the time that is to come. He has brought up now of late the most
monstrouse kind of covetousness that ever was heard of. A monstrous kind of
covetousness deui^ed by the devil these ferming of benefyces.
He has invented fee fermyng of benifices, and al to decay this office of
preaching, in so much that when any man hear after shall have a benefice, he
may go where he will for any house he shall have to dwell upon, or any glebe
land to keep hospitalytye withal, but he must take up a chamber in an Alehouse
and there sit and play at the tables all the day. The selling of benefices by
patrons perceived by the devil.
A good lie curate. He has caused also through this monstrous kind of
covetousness, patrones to sell their benefices. Yea what does he more? He gettes
him to the university, and causes great men, The diuil goes to the university
to teacy but not to learn.
and esquiers to send their sons thither, and put out poor scholars that
should be divines: for their parents ente^d not they shall be preachers, but that
they may have a show of learning. Tut it were to long to declare unto you what
desceite and means the devil has found to decay the office of salvation, this
office of regeneration. But to return to my matter. The people came to here ye
word of god, they hard him with I remember now a saying of Saint Chrysostom,
and peradventure it myghce come here after in better place, but yet I will take
it, whiles it comes to mind. The saying is this. Et loquentem eum audierunt
in silentio, seriem locucionis non interrumpentes. They herd him (says he) in
silence not interruptynge the order of his preaching. He means: they herd
him quyetlye, with out any shouelynge of feet, The misorder of walkers
Ianglers Ideltalkers shouelyng of feet hussynge and b^ssyng in time of ye
sermon is vsd in. Manchester as well as at london.
or walking up and down. Suerly it is an ill mysorder, that folk shall be
walkyng up and down in the sermon time) as I have seen in this place this
Lent) and there shall be such hussynge and bussynge in the preachers ear, that
it makes him often times to forget his matter. O let us consider the Kings
Maiestyes goodness, This place was prepared for bankettynge of the body, and
his Majesty has made it a Place for the comfort of the soul, and to have
the word of God preached in it, showing hereby that he would have all his
subjects at it, To whut end the Kings Grace orbeined the ba^^etinge place.
if it might be possible. Consider what the Kings Majesty has done for you,
he allows you all to here with him. Consider where ^e be. First ye ought to
have a reverence to Gods word, and though it be preached by poor men, yet
it is the same word that our Savior spoke. Consider also the presence of
the Kings Majesty Gods high vycare in earth, having a respect to his
personage, ye ought to have reverence to it, and consider that he is gods high
minister, and yet allows you al to be partakers with him, of the herynge of
gods word. This benefit of his, would be thankfully taken, and it would be
highli esteemed. Hear in silence, as Chrisosto^ says. It may chance that
sum in the company may fall sick, or be diseased. If therebe any such, let
the^ go away with silence, let the^ leave their salutacions till they come in
the court, let them d^parte with silence. I took occasion of Chrisostomes
words to admonish you of this thing.

What should be the cause, that our Savior Christ went into the boat? the
Scripture calls it. Nauis or nauicula. But it was no ship, it it was a
fyshers bote, they were not able to have a ship. What should be the cause, whi
he would not stand on the ba^ke and preach there, but he desired Peter to
draw the boat sumwhat from the shore into the mids of the water? What should
be the cause? Why Christ would rather go into the boat the^ stand upon the
la^d or the bank.


One cause was, for that he might sit their more co^modiously, then on the
bancke, an other cause was, for that he was like to be thrust into the pond of
the people yt came unto him. Whi? our savior Christ might have with stand
the^, An answer to a preuei objection the figure is called antipophora.
he was strong enough to have kept him self from thrustynge into the water. He
was stronger, the^ they al, and if he had listed he might have stand on the
water, as well as he walked on the water, truth it is, so might he have done
in deed. But as it was sometime his pleasure to show the power of his
Godheade, so he declared now the infirmity and imbecilitye of his manheade.
Hear he gives us an example what we shall do, we must not tempte God by any
miracles, God must not be tempted so long as we may work by ordinary means.
so long as we may walk by ordinary ways. As our Savior Christ when the
devil had him on the top of the temple, and would have had hyd him cast him
self down, he made him this answer. Non te^tabis dominu^ deum (...). Thou
shall not tempt thy lord God, as if he should have said, We may not tempte
God at all. It is no time now to show any miracles, there is an other way to
go down, by gresinges. Thus he did to show us an example, that we must not
tempte God, We must not tempte god.
except it be in extreme necessitye, and when we cannot other ways remedy the
matter to leave it all to God, else we may not tempte the majesty of his
^^yte. Beware temptynge of God? well, he commes to Symons boot, and why rather
to Symons bote then an another. Why Christ came into Simo^s bote rather the^
into any other.
I will answer, as I find in experience in my self. I came hither to day,
from Lambeth in a whirry and when I came to take my bote, the water me^ came
about me (as the manner is) and he would have me, and he would have me. I took
one of them* Now ye will ask me why, I came in the boat, rather the^ in
another, because I would go in to tha^ that I se stand nex^e me, it stood
more commodiouslye for me. And ^o did Christ by Simons bote. It stood nerer
for him, he saw a better seat in it. A good natural reason. Now come the
papystes, and they will make a mystery of it, they will pyke out the supremesy
of the Bishop of Rome in Peter's bote. We may make allegoryes inoughe of every
place in scripture, A simple matter that stands upon so weak agru^d
but suerly, it must needs be a simple matter that standeh on so weke a
ground. But ye shall se further. He desired Peter to thruste out his bote
from the shore. He desired him. Hear was a good lesson for the Bishop of
Rome, and al his college of Cardinals to learn humilitye and gentelnes.
Rogabateum. He desired him it was gently done of him, with out any austeritie,
A good lesson of humilitye.
but with all vrbanitye, wyldnes, and softnes, and humility. What an example
is this, that he gives them hear? but they spy it not, they can se nothing
but the supremycye of ye Bishop of Rome. A wounderous thing, what syghte
they have. They se nothing but the supremicie of the Bishop of Rome.
Imperabatis onibus meis. says Ezechiel Cum anaxicia, et austeritate, et
disperse sunt absque pastore.

Ye have ruled my sheep and commanded them with great lordlynes, austeritye,
and power, and thus ye have dispersed my sheep a broad, and why? There was no
shephard, they had wanted one a great while Rome has been many a hundred
years without a good shepard. How the bishop of Rom rule and reign over the
people.
They would not learn to rule the^ ge^tly, they hade rule over the^, but it was
with curssyngs exco^municacions, with great aust^rite, and thu^derboltes, and
the devil and all, to maintain their vnpreachynge prelacye. I beseech God
open their ^yes, yt they may se the truth, and not be blinded with those
things, that no man can se but they. It follows in the text. Sedens doc^ bat
de naui. He taught sitting. Preachers be like, The precher vseht to syite.
were sitters in those days, as it is written in a another place. S^dent in
cathedra moisis. They sit in the chair of Moses.

I would our preachers would preach sittyng or slandynge, one way, or
other. It was a goodly pulpyt that our Savior Christ had gotten him here.
And old rotten bote. Christ regards the people more the^ the pulpyt.


And yet he preached his fathers will, his fathers message out of this pulpyt.
He cared not for the pulpit, so he might do the people good. In deed it is to
be commended for the preacher to stand, or sit, as the place is, but I would
not have it so supersticiously esteemed, The word of god may be preached in any
convenient place where yt may be herd.
but y^ a good preacher may declare the word of god sitting on a horse or
preaching in a ^re. And yet if this should be done the vnpreachinge prelattes
would laughe it to skorne.

And though it be good to have the pulpit set up in churches, that the people
may resort thither, yet I would not have it so supersticiously used, but that
in a profane place the word of God might be preached some times, and I would
not have the people offended with all, no more then they be with our Savior
Christ's preaching out of a boat. And yet to have pulpettes in churches it is
very well done to have them, but they would be ocupyed, for it is a vain
thing to have them as they stand in many churches. A merry tale and a true of a
bishop going on visyacyon.
I hard of a Bishop of England that went on visitacion (and as it was the
custom) when the Bishop should come and be runge into the town, the great
b^lles clapper was fallen down, the tyall was broken, so that the Bishop
could not be runge into the town. There was a great matter made of this, and
the chyfe of the paryshe were much blamed for it in the visitacion, Mary sir I
t^ow yt was a matter to be angry for y^ would have made amad bishop to have
hursed away his myter.
The Bishop was some what quick with them, and sygnyfyed that he was much
offended. They made their aunsweres, and excused them selves, as well as they
could, it was a chance, said they, that the clapper brak and we could not
get it mended by and by, we must tarrye till we can have it done? It shall be
amended as shortelye as mayc be. Among the other there was one wyser then the
rest and he commes me to the Bishop. Why my Lord says he, The pulpit yt
lackyd his clapper.
does your lordshyp make so great a matter of the hell, that lacks his
clapper? here is a bell (says he) and poynted to the pulpit, yt has lacked a
clapper this.xx. years. We have a person that fetteth out of this benefyce
fyftye pound every year, Though the bishop was no preacher, yet peradventure
he cold baptyse a bell as well as ye best of them.
but we never se him. I warrau^te you the Bishop was an vnpreachyng prelate. He
could find fault with the bell, that wanted a clapper, to ring him into the
town, but he could not find any fault with the person that preached not at his
benefyce. Ever this office of preaching has been least regarded, it has
skante had the name of gods service. They must sing. Salua festadies about
the church, that no man was the better for it, So do fools in christynmas,
but these are no small fools.
but to show their gaye cotes, and garmenttes. I came once my self to a
place, riding on a iornay homewarde from London, and I sent word over night
into ye town that I would preach there in the morning because it was
holydaye, and me thought it was an holy days work. The church stood in my
way, and I took my horse, and my company, and went thither, I thought I
should have found agreat company in the church, and when I came there, the
church door was fast locked. I tarried there half an hour and more, at last
the keye was found, and one of the paryshe commes to me and says. Sir this is
a busye day with us, we can not hear you, it is Rodyn hoodes day. The
paryshe are gone a broad to gather for Robyn hoode, I pray you let them not.
Robyn hode would not give M. latemer leave to preach,
I was feign there to give place to Robyn hoode. I thought my rochet should
have been regarded, though I were not, but it would not serve, it was feign
to give place to Robyn hoodes men.

It is no laughing matter my friend, it is a weeping matter, a heavy matter, a
heavy matter under the pretense for gatherynge for Robyn hoode, a traytoure,
and a thief, to put out a preacher, to have his office less esteemed, to prefer
RoRobyn hoode before the ministracio^ of Gods word and all this has come of
unpreaching prelates. This Realm has been ill provided for, that it has had
such corrupt judgments in it, to prefer Robyn hood to gods word. If the
Bishops had been preachers, there should never have been any such thing,
but we have a good hope of beteer. We have had a good beginning, I beseech God
to continewe it. But I tell you, it is far wide, Some bishops would have
the people to continue in ingnoraunce still.
that the people have such judgments, the Bishops they could laughe at
it. What was that to them? they would have them continue in their ignorance
still, and them selves in vnpreachyng prelacye. Well, sitting, sitting. He
satte down and taught. A good place of scripture for a papyst to buyld ^ogth
upon nothing.
The text does tell us that he taught, but it does not tell us what he
taught. If I were a papist I could tell what he said. I would in the Popes
judgment show what he taught. For the Bishop of Rome has in scrimio
pectoris sui. The true understanding of Scriptures If he call a counsel, the
college of Cardinals, he has authority to determyne the supper of the
Lord, as he did at ye counsel of Florence.

And Pope Nicolas, and Bishop Langfrancke shall come and expound this place,
and say, that our Savior Christ, said thus. Peter I do mean this by
sitting in thy bote that thou shalt goo to Rome, and be Bishop there five
and twenty years, after mine ascension. And all thy successors shall be
rulers of ye universal church after the. Here is nogth upon nothing.
Hear would I place also holy water, and hollye bread, and al unwritten
verites, if I were a Papyste, and that Scripture is not to be expoundyd by any
private interpretacion, but by our holy father, and his college of
Cardinals.

This is a great deal better place then. duc in altum. But what was Coristes
sermon? it may sone be gathered what it was. He is always like him self.

His first Sermon was. penite^ci^m agite, The state of christ's first sermon.
Do pennaunce, your living is naught, repent. Again at Nazareth, when he
read in the temple and preached remission of sins, and healynge of woundyd
consciences, and in the long sermon in the mount, he was always like him
self, he never dissented from him self. O there is a writer has a ioylie
text here and his name is Dionisimus. I chanced to meat with his book in my
Lord of Caunterberyes lybrarye: A text of one Dionisius. Rikel a monk of the
charter house.
he was a Monk of the charterhouse. I m^ruayle to find such a sentence is
that author. What taugth Christ in this sermon? Mary says he, it is not
written* And he adds more unto it Euangeliste tantum scripser^^^ de
ser^^onibus et miraculis cristi, quantum ^^gnonerunt inspirante deo sufficere
ad edificacionem ecclesie ad confirmacione^ fidei, et ad salutem animarum. It
is true it is not written. Al his miracles were not written, so neither were
all his sermons written, yet for all yt the eua^gelistes did write so much as
was necessary. They wrote so much if the miracles and sermons of Christ as
they knew by gods inspiracion to be sufficient for y^ edifiyng of the
church, The englysh of the lattine text before.
the co^firmacion of our fayeth, and the health of our souls. If this be
true as it is in deed* where be on written verities? I marvel not at the
sentence but to find it in such an author. Jesus what authoriti he gives to
gods word. But GOD would that such men should be witness with the
auctoritye of his book, will they nyll they.

Now to draw toward an end. It follows in the text. duc in altum. Here
comes in the supremicye of the Bishop of Rome. When our Savior Christ had
made an end of his sermon and had fed their souls, Christ prouides for the
body as well as for the soul.
he provided for their bodies. First he began with the soul. Christ's word is
the fode of it. Now he goes to the body, he has charge of them bo^th: we
must commit the fedynge of the body and of the soul to him. Well, he says
to Peter. duc in altum. Launche into the depth, put forth thy bote farther into
the deep of the water. Lose your nets, now fyshe. As who should say,
your souls are now fed, I have taught you my doctrine, now I will confirm
it with a miracle. Christ confi^red his doctrine with miracles.
Lo sir here is duc in altum. Here Peter ^as made a great man say ^he
Papystes, and all his successors after him. And this is derived of these few
words. Launch into the deep. And their argument is this: he spoke to Peter
only, A faint and a feeble argument.
and he spoke to him in the syngulare number, ergo he gave him such a
preeminence a boue the rest. A goodly argument, I wene it be a sillogismus in
quem terra pontus. I will make a like argumce^, Our Savior Christ said to
Judas, when he was about to betraye him quod fac citius. Now when he spoke to
Peter there were none of his disciples by, but James and John, but when he
spoke to Judas they were all present. Well, he said un. ot him. quod sacis fac
citius. Sped thy busynes, yt thou have in thy head, do it, He gave him here a
secret monicion, that he knew what he intended, if Judas had had grace to have
taken it and repented. He spoke in the singular number to him, ergo he gave him
some preeminence. A good ground for the College of Cardinals.
By like he made him a Cardynall, and it might full well be, for they have
followed Judas ever sens. Here is as good a ground for the Coledge of
Cardinals, as the other is for the supremitie of the Bishop of Rome. Our
Savior Christ (say they) spoke only to Peter for preeminence, because he was
chief of the Apostles, and you can show none other cause, Ergo this is the
cause why he spoke to him in the syngular number. I dare say there is never a
whirrima^ at Westminster bridge but he can answer to this, and give a natural
reason of it.

He knows that one man is able to shoue the boat* but one man was not able to
cast out the nets, Why christ spoke in the plural number and whyrin the
syngular.
and therefore he said in the plural number, larate retia Louse your nets?
and he said in the syngular number to Peter, launch out the boat. why? because
he was able to do it.

But he spoke the other in the plural number, because he was not able to
conuaye the boat, and cast out the nets to. One man could not do it. This
would the whirry man say, and that with better reason, then to make such a
mystery of it, Christ sends not food and living without labor.
as no man can spy but they. And the cause why he spoke to all, was to show
that he will have all Christian men to work for their living. It is he that
sendes food both for the body, and soul, but he will not send it, without
labor. He will have all Christen people to labor for it, he will use our
labor as a mean whereby he sends our food. This was a wounderous miracle
of our Savior Christ. and did it not only to allure them to his
discipleshippe, but also for our commoditye. It was a seal, a seal, to seal
his doctrine with all. Now ye know that such as be kepars of seals, Kepars
of seals has their sealyng times.
as my Lord Chauncelour and such other, what so ever they be, they do not all
ways seal, they have a sealynge time (For I have herd poor men complain,
that they have been put of from time to time of sealynge, When christ's
doctrine was sufficintelye sealed
till all their monye were spent, and as they have times to seal in, so our
Savior Christ had his time of sealinge. When he was here in earth, with his
Apostlees, and in the time of the primitive church, Christ's doctrine was,
sufficientelye sealed already with seals of his own making, what should our
seals do? What need we to seal his seal? it is a confirmed doctrine already.
O luther, when he came into the world first, Luter had sumwhat to do in his
time.
and disputed against the decretales, the Clementines, Alexandrines,
Extrauagantines, what a do had he. But ye will say paraduenture he was
deceived in some things, I will not take upon me to defend him in all pontes. I
will not stand to it, They called upon Luther to do miracles.
yt all that he wrote was true, I think he would not so him self. For there is
no man, but he may erie. He came to further and further knowledge, (but suerly
he was a goodly instrument) Well I say when he preached first they called upon
him to do miracles, they were wrought before, And so we need to do no miracles.
In deed when ye popish prelates preached first, What kind of miracles the
papysh had.
they had need of miracles, and the devil wroughte some in the preaching of
purgatory. But what kind of miracles these were, all England does know,
but it will not know. A wounderfull thing, that the people will contynewe in
their blyndnes and ignorance still. We have great utility of the miracles of
our savior Jesus Christ. What profet we have of christ's miracles.
He does signifye unto us, by this wonderful work, yt he is Lord as well of
y^ water as of the la^d. A good comfort for those yt be on y^ water when they
be in any tempest or danger to call upon him. The fish here came at his
commandment. Here we may learn that all things in the water are subject
to Christ. Peter said, Sir, we have labored all night, and have not caught
one fynne, how be it at your word we will to it a fresh. By this it
appears that the gain, the lucre, Our luker and gaynes must be imputed to
god and not to our labor.
the revenues that we get, must not be imputed to our labor, we may not
say, gramercy labor it is not our labor, it is our savior Christ that
sends us living, yet must we labor, for he that said to Peter labor,
and he that bad the fyshers labor, biddes all men to labor in their
business. There be some people that ascrybe their gaynes, their increase, gotten
by any facultye, to the devil. Is there any trow ye in England would say so?
Now if any man should come to an other, and say he gat his living by the
dyuell, he would fall out with him. Who gettes their living by the dyuell.
There is not a man in England that so says, yet is there some that thyncke
it. For all yt get it with false biyng and sellyng, with circumuention, with
usury, impostures, myxte wares, false waightes, deceyuynge their Lords and
masters, all those, that get their goods on this fashion, what do they
thyncke, but that the devil sendes them gaynes and rytches. For they be his
(being vnlawefully gotten) What is this to say, but that the dyuell is aucthour
of their gaynes when they be so gotten? For God inhabites them deus nou uolens
iniquitatem tues. God will no iniquite. Sum impute all their gaynes to there
labor.
These folk ar greatly deceived. There be some again impute all to their
labors and works.

Yea, on the hollye day, they can not find in their hertes to come to the
Temple, to the blessed communion, they must be working at home. These are wide
again on the otherside. And some there be yt think, if they work nothing at
all, they shall have enough, We must work, God geues not meat in our mouths
for gapyng.
they will have no good exercise, but gape and think yt god will send meat in
to their mouths, and these are as fare wide: they must work, he had ye
fishers work. Our Savior Christ bad Peter work, and he that said so to
them, says the same to us, every man in his art. benedictio dei sacit diuitem.

The blessing of God makes a man rich. He lettes his son shine upon the
wicked, as well as upon the good, he sendes riches boeth to good and bad.

But this blessing turns to them into a malediction and a curse, it encreseth
their damnacion. Saint Paul writing to the Tessalonians, did put an order
how every man should work in his vocacion. Cum essemus apud vos, hoc
precipiebamus vobis, vt si quis nollet operari, is nec edat.

When I was among you (says he) I made this ordinance, that whosoever would
not do the work of his vocation, should have no meat. It were a good
ordinance in a common weal, that every man should be set on work, every
man in his vocacion. Let him have no mete. Now he says furthermore.
Audiuimus quos dam inter nos versantes inordinate, nihel operis facientes. I
here say there is some amongst you yt lives inordinatlye. What is ye word
inordinatlye? ydellye, geuynge them selves to no occupacion for their lyuinge.
Curiose agentes. Curiouse men, given to curiositye, to searchynge what other
men do. Saynct Paul says, he hard say, he could not tell whether it were
so or no But he took occasion of hearing say, to set out a good and wholesome
doctrine. His autem qui sunt eiusmodi precipimus, et obsecramus. We command
and desire you for the reverence of God, if there be any such, that they will
do ye worckes of their vocacion, and go quietly to their ocupation, and so eat
their own bread, else it is not their own, it is other men's meat. Our
Savior Christ before he began his preaching, lived of his occupacio^, he was
a carpenter, and gat his living with great labor.

Therefore let no man dysdayne, or think skorne to follow him in a mean
living, a mean vocacion, or a common calling and occupacyon. For as he
blessed our nature with taking upon him the shape of man, so in his doing he
blessed al occupacio^s and arts. This is a notable example to signifye yt he
abhorres all idleness. When he was a Carpentar, then he went, and did the work
of his calling, and when he was a preacher he did the works of that calling.
He was no vnpreachyng prelate. The Bishop of Rome should have learned that
at him. And these gayners with false arts what be they? They are never
content with that yt they have, though it be never so much. And they that
are true dealers, ar satisfied with that ye God sendes, though it be never so
little. Qu^^tus magnus pietas, cum animo sua sort cont^nto. Godliness is great
gain, It is lucre enough, it is vantage enough to be content with that, that
God sednes. The faithful can not lack, the unfaithful is ever lacking,
though he have never so much. I will now make an end. labores mannu^ tuarum.
Let us al labor, Christ teaches us to labor, yea the Bishop of Rome hyme
self, he teaches him to labor, rather then to be hedde of the church. Let us
put our trust in God. Lubores manuum tu^rum. Cast thy care upon ye Lord and he
will noryshe the and feed the. Again the prophet says. Numquam uidi iustum de
relictum nec semen eius querens panem.

I never saw the ryghttuouse man for saken, nor his seed to seek his bread.
It is infidelytie, infidelitye that marres all to gether.

Well to my text. Labores manuum tuarum quia manducabis, beatus et been tibi
erit. Because thou eatest thy labors of thy hands, that, yt God sendes the of
thy labor. Every man must labor, yea though he be a king yet he must
labor, for I know no man has a greater labor then a King. What is his
labor? To study gods book, to see yt there be no vnpreachynge prelates in
his realm, nor bribing Judges, t^ se to all estates, to provide for the poor,
to se vittailes goodchepe. Is not this a labor trow ye? thus if thou doste
labor, exercisynge the worckes of thy vocacyon, thou eatest the meat that
God sendes the, and then it follows. Beatus es^ Thou art blessed manne in
Gods favor, Et been tibi rit. And it shall go well with the in this world,
both in body and soul, Provision both for the body and the soul*
for God prouides for both. How shall thou provide for thy soul? Go here
sermons. How for the body? Eabour in thy vocation, and then shall it be well
with the, both here and in the world to come through the faith and merits of
our savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and the holy ghost, be praise
for ever and ever, world with out end. Ame^. The end of the.vi. Sermon.

The seventh Sermon of Master Hughe Latymer, which he preached before the
Kings Majesty within his graces Palayce at Westminster the xix.. day of
Apryll.
QVecunque scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Al things that be
written, they be written to be our doctrine. By occasion of this text (most
honorable audience) I have walked this Lent in the broad filde of scripture
and used my liberty, and entreated of such matters as I thought, mete for
this auditory. I have had a do with many estates even with the highest of all*
I have entreated of the duty of Kings, of the duty of magestrates, and
Judges, of the duty of prelates, alowyng that yt is good and disalowyng the
contrary. I have taught that we are all sinners, Al are sinners and have
offe^did he that is best may well be amendyd.
I think there is none of us al, neither preacher, nor hearer but we may be
amended, and redress our lives, We may all say, yea all the pack of us,
peccauimus cum patribus nostris. We have offended and sinned with our
forefathers. In multis offendimus omnes. There is none of us all, but we have
in sundry things grievously offended almyghtye God. I here entreated of many
fautes and rebuked many kinds of sins. I intend to day by Gods grace,
to show you the remedy of sin. We be in the place of repentance, now is the
time to call for mercy, whiles we be in this world. The remedy of sin.
We be all sinners, even the best of us all. Therefore it is good to here the
remedy of sin. This day is comonlye called good Friday, although eueri day
ought to be with us good friday, Yet this day we are accustomed specially to
have a commemoratio^ and remembrance of the passion of our savior Jesus
Christ. This day we have in memory his bitter Passion and death, which is the
remedy of our syn. Therefore, I intend to entreat of a piece of a story of his
passion. I am not able to entreat of all. That I may do, that the better, and
that it may be to the honor of God and ye edification of your souls and
mine both, I shall desire you to pray etc. In this prayer, I will desire you to
remember the souls departed, with lauds and praise to almighty God, that he
would vouchsafe to assyste them at the hour of their death In so doing, you
shall be put in remembrance to pray for your selves, that it may please GOD
to assyste and comfort you in the agonies and pains of death.

The place that I will entreat of is in the.xxvi. Chapter, xx.vi. of Mat
Luke. xxii. Mark. xilii.
of Saynct Mathewe, How be it, as I entreat of it I will borrowe part of
Sayncte Mark and saynct Luke, for they have somewhat, that saynct Matthew has
not, and especially Luke. The text is, Tunc cu^ uenisset Jesus in uillam que
dicitur gethsemani. then when Jesus ca^e, some have in nillo^ some in agrum,
some in prediu^, But it is allone, when Christ came in to a Grau^g, into a
peace of la^d, into a field, it makes no matter, call it what he will: at what
time he had come into an honest man's house, and there eaten his pascall lamb,
and instituted and celebrated the lords supper, and set forth the blessed
communion, then when this was done, he took his way to the place, where he
knew Judas would come. It was a solitarye place and thither he went with his
leaven Apostles. For Judas the twelfte was about his business, Judas did not
sleep nor forslowth his business.
he was occupied about his marchaundyse, and was prouydyng among the bishops
and preistes, to come with an imbushement of Jews to take our savior Jesus
christ.

And when he was come into this feeld, or graunge, this village, or ferme
place, which was called Gethsemani, Christ left.viii of his Disciples without
the garden appoyntynge them what to do the whiles he went to pray.
there was a Garden says Luke, into the which he goes, and leaves.viii. of his
disciples without, howbeit he appointed the^ what they should do. He says. Sedete
hic, donec nada^ il luc, et ore^. Sit you here whiles I go yonder and pray. He
told the^ that he went to pray, to monysh the^ what they should do, to fall to
prayer as he did. He left the^ there, and took no more with him but.iii.
Peter, James, and Iho^, A solitarye ^lace is mete for prayer.
to teach us that a solitari place is mete for prayer. Then when He was come
into this garden, cepit expauescere. He began to trimble, in so much he said,
Tristis est anima mea vsque ad morte^. Mi soul is heavy and pensive, even
unto death. A notable place to remember christ's doings for us.
This is a notable place, and one of the most especial and chefest of all that
be in the story of the passion of Christ. Here is our remedy. Here we must
have in consideracion, all his doings, and sayings, for our learning, for
our edificacion, for our comforth, and consolation.

Christ did appoint his three Disciples to an order.
First of al he set his three Disciples that he took with him in an order, and
toulde them what they should do, saying. Sedete hic et uigilate mecum et
orate.

Sit here, and pray that ye enter not into te^ptacio^, but of that I will
entreat afterward. Now when he was in ye garden, cepit ex pauescere He began
to be heavy, pensive, heavy herted. I like not Oregenes plaing with this word
cepit, it was a perfect heaviness it was such a one as was never seen the
greater, How doctors are to be esteemed.
it was not only ye beginning of a sorrow. These doctors, we have great cause
to thank God for the^, but yet I would not have the^ always to be allowed.
They have handled many points of our faith very godly, and we may have a
great stay in the^ in many things, we might not well lack the^, but yet I
would not have me^ to be sworn to the^, and so adicte as to take hand over
head whatsoever they say, it were a great inconvenience so to do Well, let us go
forward. He took Peter, James and John into this garden. And why did he take
them with him, rather then other? marye those that he had taken before, to whom
he had reveled in the hill, the transfiguracyon and declaracyon of his deytye,
to se the reuelacyon of the majesty of his Godhede: now in the garden he
reveled to the same the infirmitye of his manhood, because they had tasted of
the sweet, he would they should taste also of the sower. He took these with him
at both times, for two or three is enough to bear witness. And he began to be
heavy in his mind. He was greatly vexed within him self, he was sore
aflycted, it was a great heaviness, he had been heavy many times before, and
he had suffered great afflictions in his soul, as for the blyndenes of the
Jews, and he was like to suffer mo panges of pain in his body. But this
pange was greater then any he ever suffered, yea, it was a greater tormente
unto him, I think a greater pain then when he was hanged on the cross, then
when the stower nails were knocked and driven through his hands and fete,
then when the sharp crown of thorns was thruste on his head. This was the
heaviness and pensiuenes of his heart, the agony of the spirit. And as the
soul is more precious then the body: even so is the pain of ye soul is more
grievous then the pains of the body. Therefore there is another which writes.
horror mortis graui or ipsa morte. The horror and vgsomnes of death is sorer
then death it self. This is ye most grievous pain, that ever christ suffered,
even this pange, that he suffered in the garden. It is the most notable place
one of the^ in the whole story of ye passion, when he said. Anima me a
tristis est vsque ad mortem. My soul is heavy to death. And cum cepisset
expauescere and when he began to quyuer, to shake. The greuousnes of it is
declared by his prayer that he made.

Pater sipossibile est etc. Father if it be possible, a way with this cup, rid
me of it. He understood by this cup, his pains of death. For he knew well
enough yt his passion was at hand, that Judas was come upon him with the Jews
to take him. There was offered unto him now the Image of death, the Image, the
sense the, ye feeling of hell, for death and hell go both to gether. I will
entreat of this Image of hell, which is death. Truly no man can show it
perfectlye yet, I will do the best I can to make you understand the greuouse
panges that our Sauyoure Christ was in, when he was in the garden, as man's
power is not able to bear it, so no ma^s tongue is able to express it.
Paynters painte death like a man without skin, and a body having nothing but
bones, And hell they painte with, horible flames bre^ning fire, they bungell some
what at it they come nothing nere it But this is no true payntynge. No paynter
can paynte hell unless he could paynte the torment and condemnatyon both of
body and soul, ye possession and having of all in feliticie. This is hell, this
is ye Image of death, this is hell, such an evil favored face, such an vgsome
countenance, such an horrible vysage our savior Christ saw of death and
hell in the garden. There is no pleasure in beholdynge of it, but more pain
the^ any tongue can tell. Death and hell took unto them this evil favored
face of sin, and thorough sin. This sin is so hyghlye hated of Good, that
he does pronounce it worthy to be punished with lack of alfelycitie, with the
fealyng of infelicitie. Death and hell be not only the wages, the reward, ye
stipe^d of sin, but they are brought into ye world by sin, per peccatu^ mors
says S. Paul, through sin death entered into the world. Moses shows the
first coming in of it into the world: Where as our first father Ada^ was set
at liberty to live for ever, yet God inhibytynge him from eating of the
Apple, told him, If thou meddle with this fruit, thou and all thy posteritye
shall fall into necessity of death from ever living, morte morieris. thou and
all thy posteritye shall be subject to death, here came in death and hell.
Sin was their mother. Therefore they must have such an Image as their mother
sin would give them. An vgsome thing and an horrible Image must it needs
be that is brought in by such a thing so hated of God, yea, this face of death
and hell is so terryble, that such as has been wicked men hade rather be
hanged than abide it. The example of Achitophel which hanged him self.
As Achytophell that trayroure to David like an ambycyouse wretch thought to
have come to higher promocyon, and therefore co^spired with Absolon against his
master David. He, when he saw his counsel took no place, goes and hanges him
self, in contemplacion of this evil favored face of death. Judas also when he
came with pushementes to take his master Christ in beholdynge this horrible
face, hanged him self.

Yea the elect people of God, the faithful having the beholdynge of this
face, (though God has always preserved them, such a good God he is to them
that believe in him, that he will not suffer them to be tempted above that, that
they have been able to bear) yet for all that, there is nothing that they
complain more sore then of this horror of death. Go to Job. What says he?
Job cursed ye day of his death when he did inwardly behold ye horror of death
Pereat dies in quo natus sum, suspendiu^ elegit anima mea. Woe worth ye day
that I was borne in, my soul would be hanged, saying in his panges almooste he
wyste not what. This was when with the eye of his conscience, and the inward
man he be held the horror of death and hell, not for any bodylye pain that he
suffered, for when he had byles, botches, blaynes, and scabbes, he suffered
them patiently, he could say then: Si bona suscepi de manu Domini. etc.

If we have received good things of God, why should we not suffer likewise
evil? Why Job was vexed.
It was not for any such thing, that he was so vexed, but the sight of this
face of death and hell, was offered to him so lively that he would have been
out of this world. It was this evil favored face of death that so troubled
him. King David also said, in contemplacio^ of this vgsome face. Laboraui in
gemitu meo. I have been sore vexed with sighyng and mourning. Turbatus est a
furore oculus meus. Mine eye has been greatly troubled in my rage. A straun^
thing, when he had to fight with Goliath that monstrous giante, David feared
not Goliath the monstrous giant but he fears death.
who was able to have eaten him, he could a bide him, and was nothing a
frayed and now what a work? what exclamacions makes he at the syghte of
death? Jonas feared not ye sea but he feared death.
Jonas likewise was bold inoughe, to bid the shypmen cast him into the sea, he
had not yet seen that face and vysage, but when he was in the Whales belly, and
had there the beholdynge of it, what terror and distress abode he? Ezechias
when he saw Senacherib beseigynge his city on every side most violentlye,
Ezechias feared not the mighty Army of Senacherib but he feared death.
was nothing a frayde of the great host and mighty army that was like to
destroy him out of hand, yet he was a frayed of death. When the Prophet
came unto him, and said: iiij. of the kings the.xx.
Dispone domini tue, morte morieris, et non vines.

It stroke him so to the heart that he fell a weeping. O Lord what an horror was
this? There be some writers that says that Peter, James and Ihon, were in this
feeling at the same time and that Peter when he said: Exi a me domine quia
homo peccator su^. Did taste some part of it he was so astonyshed, he wist not
what to say. It was not long that they were in this anguyshe, some says
longer, some shorter but Christ was ready to comfort them, and said to Peter.

Ne timeas, Be not afraied. A fre^d of mine told me of a certain woman, that
was.xviii. years to gether in it. Ly^le (...) the (...) had wo^^full co^^^^^
in his (...)*
I knew a man my self Bilney, little Bilnei, that blessed martyr of GOD, what
time he had borne his fagott, and was come again to Cambrydge had such
conflyctes, within him self, beholdynge this Image of death, that his friends
were a frayed to let him be alone, they were feign to be with him day and
night, and comforted him as they could, but no comfortes would serve. As for
the comfortable places of scripture to bring them unto him, it was as though
a man would run him through the heart with a sweard. Yet afterward all
this he was revived, and took his death patiently, Byluey took his death
patiently.
and dyed well against the Tirannical sea of Rome. Woe, will be to that bishop
that had the examynacyon of him, if he repented not. Here is a good lesson for
you my fryendes. If ever ye come indaunger, induraunce, in prison for gods
quarrel. and his sake, (as he did for purgatory matters, A god leasson for
such as are in prison for ye words sake.
and put to bear a faggot for preaching the true word of God against
pilgremage and such like matters) I will advise you first and above al thing to
abjure al your fryendes, all your frindeshipe, leave not one vnabiured, it is
they that shall undo you, and not your enemies. It was his very friends, that
brought Bylnye to it. By this it may somewhat appear what our savior Christ
suffered, he does not dissemble it him self, Christ was in Agonye.
when he says, my soul is heavy to death, he was in sosore an Agony, that
there issued out of him as I shall entreat anon, drops of blood, and vgsome
thing suerly, which his fact and deed shows us, what horrible pains he was
in for our sakes. But you will say, how can this be? It were possible that I
and such other, An answer to an obiectyon concerning Christ's affliction and
tormentyng.
as be great sinners should suffer such affliction. The son of God, what
our Savior Christ? never sinned, how can this stand that he should be
this handeled? he never deserved it. Mary I will tell you how we must consider
our Savior Christ two ways, one way in his man hode, a another in his
Godhed. Some places of scripture must be referred to his deity, and some to
his humanity. Christ suffered nothing in his godhed.
In his godhed he suffered nothing, but now he made him self void of his
deity, as scripture says.

Cu^ esset in forma dei exinaniuit seipsum. Where as he was in the form of
God, he emptyed him self of it, he did hyde it, and used him self as though
he had not had it, he would not help him self with his godhede, he humbled
him self with all obedience unto death, even to the death of the cross this
was in y^ he was man, How Christ took upon him our sins.
he took upon him our sins, our sins, not the work of sins. I mean not
so, not to do it, not to commyt it, but to purge it, to cleanse it, to bear
the stypende of it, Which way Christ was ye great sinner of the whole world.
and that way he was the great sinner of the world, he bare all the sin of
the world on his back, he would become detter for it.

Now to sustain and suffer the doloures of death, is not to sin, but he
came into this world, with his passion to purge our sins. Now this that he
suffered in the Gardaine is on, Christ's sufferyng in the garden was one of the
bytterest pieces of al his passion
of the bittrest pieces of al his passion, this fear of death was the
byttereste pain that ever he a bode, dew to syn which he never did, but
became detter for us. All this he suffer for us, this he did to satissefye for
our sins. It is much like as if I ought another man.xx. M. pou^des, He
declares what Christ did for us by a similitude.
and should pay it out of hand, or else go to the dungen of ludgate, and
when I am going to prison, one of my frie^des should come, and ask, whether
goes this man? And after he had hard the matter, should say, let me answer
for him, I wylbe come suertye for him. Yea, I will pay all for him Such a
part played our savior Christ with us. If he had not suffered this, I for my
part should have suffered, according to the gravity and quantity of my
sins, damnacion. For the greater the sin is, The greatter the sin is, the
greater is the pain.
the greater is the punyshement in hell. He suffered for you and me in such a
degree, as is dew to al ye si^nes of the whole world. It was as if you would
immagin that one man had committed all the sins since Ada^, you may be sure
he should be punished with the same horror of death in such a sort as al
men in the world should have suffered. Feyne and put case our savior
Christ, had committed all the sins of the world, all that I for my part have
done, all that you for your part have done, and that any manne else has
done, if he hade done all this him self, his agony that he suffered should
have been no greater nor greuouser, then it was. This that he suffered in the
garden was a portion I say of his passion and one of the bitterest parts of
it. His suffering in the garden was bitter and paynfull.
And this he suffered for our sins and not for any sins that he had
committed him self, for all we should have suffered every man according to his
own deserts.

This he did of his goodness, Why Christ suffered such pains in the garden.
partelye to purge and cleanse our sins, partlye, because he would taste, and
feel our myseries, Quo posset succurrere nobis. that he should the rather help
and relieve us, and partly he suffered to give us example, to be have our
selves as he did. He did not suffer, to discharge us clean from death, to keep
us clean, from it, All men shall behold the vgsome face of death.
not to taste of it. Nay nay, you must not take it so. We shall have the
beholding of this vgsome face every one of us, we shall feel it our selves. Yet
our savior Christ did suffer, to the entente, to sygnifye to us, that death
is ouercomable. How we shall overcome death.
We shall in deed overcome it, if we repent, and acknowledge that our savior
Jesus Christ pacifyed with his panges and pains the wrath of the father,
having a love to walk in the ways of God, if we believe in Jesus Christ, we
shall overcome death, I say, it shall not prevail against us. Wherefore wherso?
ever it chaunseth the my friend, to have the tastynge of this death, What is to
be done when the horror of death comes.
that thou shalt be temted with this horror of death, what is to be done
then? when soever thou felest thy soul heavy to death, make haste, and resort
to this gardaine, and with this faith thou shall overcome this terror when it
comes. Oh it was a grievous thing, that Christ suffered here. Oh the
greatness of his dolor that he suffered in the garden, Why Christ suffered such
pain in the garden.
partlye to make ame^des for our sins, and partly to deliver us from death,
not so, that we should not dye bodylye, but that this death should be away to
a better life, and to destroy and overcome hell. Our Sauyoure Christ had a
gardayne, but he had littel pleasure in it. You have many goodly gardaynes, I
would you would in the mids of them consider what agonye our sauyoure Christ
suffered in his gardayne. A meditation for us in our gardaynes.
A goodly meditacion to have in your gardaines. It shall occasyon you to
delight no farther in vanities but to remember what he suffr^^ for you. It may
draw you from sin? It is a good monumente, a good sign, a good monycyon to
consider how he be haued him self in this garden.

Well he says to his Discyples. Sytte here and pray with me. He went a
little way of, as it were a stones cast from them, and falls to his prayer, and
says: Pater si possible est transe at a me calix iste.

Father if it be possible. Away with this bitter cup this outrageous pain.
Yet after he correctes him self, and says: Veruntamen u^u sicut ego volo sed
sicut tu vis.

Not my will but thy will be done O father. Here is a good medytacyon for
Christen men, at all times, and not only upon good friday, Every day
should be good friday to a Christen man.
let good friday be every day to a Christian manne to know, to use his
passion to that end and purpose, not to read the storye, but to take the
fruit of it.

Some men if they had been in this agonye, would have ru^ne them selves
through with their sweardes as Saul did, i. Samu. xxxi
some would have hangged them selves, ij. Samu. xvij
as Achitophell did.

Let us not follow these men, they be no examples for us, but let us
follow Christ, which in his agonye resorted to his father with his prayer.
This must be our patron to worck by. Here I might dilate the matter as
touching prayinge to Saynctes, We must pray to God and not to saynctes.
here we may learn not to pray to Saynctes. Christ byddes us, Ora patrem
qui est in celis.

Pray to thy father that is in heaven, to the creator, and not to any
creature. And therefore away with these auowryes. Let god alone be our auowry,
what have we to do to run hither or thither, but only to the father of
heaven? I will not tarry to speak of this matter. Our Savior Christ set his
disciples in an order and commanded them to watch, and pray, saying:
Vigilate et orate.

Whatch and pray. Whereto should they watch and pray? he says by and by:
Why the discyples were commanded to pray.
Ne intretis in tentationem That ye enter not into temptacion. He byddes them
not, pray that they be not tempted, for that is as much to say, as to prai
that we should be out of this world. There is no man in this world without
temptacion. In the time of prosperyte we are tempted to wantonness, pleasures,
and all lyghtnes, in time of aduersyte to despair in gods goodness.
Te^ptacion never ceasses.

There is a difference between being tempted and entering into temptacion. A
dyfference between being tempted and entryng into temptacion.
He byddes therefore not to pray that they be not tempted, but that they enter
not into temptacion. To be tempted is no evil thing.

For what is it? no more then when the flesh, the devil and the world does
solycyte and move us against God.

To give place to these suggestions, and to yield our selves, and suffer us to
be over comme of them, To enter into temptacion
this is to enter into temptacyon. Our sauyoure Christ knew that they should
be grievously tempted and therefore he gave them warning, The apostles were
warned of their temptacion.
that they should not give place to temptacyon, nor dyspayre at his death. And
if they chaunched to forsake him, or to run away, in case they tripped or
swarued, yet to come again.

But our Savior Christ did not only command his dyscyples to pray, but
fell down upon his knees flat upon the ground and prayed him self, Christ
did pray in his agonye.
saying: Pater si fieri potest transeat a me calix iste Father, deliver me of
this pange and pain that I am in, this outragyous pain* This word, father,
came even from the bowels of his heart, when he made his moan, as who should
say, father ryd me, I am in such pain that I can be in no greater? Thou art
my father, I am thy son Can the father, forsake his son in such anguishe?
Thus he made his moan. Father take a way this horror of death from me, ryd me
of this pain, suffer me not to be taken when Judas comes, suffer me not to be
hanged on the cross, suffer not my hands to be perced with nails nor my
heart with the sharp spear. A wonderful thing, that he should so often tell
his discyples of it before, and now when he comes to the point, to desire
to be rydde of it, as though he would have been disobedient to the will of his
father. Before he sayede, he came to suffer, and now he says, a way with this
cup. Who would have thought that ever this gear should have come out of
Christ's mouth? What a case is this? What should a man say? You must
understand, that Christ took upon him our infyrmities, Christ took upon him
all our infirmyties, except syn.
of the which this was one, to be sorye at death. Among the styppendes of
sin, this was one, to trymble at the cross, this is a punyshement for our
sin.

It goes otherwise with us, the^ with Christ, if we were in like case, and
in like agony. almost we would curse God, or rather wyshe that there were no
God. This that he said, was not of that sort, it was referrynge the matter to
the will of his father, but we seek by all means be it right, be it wrong of
our own nature to be ryd out of pain, he desired it condicionally, as it
might stand, with his fathers will, addyng a Veruntamen to it.

So his request was to show the infyrmytye of man, here is now an example what
we shall do, when we are in like case.

An example for us when we arr tempted
He never deserved it, we have. He had a Veruntamen, a notwythstandynge, let us
have so to, we must have a nevertheless, thy will be done and not mine.

Give me grace to be content to submit my will unto thine. His fact teaches
us what to do. This is our surgerye, our physyke, When we are in Agonye what
phisyck we should use.
when we be in Agonye, And reken upon it friends, we shall come to it, we shall
feel it, at one time or an other.

What does he now? what came to pass now, when he had hard no voice? his
father was domme.

He resortes to his fre^des, seking some comfort at their hands seeing he hade
none at his fathers hand, he comes to his disciples. and fyndes them a sleep,
he spoke unto Peter and said. Ah Peter art thou a sleep, Peter before had
bragged stoutly as though he would have killed, God have mercy upon his
soul. And now when he should have comforted Christ, he was a sleep, not once
buffe, nor baffe to him, not a word, he was feign to say to his dyscyples:
Vigilate et orate, Watch and pray, the spirit is ready, but the flesh is
weak, he had never a word of them again. They might at the least have said.
Oh Sir remember your self, are you not Christ? came not you into this world,
to redeem sin? be a good cheer, be a good comforth, this sorrow will not
healpe you, comfort your self by your own preaching you have said:
Oportet filium hominis pati, You have not deserved any thing, it is not your
fault. In deed if they had done this with him, they had played a frendlye
part with him, but they gave him not so much as one comfortable word. We
run to our friends in our dystresses and Agonyes, as though we had al our
trust and confydence in them, he did not so, he resorted to them, but
trusted not in them, we will run to our friends and come no more to God, he
returned again.

What? shall we not resort to our friends in time of need? and trow ye we
shall not find them a sleep? yes I warrante you, and when we need their help
most, we shall not have it. But what shall we do, when we shall find lack in
them? we will cry out upon them, vpbrayde them, chyde, braule, fume, chaufe
and backebite them. But Christ did not so, he excused his fryendes, saying:
Vigilate et orate spiritus quide^ pro^ptus est, caro autem infirma. Oh (quouth
he) watch and pray, I se well the spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak.
What means this? suerelye it is a comfortable place. For as long as we live
in this world, when we be at the best, we have no more but. Promptitudinem
spiritus cum infirmitate carnis, The redynesse of the spirit with the
infirmite of the flesh. The very Saynctes of God said: Velle adest mihi, My
will is good, Roma. vij.
but I am not able to perform it, I have benewith some, and feign they would,
feign they would, there was redines of spirit, but it would not be. It
grieved the^ that they could not take things, as they should do.

The flesh resysteth the work of the holy Ghost in our hertes, and lettes
it, lettes it. How ye flesh resistis. m.C. wishes prayer to be used.
We have to pray ever to God O prayer, prayer, that it might be used in this
Realm as it ought to be of all men, and specyallye of Magystrates, of
Counsaylers, of great Rulers, to pray, to pray, that it would please God to
put Godly policies in their hertes. Call for asystaunce. I have heard say,
when that good queen that is gone had ordained in her house, daily prayer both
before none, The admiral was a contempner of co^m^^ prayer
and after none, the admyral gettes him out of the way, like a moule diggynge
in the earth, He shall be Lottes wife to me as long as I live. He was a covetous
man an horrible covetous manne, I would there were no mo in England. He was an
ambicious man. I would there were no mo in England. He was a sedicious man, a
contemnar of commune prayer, I would there were no mo in England, he is gone, I
would he had left none behind him, Remember you my lords, that you pray in
your houses to the better mortification of your flesh. Remember god must be
honored, He wylleth the^ to pray.
I will you to pray that God will continue his spirit in you. I do not put you
in comfort, that if ye have once the spirit, ye cannot lose it, New spirits
lately start up.
There be new spirits start up now of late, that say after we have received the
spyryt, we cannot sin. I will make but one argument. Saynct Paul had
brought the Galathyans to the professyon of the faith, and left them in that
state, they had received the spirit once but they sinned again, as he
testified of them him self. He says: ^urrebatis been. Ye were once in a
right state, and again. Recepistis spiritu^ ex operibus legis, an ex iusticia
fidei? Once they had the spirit by faith, but false Prophets came (when he was
gone from the^) and they plucked them clean away from all that Paul had planted
the^ in, and the^ said Paul unto the^: O stulti Galathe quis vos fascinauit? if
this be true, we may lose ye spryte, ye we have once possessed. It is a fond
thing, I will not tarry in it. But now to the passion again. Christ had been
with his father, and felt no healpe, he had been with his friends, and had no
comfort, he had prayed twyse, and was not herd, what did he now? Christ
continued in prayer
did he give prayer over? no, he goes again to his father, and says the same
again, father if it be possible away with this cup, here is an example for us
although we be not herd at the first time, shall we give over our prayer? nay we
must to it again, we must be importune upon god, we must be instant in prayer.
He prayed thryse and was not herd, let us si^ners pray three store times, folks
are very dull now adays in prayer, to come to sermons, to resort to common
prayer. You houskepers, Housekepers and great men must give example of prayer.
and especially great men give example of prayer in your houses. Well did his
father look upon him this second time? no, he went to his friends again
thynkyng to find some comfort there, but he finds the^ a sleep again more
deper a sleep the^ ever they were. Their eyes were heavy with sleep There was no
comfort at all, they wist not what to say to him. A wonderful thing, how he
was tossed from post to pillar, one while to his father, and was destytute at his
hand, another while to his friends, and found no comfort at the^, his father
gave him loki^g on, and suffered him to bite upon the bridle a while. Almyghtye
God beheld this battle that he might enjoy that honor and glory, that in
his name all knees should bow, Celestium, Terrestrium, et infernoru^, in heaven,
earth, and hell. God punyshes syn in not hearing of our prayers
This that the father would not here his own son, was an other punyshemente
due to our sin. When we cry unto him, he will not here us. The Prophet
Jeremy says: Clamabu^t ad me, et ego no^ exaudia^ eos. These be Ieremyes
words, here he threateneth to punyshe sin, with not hearing their prayyers,
The Prophet says: They have not had the fear of God before their eyes, nor
have not regarded disciplyne and correction. I never saw surely so lyttel
discipline as is now a days Men will be masters, they will be masters, and no
Disciples. Alas where is this disciplyne now in England. People are without
order or honesti.
The people regard no disciplyne, they be without all order. Where they should
give place, they will not stur on inch, yea, where magistrates should determyne
matteres, they will break into the place before they come, and at their
coming not move a whytte for them. Is this discipline? Is this good order? If
a man say any thing unto them, they regard it not. They that be called to
answer will not answer dirertlye, but skoffe the matter out. Men the more
they know, the worsse they be, The more we know the worsse we be.
it is truly said.

Sciencia inflat, knoweledg makes us proud and ranseth us to forget all, and
set a way discipline, Suerlye, in Poperye they had a reverence, In time of
popery their was sum reverence but now none at all.
but now we have none at all, I never saw the like. This same lack of the
fear of God, and discipline in us, was one of the causes that the father
would not hear his son. This pain suffered our savior Christ for us, who
never deserved it. Oh what it was, that he suffered in this gardeyn, till Judas
came. The doloures, the terroures, the sorrows that he suffered, be
vnspeakeble. He suffered, partelye, Why Christ suffered so sore in the gardaine.
to make amends for our sins, and partelye, to give us example, what we
should do in like case.

What comes of this gear in the end Well, now he prays again, he
resorteth to his father again. Angore correptus prolixius orabat. He was in
sorer pains, in more anguishe, then ever he was, and therefore he prays
longer, more ardente lie, more feruentelye, more vehementli, then ever he did
before.

Oh Lord, Christ prayed the third time and swettes blood*
what a wonderful thing is this, this horroure of death is worsse then death
it self, more vgsome, more bitter then any bodylye death. He prays now the
third time. He did it so instantlye, so feruentlye, that it brought out a
bloody sweat, and such plentye that it dropped down even to the ground.
There issued out of his precious body drops of blood. What a pain was he
in, when these bloody drops fell so abu^dantlye from him? Our ingrattitude and
unthankfulness to God which died for us.
Yet for all that, how unthankful do we show our selves toward him that
dyed only for our sakes, and for the remedy of our sins. Oh what
blasphemye do we commit day by day, what little regard have we to his blessed
passion thus to swear by gods blood, blasphemy and swering in all our
pastimes
by Christ's passion. We have nothing in no pastime, but gods blood gods
wou^des. We continually blaspheme his passion in haukyng huntyng, dising, and
cardynge Who would think he should have such enemies among those that
profess his name. What became of his blud that fell down trow ye? The blood
of Hales was taken once for a religious relic.
was the blood of Hales of it, woe worth it. What a do was it to bring this
out of the kings head. This great abhomynacyon of the blood of hales could
not be taken a great while out of his mind. You that be of the court, M. L.
lesson yt was taught him at his first coming to the court.
and especially ye sworn chaplaynes beware of a lesson that a great man
taught me at my first coming to the court he told me for good will, he
thought it well. He said unto me. You must beware how so ever ye do that ye
contrary not the King, let him have his sayings, follow him, go with him.
Mary out upon this counsel, shall I say, as he says.

Say your conscience, or elce what a worm shall ye feel gnawynge, what a
remorse of conscience shall ye have, when ye remember how ye have slacked your
duty. It is as a good wise verse. Gutta cauat lapide^, non ui sed sepe cadendo.
The drop of rain makes a hole in the stone, not by violence, but by often
falling. Like wise a Prince must be turned not violentelye, A princes mind
must be persuaded but not violently forced.
but he must be won by a little and a little. He must have his duty told
him, but it must be done with humblenes, with request of pardon, or else it
were a dangerous thing.

Unpreachynge Prelates have been the cause, that the blood of Hales did so long
blind the King. Woe worth that such an abhomynable thing, should be in a
Christen realm, but thanks be to God it was partly redressed in the Kings
days that dead is, and much more now. God grant good will, and power to go
forward, if there be any such abhomynacion behynd, Amen.
that it may utterly be rooted up.

O how happy are we, that it has pleased almighty God to vouchsafe, that his
son should sweat blood for the redemyng of our sins, and again how
unhappy are we, if we will not take it thanckefullye, that was redeemed so
paynefullye. Alas what hard hearts have we. Our Savior Christ never
sinned, and yet sweat he blood for our sins, we will not once watter our
eyes with a few tears. What an horrible thing is sin? Sin is horrible and
why?
that no other thing would remedy and pay the ransom for it, but only the
blood of our Savior Christ. There was nothing to pacify the fathers wrath
against man, but such an Agony as he suffered, All the passion of all the
martyrs that ever were, all the sacrifyces of Patriarchs that ever were, all the
good works that ever were done, were not able to remedy our sin, to make
satisfaction for our sins, What was thou remedy for our syn?
nor any thing besides, but this extreme passion and blood sheddyng of our
most merciful Savior Christ.

But to draw toward an end, what became of this three fold prayer, at the
length, it pleased God to here his sons prayer, and sent him an angel to
corroborate, to strengthen, to comforth him.

Christ need no angels help if he had lysted to ease him self with his
deitye. He was the son of God, what then? for so much as he was man he
received comforth at the Angels hand, Whi Christ received comfort of the
angel.
as it accordes to our infirmity. His obedyence, his contynaunce, and
sufferynge, so pleased the father of heaven, that for his sons sake, be he
never so great a sinner, Note a co^forttable promise and a joyful saiynge.
leaving his sin, and repent, ynge for the same, he will owe him such
favor, as though he had never commyted any sin.

The father of heaven will not suffer him to be tempted with this great
horroure of death and hell to the vttermoste, and above that he is able to
bear. Look for it my friends, by him and through him he shall be able to
overcome it, A lesson for us in time of temptacion.
let us do as our Savior Christ did, and we shall have help from a boue, we
shall have angels help, if we trust in him, heaven and earth shall give up,
rather then we shall lack help, He says he is. Adiutor in necessitatibus an
helper in time of need. When the angel had comforted him, and when this
horroure of death was gone, he was so strong, that he offered himself to
Judas, and said. I am he. To make an end, I pray you take pains. it is a
day of penance (as we use to say) give me leave to make you werye this day.
The Jews had him to Cayphas and Annas, and there, they whypte him, and bethym,
The harrer of death and the agony which Christ sustened in the gardaine
excedeth the other pains.
they set a crown of sharp thorn upon his head, and nailed him to a tree,
yet al this was not so bitter, as this horroure of death, and this Agony, that
he suffered in the gradayne, in such a degree as is dew to all the sins of
the world, and not to one man's sin.

Well, this passion is our remedy, it is the satisfaction for our sins. His
soul descended to hell for a time. Here is much a do, these new vpstartynge
spirits, say Christ never descended into hell, neither body nor soul. Against
such as deny that Christ descendid into hell.
Inscorne they will ask, was he there, what did he there? what if we cannot
tell what he did there? The creed goes no further, but fayeth, he descended
thither, what is, that to us if we cannot tell seeing we were taught no
further. Paul was taken up into the third heaven, ask likewise what he saw
when we was carried thither, you shall not find in scripture what he saw or
what he did there, shall we not therefore believe that he was there.

Arrogant spirits of vain glory.
These arrogant spirits, spirits of vain glory, because they know not by
any express scripture, the order of his doings in hell, they will not believe
that ever he descended into hell. In deed this article has not so full
scripture, so many places and testimonies of scriptures as other have, yet it
has enough, it has.ii. or.iii. textes, and if it had but one, one text of
scripture, One text of scripture, is sufficient authorite as a thousand.
is of as good and lawful authority as a.M. and of as certain truth. It is
not to be wayed by the multitude of textes. I believe as certaynelye and verelye
that this Realm of England has as good authority to hear Gods word as
any nation in all the world, it may be gathered by.ii. textes one of them is
this.

Ite in vniuersum mundum, et predicate euangelium omni creature. Go into the
whole world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures. And again. deus ^ult
omnes homines saluos fieri. God will have all men to be saved, he exceptes not
the Englishemen here, nor yet expresselye names them, and yet I am as sure,
that this Realm of England, by this gatheryng, is allowed to here Gods word,
as though Christ had said a thousand times, Go preach to Englysh men. I will
that Englyshemen be saved. Because this Article of his descendyng into hell,
can not be gathered so directlye, so necessarylye, so formallye they do
utterly deny it. Curiouse brains are never content,
This article has Scriptures two or three enough for quiet mind, as for
curyouse brains nothing can content them.

This the diuils sterryng up of such spirits of sedicion, is an euidente
argument, An argument that gods word is a brood
that the light is come forth, for his word is a broad, when the devil
russheth, when he roreth, when he styrreth up such busy spirits, to sclaunder
it. My entente is not to entreat of this matter at this time. I trust the
people will not be carried away with these new arrogant spirits, I dout not,
but good preachers wyllabour against them. But now I will say a word, and
herein I prottest first of al not arrogantlye to determyne, and defyne it, I
will contend with no man for it, I will not have it be prejudice to any body,
but I offer it unto you to consider and weay it.

There be some great clerks that take my part, and I perceive not what evil
can come of it, in saying, yt our Savior Christ did not only, in soul
descend into hell but also that he suffered in hell such pains as the damned
spirits did suffer there. Suerly. I believe verelye for my part, that he
suffered the pains of hell proporcionably, as it correspondes and aunsweres to
the whole sin of the world. He would not suffer only bodily in the
gardayne and upon the cross, but also in his soul, when it was from the
body, which was a pain dew for our syn.

Some write so, and I can believe it that he suffered in the very place, I
cannot tell what it is, call it what ye will, even in the skaldinge house, in
the vgsomnes of the place, in the presence of the place, such pain as our
capacity can not attain unto, it is somewhat declared unto us, when we utter
it by these effects, by fire, Fire, gnasshing of teth, the worm of
conscience, are terms vtteryng to us ye pains of hell
by gnashynge of teth, by the worm that gnaweth on the conscience, What so
ever the pain is, it is a great pain that he suffered for us. I se no
inconuenyence to say, that Christ suffered in soul in hell.

I singularly commend the exceeding great charytye of Christ, that for our
sakes would suffer in hell in his soul. It settes out the unspeakable hatred
that God has to sin. I perceive not that it does derogate any thing from the
dignity of Christ's death, as in the gardayne, when he suffered, it derogates
nothing from yt he suffered on the cross. Scripture speaks on this fashion:
Qui credit in me, The peculiar phrase and manner of speaking of the scripture is
to be noted.
habet vitam eternam. He that believes in me, has life everlasting. Here he
settes forth faith, as the cause of our iustifycatio^, in other places as high
comme^dacion is given to works, and yet are the worckes any derogation from
that dignitye of faith? No. And again scripture says: Traditus est propter
peccata nostra et exuscitatus propter iustificationem etc. It attributes here
our iustyfycation, to his resurrection, and does this derogate any thing
from his death? not a whit. It is whole Christ. What with his natiuytye, what
with his circumcysyon, what with his incarnation, christ wrogth our salvation
in all his doings.
and the whole process of his life, with his preaching, what with his
ascendynge, descendynge, what with his death, it is all Christ that works
our salvation. He sytteth on the ryghthande of the father, and all for us. All
this is the work of our salvation. I would be as loathe, to derogate any
thing from Christ's death, as the best of you al. How vnestymably are we bound
to him? what thanks ought we to give him for it? We must have this
contynuallye in remembrance. Propter te morti tradimur tota die. For the, we
are in dieyng continually.

The life of a Chrsten man is nothing but a readiness to dye, and a remembrauce
of death. If this that I have spoken of Christ's sufferynge in the gardayne,
and in hell, derogate any thing from Christ's death and passion, away with
it, believe me not in this, if it do not, it commendes and settes forth very well
unto us, the perfection of the satisfacion that Christ made for us, and the
woorck of a redemption, not only before wytnes in this world, but in hell in
that vgsome place, where, whether he suffered, or wrastled with the spitites, or
comforted Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob I will not desire to know. If ye like not
that which I have spoken of his sufferynge, let it go, I will not strive in it,
I will be prejudice to no body, weye it as ye list, I do but offer it you to
consider. It is like his soul did somewhat the thredayes that his body lay in
the grave. To say he suffered in hell for us derogats nothing from his death,
For all things that Christ did before his suffering on the cross, Christ was
beneficial to us in all his doings.
and after, do work our salvation* If he had not been incarnat, he had not
dyed, he was beneficial to us with althinges he did. Chryste^ people should
have his sufferynge for them in remembrance. Let your gardaynes monishe you,
your pleasant gardaynes, what Christ suffered for you in the Gardayne, and
what commodyete you have by his sufferynge.

It is his will ye should so do, he would be had in remembrance. Myxt your
pleasures with the remembrance of his bitter passion. The whole passion is
satisfaction for our sins, and not the bare death, considering it so nakedly
by it self. The manner of spekyng of scripture is to be considered. It
attributes our salvation, now to one thing, now to a nothere that Christ
did, where in deed it partayned to all. The blessed communion is a remembrance
of Christ's passion.
Our Savior Christ has left behynd him, a remembrance of his passion,
the blessed communion, the celebration of the Lords supper, a lack it has
been long abused, as the sacryfices were before, in the old law. The
Patriarchs used sacrifice, in the fayeth of the seade of the woman, which
should break the serpents head. The Patriarchs sacrificed on hope, and
afterward the work was esteemed.

There comes other after, and they consider not the fayeth of Abraham* and the
patriarchs, but do their sacrifice according to their own imaginacion, even
so came it to pass with our blessed communion.

In the prymatyue church in places, The usage of the primative church in the
receyuyng of the communion at the buryal of the death.
when their fryendes were dead, they used to come together to the holy
communion. What? to remedy them that were dead? No, no. A straw, it was not
instituted for no such purpose.

But then they would call to remembrance gods goodness, and his passion that
he suffered for us, wherein they comforted much their faith. Other came after
ward and settes up all these kinds of massynge, all these kinds of iniquite.
Massyng was the foulest abomination that ever was.
What an abhominacion is it? the foulest that ever was, to atribute to man's
work our saluatyon. God be thanked that we have this blessed communion set
forth so now, that we may comfort, increase, and fortify our faith at that
blessed celebracyon. If he be gyltye of the body of Christ, that takes it
unworthily, he fetches great comfort at it, that eats it worthily, He
doothe eat it worthelye, that does eat it in faith. In faith? in what faith?
Not long a go a great man, said in an audyence. They babble much of faith,
The great man that never know other them the whore mongers faith.
I will go lie with my whore al night, and have as good a faith, as the best
of them al. I think he never knew other, but the whoremongers faith. It is no
such faith that will serve. It is no brybynge Judges, or justices faith, no
retreasers faith, no whoremongers faith, no lease mongers fayeth, no seller of
benefices fayeth, but the faith in the passion of our Savior Christ. What
faith will serve.
We must believe that our Savior Christ has taken us again to his favor,
that he has delivered us his own body and blood to plead with the dyuel and
by merit of his oune passion, of his own mere liberality. This is the faith
I tell you, that we must come to the communion with, and not the whoremongers
faith? Look where remission of syn is, there is acknowledging of sin also. Faith
is a noble woman she is at her gentleman usher going before her, and her train
after her.
Faith is a noble duchess, she has ever her gentleman usher going before her,
the confessyng of sins, she has a train after her, the fruits of good
works, the walking in the commandments of God. He that believes, will not be
idle, he will walk he will do his business, have ever the gentelman usher with
you. So if ye will try faith, The true trial of faith
remember this rule, consider whether the train be waiting upon her. If you
have another faith then this, a whoremongers faith, you are like to go to the
Scalding house, and there you shall have two dishes, weping and gnasshyng of
teeth, much good do it you, you se your fare. If ye will believe and acknowledge
your sins, you shall come to the blessed communion of the bitter passion of
Christ, worthlye, and so attain to everlasting life, to the which the father
of heaven bring you and me AMEN.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling at Aldersgate, and Wylliam Seres,
dwelling in Peter College. These books are to be sold at the new shop by the
ly^le Conduyte in Chepesyde.

Cum gratia et Priuilegio a^ imprimendum solum.


