

CERTAIN GODLY Sermons, made upon the lords Prayer, preached by the right
reverend Father, and constant martyr of Christ, Master Hughe Latymer, before
the right honorable, and virtuous Lady Katherine, Duches of Suffolk, in the
year of our Lord. 1553.

Whereunto are annexed certain other sermons, preached by the said reverend
Father, in Lincolneshire, which were gathered, and collected by Augustine
Bernher, a servant of his, though not so perfectly as they were uttered: yet
faithfully and truly, to the singular commodity and profyt of the christian
reader, faithfully perused and allowed according to thorder appointed in the
Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Repent, repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Math. 3.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cumgratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per septennium. An. 1562.

To the right honorable, the Lady Katherine, Duches of Suffolk, Augustine
Bernher, wishes the grace of God (...) the increase of all heavenly virtues,
to her graces eternal comfort in Jesus Christ.
THat princely prophet David describing the perverse nature and wicked
properties of the ungodly and reprobates, amongst other crimes whereof he (...)
accuse them, he laith also to their charge that they have not called upon God.
By the which words he does manifestly teach, that they which do not give
themselves to (...) and saythfull prayer and (...) ge of the name of God, are
in the number of those which do say in their hearts there is no God. For as
the Godly by their earnest and continual praying and praising of the name of
God, do declare their reverend fear they bear toward his divine majesty,
and their unfeigned love the which is grafted in their hearts by the gracious
and divine spirit, toward their heavenly and most loving father, by the
which they are incoraged willingly and cheerfully to walk in the way of
Godlynes, and to frame their lives to the will and pleasure of him whom they
fear and love: So on the contrary side, the ungodly, in that they do not
call upon their God, neither praise him, most evidently declare that they
stand not in awe of him, nor love him, but rather despise him as one that is
neither able to hurt or pleasure them.

By this now that I have said it does manifestly appear, that as saythfull
and true prayer is the occasion of all goodness and godlynes, so thomitting and
neglecting of the same, is the rote and cause of all sin and mischief: And
that will be more evident unto them that do consider with the^ selves these two
principal parts wherein true prayer does consist. The first part of true
prayer is called in yt hebrew to^g, Thephilah the which sig (...) Iudicij vel
co^de^nationis deprecati^one^, a hearty and ernest request and suplica tio^ made
unto god theternal judge, for the remission, and pardon of sins, the which
request proceeds from the heart yt is anguished by the ougsome sight of his
wickedness, reveled by the brightness of the law of God. The other part of prayer
is called in yt same to^g, Thehillah. Laus, a praise of gods mercies, the which
does follow the former request. For when the heart so an guished has poured out
his grief, and is by the spirit of God certifyed that his sins be forgeuen,
his prayer heard for Christ's sake: by and by it bursteth out into a joyful
praising of the name of the Lord, who so graciously has showed himself in
giving comfort unto his sorrowful conscience. In these two parts of prayer,
the Children of God do exercise them selves, that is, in lamenting of their
sins, and in rejoicing in the forgiveness of the same, the which consists
in the death of Christ.

Wheruppon the third part follows, the which is to crave at their fathers
hands such things as be needful for them in this world. Now he that
beholds diligently the state of the world, shall (...) perceive that the
most part of men are given up to their own hearts just because they be (...) of
that most comfortable spirit of prayer.

Who does not see that the principal occasion of this horrible (...), the
which of all states of men is showed toward the (...) God, happens by the
reason that men do not pass for their sins, do light ly regard them, and so
do not crave (...) of them at Gods hands, ney there be (...). If men did
exercise themselves in faithful prayer, and did use to examine themselves by
the rule of the law of God (in the which glass they may sone (...) their own
fylthines) they would no doubt with great diligence, consider the great and
(...) benefits of the Lord their god showed unto them, even in these our
days. First how graciously he gave us the light of the Gospel in king Edwards
time, for the space of seven years. After the which time, by the reason of
our unthankfulness, he most (...) plaged us, and took the same away again,
and caused by the devils hangmen (the papists I mean) darkness, blind nes, and
most pestiferous doctrine to be brought into the church, by reason whereof, a
great number that had before no lust to the truth (even by Gods just
judgment) were the^ deceived by lies and so peryshed eternallye. And yet
notwithstanding, the faithful Lord, in all these tormoylings preserved his
servants, giving unto a number of them such a princely spirit, that they
were able to deride and laugh to scorn the threatenings of the tyrauntes, to
despise the terriblenes of prisons and torments, and in the end, most
ioyfullye to overcome and conquer death to the praise of God and their own
endless comfort. Unto other some, the (...) same most gracious God gave such a
(...) spirit, that they were able by his grace to forsake the pleasures and
commodityes of this world, and being armed with patience, were content to
travel into far and unknown countries with their familyes and housholdes,
having small worldly provision, or none at all, but trustyng to his
providence, who never forsakes them that trust in him. Besides this, 'the
same God preserved a great number, even in the midst of their enemies, not
only from bodily dangers, but also from being infected with that poisoned and
The congregation of the faith full at London in Queen Ma ryes time.
blasphemous doctrine, that then in allope^ (...), with shameless brags and
ostentation was set abroad. I will not speak now of that wonderful work of
God, who caused his word to be preached, and his sacraments ministered even in
the midste of the enemies, in spyte of the devil and all his ministers.

These things the Lord wroughte most graciously for his people. But when the
time came that the measure of wickedness of the wicked was full, the self same
God, even of his own mercy, and by his own power confounded his enemies, by
the means of our most gracious La die the Queens majesty (for whose
prosperous estate and preservation the God of mercy grant unto all faithful
Christians grace, most instantly to pray) her most joyful coming to the
imperial croune of this Realm, who caused that filthy and dark antichristian
doctrine to vanish out of sight, and in stead thereof that most glorious light
of the Gospel to shine again, the which sorowfully was wished for of all
faithful Eng lish hearts: restoring withal the preachers of the same Gospel,
the which before were expulsed as (...), by the tyranny of the popish prelates.

The which benefits, as they be unmeasurable, so ought they continually with
thanckful hearts of all them that bear the name of christians to be
considered. But as I said before, the most part of men do not pas for these
things. The light of the Gospel is not confortable unto them, because they
feel not the darkness that is in them: they be not troubled with their own
wickedness: sin lies lurking and slepyng within the^, and they have fully, as
it were, soide themselves to worldly busynes, to clyme up to get honors and
dignities, and the pelf of worldly (...), and these things are the cause why
they do not (...) unto the Lord their God. But woe be unto such slepers in
their own sins, and forgetters of Gods benefits. A day will come when they
shall wish them selus never to have been borne. Thus you see that the neglecting
of pray er is the occasyon of that horrible unthankfulness and forgetfulness of
gods benefytes. What is to be said unto them that contrary to their own
hearts and consciences lie in sin and wickedness, and will not amend their
lives, although they hear their sins accused, condemned, and Gods vengeance
pronounced upon them: They be so drouned with the desires of their own
hearts, that they do not pas for the ways of the Lord. Of such kind of men
the world is full, which have shameless forheades, being not abashed of their
vylenes.

The cause of their miseries (as David declares) Is quia deum non in (...),
because they have not called upon God. But what kind of prayer do those men
say (trow you) which call themselves spiritual and (...) the lot of the
Lord? It is as manifest as the none day, that the most part of them, neither
pray nor know what true prayer is. For if they did use to pray as the true
christians do, they could not chose but be compelled to amend their lines:
their consciences would be abashed to come before the Lord without a hearty
purpose to amend their conversation. Does not the saying of Ose the Prophet
take hold upon the Ose. vt.
most part of you that be of the popish clergy, and have been mossemongers:
Where as he says, as thieves wait for a man, so the company of prcests
murder in the way by consent, for they work mischief.

Did not you conspire together at the entry of (...) Marye to murder the
people of God, in casting from you most traitorously the precious Gospel of
Jesus Christ? in submittyng your selves to that filthy beast of Rome, and in
receauyng the stinckyng I dolatrous mass, by the which you have destreyed an
inaumerable sort of people? Are you sorye for these your doings: Do you
humble your selves before the majesty of the terrible God, with hearty and
faithful prayer acknowledging your wickedness, and intending to eschew the same?
No such things can be perceived in you. For where as before, in the time of
antichryst, boldly and openly, you did deceive the people of their salvation
in Christ, now in the light of the gospel, secretly you whisper in to the
ears of the simple and visswade them from receiving of the truth: so that most
justly Nume (...)
you may be compared unto those spies of whom we read Nume. xiii. the which
with their false reports, did hinder the people of I sraell from entryng into
the land of promise. For they being sent by Moses to search the land, and
to bring good tidings unto the people, by the which they might have been
encouraged manfully to have assayed their enemies, and take possession of the
land, they contraye to Moses expectation, like faytheles men, came and
discomforted the people, and caused them to mistrust Gods promises. And do not
ye the like? where as god has appointed you to search the land of promise
in his holy word, and to bring tidinges of the same unto his people, by
faithful and dilygent teachers, and encourage them to embrace and to lay hold
upon the kingdom of Christ, you like false messengers, either by your false
reports and wicked doctrine, do hinder the people from entering into the
promised land, or else like domme dogs that are not able to bark, you lie in
your kennels, fedpng your bellyes, and making good cheer with the labors and
sweat of the poor people, not passing wheather they swymme or synke, or what
become of them.

Worthily therefore the Prophet David numbreth you amongst them that say in
their hearts there is no God: And this appears unto all others, because ye
do not call upon God. For if you did accastom to call your selves to an
account before the majesty of God, in your faithful prayers, the
remembrance of your horrible murder of Gods people, of your idleness,
carelesnes, bellychere, ignorance of Gods will and word, secret (...). and
such other like stuff, would cause you to water your (...), and compel you
to show some token of repentance unto the people of God: but nothing is seen
in you but desperatnes, wherefore the spirit of the Lord is departed from you.
And this is more euidente in your manifold and mamfest periuryes, committed by
you in king Hen ryes time, in king Edwards time, in Queen Maryes time. And what
may be said of you at this time, but that you be false (...), bearing two faces
under one hood, being ready like weather cocks to turn at all seasons as the
wind does carry you? can you look for any thing at gods hands, but to be
punished with his (...) as (...) was (whose companions you be) that all the
world may take ensample by you to beware of these horrible crimes with the
which you are so (...), that no water in the sea is able to make you clean
(...) kind of water would help your disease, if the Lord of his mercy
would give you grace to call unto him for it, that is the same water of life
the which the Lord (...) to the faithful and penitente sinners, amongst the
number of whom as yet ye be not (sofar as man can (...).) And therefore it
stands you in hand to lock about you in time, before the halter be cast
about your necks, as it happened to (...), whose foot steps you follow in
your behauiours in this world, that it is to be feared you shall rest together
in one place in the world to come. But of the vile behavior of these
miserable men, it greueth me to speak any further not doub ting but that the
magestrates whom god has charged with his people, will even with speed
consider these things accordingly, and not suffer those waueryng and (...)
weathercokes to have any thing to do within the house of God, the which is
bys Church, purifyed with the blud of Christ. For the (...) know that they
themselves cannot pray unto the Lord their God, except their hearts be
faithfully disposed to do the works of their vocatyon trewly and faithfully, of
the which the (...) is to see the people instructed by faithful ministers in
the way (...) of the Lord: the which instructions can not be given by such as
are not only defiled with such kind of (...), as is above rehearsed, but also
are utterly (...) of all good gyfts, and know not the principles of their
religion.

This matter is so (...) and of such importance, that the magistratee, having
the fear of god before their eyes, must needs consider it with speed, for it
touches the eternal save guard of them, for whom the son of god did shede
his own hearts blood: they ought to be put into hands of such as do not pass
for their own salvation, much less for others: therefore with great and spedy
dilygence the magistrates are bound (scyng god does put them in trust with his
children) to provide, that as they be bought with the blood of Christ, so they
may be nourished with the true and sincere word of god, to the praise of his
name, and their eternal comfort. Further who can not lament, even from the
botom of his heart, to see a great number to live in such carelesnes, and
flatter themselves in their own sins, thinkinge that they be the children of
God, when as in very deed the comfortable spirit of faithful prayer is
departed from them, and they worthily numbered amongst them that have no God nor
Christ: As those men be, which be so greedy upon the world, and have addicte
and consecrate themselves unto it, after such a forte, as though this world
should last for eucr: And in this taking be the grea ter part of the gentelmen,
which with such extremities entreat (...) poor tenantes, with raysyng of
rents, taking of synes, and other kinds of extreme dealinges, that they are
compelled day and night to cry unto God for vengeance against them: and can
any man think that these pitiles and cruel men, can appear before the
majesty of god, and crave remission of their sins, when as they be purposed
to go on forward still in their extreme dealinges against the poor? I will
not speak now of them, that being not content with their lands and rentes,
do catch into their hands spiritual liuyngs: as personages and such like, and
that under the pretense to make provision for their houses. What hurt and
damage this realm of England does sustain by that deuelyshe kind of
provision for gentelmens houses, knights and Lords houses, they cantel best
that do travel in the countries, and see with their cyes, great parishes and
market towns, with innumerable others, to be (...) destitute of Gods word, and
that because that these greedy men have spoiled the lyuings and gotten them
into their hands: and in stead of a faithful and painful teacher they hyre a
sir John, which has better skill in playing at tables, or in keeping of a
garden, then in Gods word, and he for a triefle does serve the cure, and so
help to bring the people of God in danger of their souls. And all those serve
to accomplish the abominable pride of such gentelmen, which consume the
goods of the poor (the which ought to have been bestowed upon a learned
minister) in costly apparel, belly chere, or in building of gorgious houses.
But let the^ be assured, that a day will come when it will be laid to their
charge: Rapina pauperu^ in domibus vestris, And then they shall perceive that
their fair houses ar built in the place called Aceldama: they have a bloody
foundation and therefore can not stand long. This matter also is so wayghtye,
and the spiritual slaughter of the poor people so miserable and woeful, that
except the magistrates spedely look thereunto, and redres the same, the Lord
of Sabbath himself will synde out some remedy to deliver his people from such
cater pillars, and require the blood of his people at their hands, by whose
covetousness they were let to come to the knowledge of Christ. And besides
this such (...) wolves as devour the lyuings of teachers, and ministers of
gods word, shall not be hable to come in the presence of the Lord, to pray unto
him or to praise him: for all that ever they do (yea even their prayers) is
execrable before the Lord, so long as they turn their ear fro the heating of
the law of the Lord: that is to say, so long as they do not even from the
very (...) of their hearts, (...) about to redress these heinous faults
with the which they be entangled. Let them repent therefore even (...), before
the wrathful indignation of the Lord faule upon them, and so destroy them in
their sins. And these things ought to be considered of all them that pretend
christianytie, of what estate or degree soever they be, as well lawyers (whose
covetousness has almost devoured England) as craftesmen, husbandmen, servants
and others, remembryng with them selves, that if their hearts be inclined to
wickedness, the Lord will not hear their prayers. Let them stand in awe of the
Lord their God, and so behave themselves in their conversation and life, that
they may have recourse unto him, and be incoraged to make their prayers
co^side^tly before him in the name of Jesus Christ, of whom they shall receive
comfort of soul and body, as well in this world as in the world to come
eternally. For this is most certain, that if they proceed in their wickedness
and ungodliness, not passying wheather they be ruled, moved, and stirred by the
gracious spirit of God to praise his name or not: then most assuredly the Lord
will power out his plages upon the Psalm. lxxix
hole realm, according to the saying of the Prophet: the Lord will power out
his wrath upon the kingdoms that have not called upon his name.

Now to the intent that they which are ignorant and unlearned may the better be
instracted how to order themselves when they go about to present themselves
before the majesty of God, and talk with him concerning those things which
be needful for their souls health, and preservation of their bodies: I
thought it good (by the instant request of the godly learned) to put fourth
these sermons here following, in print, which were preached in king Edwards
(...), before the right honorable lady Katheryne Duches of Suffolk her grace,
by that same reverend sather and most constant martyr of Christ, Doctor Hughe
Latymer, my most dear master. For whose most paynfull travels, faithful (...),
true carefulnes for his country, pacient impriso^ment, and constant suffering.
all the whole realm of England, has great cause to give unto the eternal
God most high laud and praise, For who is he that is so ignorante that did not
see the wonderful handiworke of God in that man? did not God appoint him eue^
in king Kenries days, to be a singular instrument to set forth his truth, and
by his preaching to open the eyes of such as were deluded by the subtle and
deccatfull crafts of the popish presates?

How many fold ways was he troubled, toste, and tormoyled from post to
pillar, by the popish by shops? Whose hands he could not have escaped if God
had not moved the kings majesty's heart (that then was) to assist him. By whose
absolute power diucrse times he was delivered from the cruel Lions. And
although it did please God, in process of time to suffer the kings (...) to be
deluded and circumuented by the subtyl (...) D. Latiuier withstode the six
articles although they were confirmed by laws.
sions of those popish by shops, to establish by law syxs ungodly articles:
Yet this faithful servant of Christ would rather put his own life in
danger, then forsake or depart from that, the which before most faithfully he
had taught out of Gods word. Wherefore he was contented ra there to be cast into
the Tower, and there to look daily for death, then to be found a wavering
reed, or to deceane his Prince. For they (said he) that do allow any thing
disagreing from Gods word, in respect to fulfill the appetites of Princes, ar
betraiers and murderers of their princes. because they provoke the wrath of
God to destroy such princes: and these slatterers become gilty of the blood of
their princes, and are the chiefs causes of their destructions. Wherefore this
faithful man or god, knowing his prince to be deluded by the false priests and
bemge assureb the things that were allowed to be contrary to gods word, was
ready thus to adventure his life: at the which time god mercifully delivered
him, to the great comfort of al godly hearts, and singular commodity of his
church.

Now when he was thus delivered, did he give himself up to yt pleasures of the
world? to delicatenes or idleness? No assuredly, but even then most of al he
began to set fourth his plough, and to till the ground of the lord, and to
(...) the good corn of gods word, behauing him self as a faithful messenger of
god, being afraid of no man, telling all degrees their duties faithfully and
truly, without respect of persons, or any kind of flattery. In the which his
paynefull travels he continued al king Edwardes time, preaching for the most
part every sunday two sermons to the great shame, confusion, and (...) of a
great number of our fatbellied unpreaching prelates. For he being a sore bruised
man and above three score and 7 years of age, took notwithstanding at these
pains in preching, and besides this, every morning ordinarily, winter and
summer, about two of the clock in the morning, he was at his book most
diligently. And besides this how careful he was for the preservation of the
church of God, and for the good success of the gospel, they can bcare record.
which at that time were in autoritye whom continually by his letters he
admonished of their (...), and assisted with his godly counsel.

But when the time approached, (...) which god had appointed for the punishment
of the carnal gospcllers and hipocrited which most wickedly abused the same,
how faithfully he did (...) both prinatly, and open ly al kinds of men, they
that were then about him can bear record. But one thing amongst others is
principally to be noted, that god not only gave unto him his sprit most
plentiously and comfortably, to preach his word unto his (...): but also by the
same spirit he did most (...) prophecy of al those kinds of plages, which in
very deed afterward en sued, so plainly I say, as though he had seen them
before his eyes so that, if England ever had a Prophet, he was one. (...)
amongst other things he ever affirmed that the preaching of the gospel would
cost him his life, to yt which thing he did most cherefully arm and prepare
him self, being certainly persuaded, that Winchest. was kept in the tower for
the same purpose. Therefore not long after Queen Mary was proclaimed, a
pursiuant was sent down into the country for to call him up. Of whose coming
when he was made ware about six hours before, by a faithful man of god Ioha
Careless (a man worthy of everlasting memory) he pre pared himself toward his
journey before the said pursiuant came to his house. At yt which thing, when the
pursiua^t marueled seeing him so prepa red toward his journey he said unto him,
my friend: you be a welco^ mes senger to me, and be it known unto you and to the
whole world, that I go as willingly to London at this present, being called by
my prince to render a reckning of my doctrine, as ever I was to any place in the
world, and I do not dout, but that god, as he has made me worthy to preach his
word before two excellent princes, so he will able me to witness the same unto
the third, either to her comfort, or discomforte eternally etc. At the which
tune the pursiuant, when he had delivered his letters departed, (...) that he
had commaundenie^t not to tarry for him, by whose sode^ departure it was
manifest, that they would not have had him to appear, but rather to have fled
out of the realm. They knew that his co^stantnes should confound them in their
popery, and confirm the godly in the truth. As concerning the manner and form
how he was interteyned when he came before the counsel, how stoutly he did
behave himself in Christ's cause, and was content to bear most patiently all
the mocks and tan^tes given him by the scornful, and pestilent papists: also
how patiently he took his imprisonment, and how boldly and willingly he in
the end adventured his life in the defense of the glorious gospel of Jesus
Christ, because these things be at large described in the book of the
martyrs by that most godly learned and excellent instrument of God master John
Fox, I will not spend the time now to rehearse the same: saving one thing the
which I would wish all godly bishops and faithful preachers to note, the
which is this: that he being in prison comfortles, and destitute of all worldly
help. most of al did rejoice in this, that god had given him grace, to aply his
office of preching and assisted him without fear or flattry to tell unto the
wicked their faults, and admonish the^ of their wickedness, neither alowing,
nor consenting to any thing, that might be prejudicial or hurtful unto the
gospel of Christ, although the refusal thereof did cast him in danger of
his life. God grant that al those that be in that of fice may follow his
footesteppes, and that the rest that either refuse to take payns, or are given
to flatter, may be turned out, and be set to the cart or plough, and others put
into their romes that be willing, diligent and hable to do their duties. The
other thing that I would have no ted, is his (...) and diligence in prayer,
wherein oftentimes so long he continued kneeling, that he was not able for to
rise without help: and amongst other things these were three principal matters
he prayed for. The first, that as god had appointed him to be a precher and
professor of his word, so also he would (...) him grace to stand unto his
doctrine until his death: The Other thing, the which most instantly with great vi
ole^ce of gods sprite he desired, was that god of his mercy would restore the
gospel of his son Christ unto this realm of England once again, and these
words once again, once again, he did so inculcate and beat into the cares of
the Lord god, as though he had seen god before him, and spoke unto him face to
face. The third principal matter wherewith in his prayers he was (...) was to
pray for the preservation of the queen's majesty that now is, whom in his
prayer accustomablye he was wont to name, and even with tears desired god to
make her a comfort to this comfortles realm of England. These were the matters
he prayed for so earnestly. But were these things desired in vain? Did god
despise the prayers of this his faithful soldier? No assuredly: for the lord
did most graciously grant all these his requests. First, concerning
profession, even in the most extremity, the Lord (...) assisted him. For when
he stood at the stake, without Bocardo gare at Oxford, and the tormen (...)
about to set the fire upon him and that most reverend father D. Rid ley, he
lifted up his eyes toward heaven with a most amiable and (...), saying these
words. Fidelis est Deus, qui non (...) nos tentari supra id quod possumus. God
is faithful, which does not suffer us to be tempted above our strength: and so
afterward by and by shed his blood in the cause of christ, the which blood
ran out of his heart in such abundance that all those that were present
(being godly) did marvel to see the most part of the blood in his body so to
be gathered to his heart, and with such violence to gushe out, his body being
opened by the force of the fire. By the which thing God most graciously
granted his request, the which was, to shede his hearts blood in the defense of
the Gospel. How mercifully the Lord heard his second request, in restoring
his gospel once again to this realm, these present dais can bear record. But
alas, what shall England say for her defense, how shall she avoid the terrible
plages of God for the horrible and deuelish vnthanckfulnes, for that treasure?
The Lord be merciful unto us.

Now concerning his third request, it was also most effectuously granted to
the grent praise of God, the furtheraunce of his Gospel, and to the
vnspeakenble comfort of this realm. For when matters were even desperate, and
the enemies mightily flourished and triumphed, Gods word banished, (...),
suddenly the Lord called to remembran^ce his mercy, and made an end of all
these miseries, and appointed her, for whom that same gray headed father
Latimer so earnestly prayed in his (...), as the true and natural ruler, and
owner of this imperial (...) to show her (...), and by the brightness of Gods
word to confound the dark, (...) and (...) kingdom of Antichrist, and to
restore the tem ple of God again, the which thing not this faithful prophet
only, but all the rest, whom God made worthy to be his witnesses, did most
earnestly require and desire in their faithful prayers. The self same God
grant unto every faithful Christiar: his spirit, that they may be dilligent
and watchful in prayers for her, by whom God has bestowed such vnspeakcable
gifts upon us, that the same God will assyste her with his grace and holy
spirit, to proceed faythfullye in the building of his house, and in plucking
down of all kinds of sin and (...), (...), Idolatrpe and all the monuments
of the same, to the glory of his name and her cuerlasting and endless comfort.
To the which faithful prayers, that all they which fear God, may be the (...)
I have (...) forth these sermons, made by this holy man of God, and dedicated
them to your grace: partly because they were preached (...) your (...) house at
Grimsthorp, by this reverend father and faithful (...) of god, whom you did
norish, and whose doctrine you did most (...) embrace, to the praise of god and
unspeakable (...) of al godly hearts, the (...) did (...) great admiration
marvel at the (...) gifts of god (...) upon you grace, in giving unto you
such a (...) spirit, by whose power and virtue you were able to overcome the
world, to forsake your (...), (...) and goods, your worldly (...) and (...),
(...) high estate and estimation with the which you (...) adorned, and to
become an (...) for Christ and his gospels sake, to (...) rather to (...) with
the people of god, then to (...) the (...) of the world with a wicked (...)
the (...) of (...) greater (...), then the treasures of England: where (...)
the (...) are far otherwise (...): for they have their pleasures amongst the
ports of (...), they eat and (...) and make (...), not passing what become of
(...) or his (...): they be (...) dronken with the sweet delicates of this
miserable (...), that they will not taste of yt buter morsels which the lord has
appointed and prepared for his chosen children, and especyall friends: Of the
which he did make you most gratiouslye to taste, geuyg unto your grace his
spirit, that you were able in all the tormoyles and greuaunces the which you
did receive, not only at the hands of those which were your professed
enemies, but also at the hands of them which pretended (...) and good will,
but secretly wrought sorrow and myschyef, to be quiet and (...), and in the end
brought your grace home again into your native country, no doubt to no
other end, but that you should be a comfort unto the comfortles, and an
instrumente by the which his holy name should be praised, and his gospel
propagated and spredde abroad, to the glory of his holy name, and your eternal
comfort in Christ Jesus, unto whose merciful hands I commit your grace, with
all youres eternally.

Amen.
From Southam, the second of October.
Certain sermons made by the right reueren de father in God, master doctor
Latymer, before the right virtuous and honorable lady, Katherine duchess of
Suffolk, in the ycre of our Lord. 1552.
OUR FATHER which art in heaven. I have entered of late in the wase of
preaching, and spoken many things of prayer, and rather of prayer than of any
other thing. For I think there is nothing more necessary to be spoken of, nor
more abused than prayer was by the craft and suttletie of the devil: for many
things were taken for prayer when they were nothing less. Therefore at this
same (...) also I have thought it good to entreat of prayer, to the intent that
it might be known what a precious thing right prayer is. I told you first
what prayer is. Secondarily, to whom we ought to pray. Thirdely, where and in
what place we ought to pray. And fourthely I told you the diversity of
prayer, namely of the common prayer and the private. These and such like
things I have dilated and cxpounded unto you of late in the open pulpet.

Now at this present time I (...) as by the way of a lecture, at the request
of my most gracious Lady, to expound unto you, (her household servants, and
other that be willing to hear) the right understanding and meaning of this
most perfect prayer, which our savior himself taught us, at the request of his
disciples, which prayer we call the Pater noster. This prayer of our lord may
be called a prayer above all prayers, the principal and most perfect prayer,
which prayer ought to be regarded above all others, considering that our
Savior him self is the author of it, he was the maker of this prayer, being
very God and very man. He taught us this prayer which is a most perfect
scholemaister, and commanded us to (...) it, which prayer contains great and
wonderful things, if a learned man had the handlyng of it. But as for me,
such things as I have conceived by the readyng of learned men's books, so
(...) forth as GOD will give me his grace and spirit, I will show unto you
touching the (...) meaning of it, and what is to be understand by every word
contained in that prayer. For there is no word idle or spoken in vain. For it
must needs be perfect, good, and of great (...) our sauiors teaching, which is
the wysedom of God it self. There be many other psalms and prayers in
scripture very good and godly, and it is good to know (...). But it is with
this prayer (the Lords prayer I say) like as with the law of love. All the
laws of Moses, as concerning what is to be done to please God, how to walk
before him uprightly and godly: All such laws are (...) in this The
Abridgeme^t of the law of god.
law of Love, Diliges Dominum Deum (...) ex toto cord tuo, and in tota anima
tua, and in tota mente (...), and proximum sicut reipsum. Thou shall love the
lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind,
and Mat. 22.
thy neighbor as thy self:) even so is it with this prayer. For like as the law
of Love is the su^me and (...) of the other laws, so this prayer is the (...)
and abridgement of The (...) of al prayers.
all other prayers: all the other prayers are contained in this prayer, yea
whatsoever mankind has need of to soul and body, that same is contained in
this prayer.

This prayer has. ii. parts, it has a preface, which some call a salutation
or a loving entrance: secondarily the prayer Mat. 6.
it self. The entrance is this: (...) Pater noster Lu. II.
qui es in coelis, Our father which art in heaven. as who say you christen
people, you that bear the name of christians, you must pray so. Before I go
any further, I must put you in remembrance to consider how much we be bound to
our savior Christ, that he would vouchsafe to teach us to pray: and in this
prayer to signify unto us the good will which our heavenly father bears
toward us. Now to the matter.

Our Father, These words (...) not to the petitions, they be but an entering, a
sekyng favor at Gods hand, yet The entrance into prayer.
if we well way and consider them, they admonish us of many things, and
strenghthen our faith wonders well. For this What it is to call God Father.
word Father signifies that we be Christ's brothers, and that God is our
Father. He is the eldest son, he is the son of GOD by nature, we be his
sons by adoption thorough his goodness, therefore be bids us to call him
our Father, which is to be had in fresh memory, and great reputation. For here
we are admonished how that we be reconciled unto God: we which before times
were his enemies, are made now the children of GOD, and inheritoures of
everlasting life. Thus we be admonished by this word Father. So that it is a
word of much importance and great reputation: For it confyrmeth our faith,
when we call him (...). Therefore our Savior when he teaches us to call God
father, teaches us to understand the VVhae Christ (...) by (...) us to call
god father.
fatherly affeccion which God bears toward us, which thing makes us bold
and hearty to call upon him, knowing that he bears a good will toward us, and
that he will surely hear our prayers. When we be in trouble we doubt of a
stranger whether he will help us or not: but our savior commaundyng us to
call God father, teaches us to be assured of the love and good will of GOD
toward us. So by this word Father, we learn to stablish and to comfort
our says: knowing most assuredlye that he will be good unto us. For Christ
was a perfect schoolemaister, he lacked no wisdom, he knew his Fathers will
and pleasure: he teaches us, yea and most certainly assures us, that GOD
will be no cruel judge, but a loving Father. Here we see what commodities we
have in this word Father. Seeing no we that we find such commodities by this
one word, we ought to consider the whole prayer with No word in this prai er
(...) his weight
great diligence and earnest mind. For there is no word nor letter contained
in this prayer, but it is of great importance and waighte, therefore it is
necessary for us to know and to understand it thoroughlye, and thanne to
speak it consideratelye with great devotion: else it is to no purpose to
speak the words without understanding, it is Note what lyplabour is.
but lyplabour and vain bablying, and so unworthy to be called prayer (as it
was in times (...) used in England.) Therefore whenne you say this prayer,
you must well consider what you say. For it is better once said deliberately
with understanding, then a thousand times without understanding, which is in
very deed but vain babbling: and so more a displeasure than pleasure unto God.
For the mat ter lies not in much saying, but in well saying. So if it be said
to the honor of God, than it has his effect, and we shall have our petitions,
for God is true in his promises: and our Savior knowing him to be well
affected toward us, commands us therefore to call him Father.

Here you must understand, that like as our Savior was most earnest and
fervent in teaching us (...) to pray and call upon God for aid and help, and
for things necessary The devil is dilligent to let prayer.
both to our souls and bodies: So the devil that old serpent, with no less
diligence endeuoreth himself to let and stop our prayers: so that we shall
not call upon god. And amongst other his lettes, he has one especially, where
with he thinks to keep us from prayer, which is the remembrance of our
sins. When he perceives us to be disposed to pray, he comes with his
craft and subtle conueiaunces, saying: What, will thou pray unto god for
aid and help? know thou not that thou art a wicked sinner and a
transgressour of the law of God? Look rather to be The slights of the devil
damned and judged for thy ill doings, than to receive any benefit at his
hands. Wylt thou call him father which is so holy a god? and thou art so
wicked, and miserable a sinner? This the devil will say, and trouble our
minds to stop and let us from our prayer: and so to give us occasion not to
pray unto god. In this temptation we must secke for some remedy and comfort,
for the devil does put us in remembrance of our sins to that end, to keeye
us from prayer and invocation of GOD. The remedy for this temptation is to
call our Savior to remembrance, who has taught us to say this prayer: he
knew his fathers pleasure, he knew what he did. When he commanded us to call
GOD our Father, he knew we should find fatherly affections in god toward
us. Call this (I say) to remembrance, and than again remember that our
Savior has cleansed, thorough his passion, all our sins, and taken away all
our wickedness. So that as many as believe in him shall be the children of God.
In such wise let us strive and fight against the temptacions of the devil,
which would not have us to call upon god: because we be sinners. Catch thou
hold of out savior, believe in him, be assured in thy heart that he with his
sufferyng took away all thy sins. Consider again, that our Savior calls
us to prayer, and commands us to pray: Our sins let us, and withdraw
us from prayer, but our savior makes them nothing: when we believe in him,
it is like as if we had no sins. For he changes with us, he takes our
sins and wickedness from us, and gives unto us his holiness,
righteousness, justice, fulfyllyng of the law, and so consequentely everlasting
life: So that we (...) like as if we had done no sin at all: for his
ryghtuousnesse stands us in so good stead, as though we of our own selves
had fulfilled the law to the vttermoste.

Therefore our sins can not let us, nor withdraw us from prayer: for they be
gone, they are no sins, they can not be hurtful unto us. Christ dyeng for
us, as all the scripture both of the new and old testament witnesses: Dolores
nostros ipse portauit, He has taken away our sorrows. (...). 53.
Like as when I owe unto a man an hundredth pound, the day is expired, he
will have his money, I have it not, and for lack of it, I am laid in
prison. In such dystresse comes a good friend, and says: Sir, be of good
cheer, I will pay thy dettes, and forthwith pays the wholle sum, and
sets me at liberty. Such a friend is our Savior, he has paid our
dettes, and set us at liberty, else we should have been damned world without
end in everlasting prison and darkness. Therefore though our sins condemn
us, yet when we allege Christ and believe in him, our sins shall not hurt
us. For saint John says: (...) peccauerit aduocatum habemus apud 1 Ioh. 2.
(...), lesum Christum iustum, We have an advocate with God the Father, Jesus
Christ the rightuous. Mark that he says (...), non aduocatos, he speaks
singularly, not plurally. We have one advocate, not many, One (...), not many.
neither saints nor any body else, but only him: and none other neither by the
way of Mediation, nor by the way of redemption. He only is sufficient, for
he only is all the dooer, let him have all the wholle praise. Let us not
withdraw from him his (...), and give it to creatures: for he only
satisfies for the sins of the whole world. So that all that believe in
Christ be clean from all the fylthines of their sins. For saint John
Baptist says. John 1.
Ecce agnus dei qui (...) peccata mundi. Behold the lamb of God which takes
away the sins of the world: Does yt devil call thee from prayer? Christ
calls the unto it again: 2. John. 3.
For so it is written. In hoc aparuit filius dei vt destruat opera diaboli, To
that end the son of god appeared to destroy the works of the devil.

But mark here, Scripture speaks not of (...) sinners, Christ suffered not
for them, his death remedieth Christ suffe red not for (...).
not their sins. For they be the bondmen of the devil and his slaves, and
therefore Christ's benefytes pertayne not un to them. It is a wonderful saying
that (...) John has. Behold the lamb of GOD that takes away the sins of
the world. The (...) upll says unto me: thou art a sinner. No, says Sainet
John, the lamb of God has taken away thy sins. Item Habentesigitur
pontificem (...), qui pe Hebr. 4
Christ is an high bishop.
netrauit coelos, lesum filium Dei, accedamus cum fiducia, ad thronum gratiae,
vt consequamur misericordiam. We therefore having a great high (...), which
has passed thorough the heavens even Jesus the son of GOD, let us with
boldness gee unto the seat of his grace that we may obtain mercy. O it is
a comfortable thing that we have an access unto God: Esaias says, (...) eius
sanati sumus: Esa 53
The pain of our punnishment was laid vppen him, and with his stripes are we
healed. Further in the new testament we read, Huie omnes Prophetaetestimonium
perhibent, Act. 10 All the pro phetes testi fie of Christ.
remissionem peccatorum accipere per nomen eius om nes qui credunt in eum. Unto
the same bear all Prophets witness, that all they do receive forgiveness of
sins by his name, which believe on him. Now you see how ye be remedied from
your sins, you hear how you shall wythstande the devil when he will
wythdrawe you from prayer: Let us therefore not give over prayer, but stick
unto it, let us rather believe Christ our Savior, then the devil, which
was a liar at the beginning. You know now how you may prevent him, how you
may put him of, and avoid his temptations.

There is one other addicion before we come to the peticions, which does much
confirm our faith, and increase What these words which arre in heaven do
teach us
the same. Qui es in coelis, which art in heaven. These words put a diuersitye
between the heavenly father, and our temporal fathers. There be some
temporal fathers which would feign help their children, but they can not,
they be not able to help them. Again there be some fathers which are rich
and might help their children, but they be so unnatural they will not help
them. But our heavenly Father, in that we call him Father, we learn that he
will help, that he bears a fatherlye love toward us. (...) heaven, here we
learn that he is able to help us, to give us al good things necessary to
soul and body: and is mighty to defend us from all ill and peril. So it
appears that he is a Father which will help, and that he being celelestiall,
which is able to help us. Therefore we may have a boldness and confidence,
that he may help us, and that he will help us, where and whenever we call.
he says: Coelum and terram impleo. I syll heaven and earth. And again Hie.
23.
Coelum mihi seeds est, and terta scabellum pedum meorum, Esa 66.
Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footestoole. Where we see that he is a
mighty GOD, that he is in heaven and earth with his power and might. In heaven
he is apparently, where face to face he shows himself unto his Angels and
Saines. In earth he is not so apparently, but darkelye and obscurelye he
exhibiteth himself unto us: for our corrupt and feeble flesh could not
bear his majesty: Why god is not appa rantly upon, earth.
Yet he (...) the earth, that is to say, he rules and governs the same,
ordering all things according unto his will and pleasure. Therefore we must
learn to persuade our selves, and undoubtedly believe that he is able to help:
and that he bears a good and fatherly will toward us, that he will not
forgette us. Therefore the king and prophet David says, Dominus de coelo
prospexit, The Lord has seen down from heaven. As far as the earth is
from Psalm 53.
heaven, yet GOD looks down, he sees all things, he The (...) see not loun
from heaven.
is in every corner. He sayethe the Lord has looked down, not the
Saynctes. No, he says not so. For the Saints have not so sharp eyes to see
down from heaven: they be spur blind, and sand blind. they can not see so
far, nor have not so long ears to hear. And therefore our petition and
prayer should be unto him, which will hear, and can hear. For it is the
Lord that looks down. He is here in earth (as I told you) very darkely,
but he is in heaven most manifestely: where he shows him (...) unto his
angels and saints face to face. We read in Scripture that Abels blood did
cry unto Gene 4
God: where it appears that he can hear, yea not only God heard the cry
(...) Abels blood.
hear, but also see and feel. for he sees over all things, so that the
least thought of our hearts is not hid from him. Therefore ponder and
consider these words well, for they fortify our says. We call him Father,
to put our selves in remembrance of his good will toward us. Heavenly we
call him, signifying his might and power that he may healpe and do all
things according to his will and pleasure. So it appears most manifestly,
that there lacks neither good will nor power in him. There was ones a
prophet which when he was ill entreated of king Ioas, said: Dominus videat
and (...), The Lord (...). Para. 24
look upon it, and require it. There be many men in England and other
where else, which care not for God: yea they be clean without God, which say
in their hearts, Nubes latibulum eius, (...) nostra considerat, and circa car
John. 22.
dines (...) ambulat, Tushe the clouds cover him that he may not se, and he
dwells above in heaven. But as I told you before, Abels blood may certify us
of his present know ledge. Let us therefore take heed that we do nothing that
might displease his majesty, neither openly nor secretly. For he is every
where, and nothing can be hyd from him, Vider and requiret, He sees it, and
will punish it.

Further this word Father is not only apt and convenient for us to strengthen
our faith withal (as I told you) but also it moves God the sooner to hear
us when we call An other commodity of this word Father.
him by that name Father. For he perceiving our confidence in him, can not
chose but show him like a Father. So that this word Father is most mete to move
god to pity, and to grant our requests. Certain it is, and proved by holy
Scripture, that God has a fatherly and loving affection towarves us, far
passing the love of bodilye parents to their children. Yea as far as heaven
and earth is a sonder, The love of god toward us excedeth the natural love
of parents to their own children. Esa. 49.
so far his love toward mankind exccdeth the love of natu ral parents to
their children, which love is set out by the mouth of his holy Prophet Esaias,
Where he says: Number (...) tradet (...) suum, quo minus misereatur (...) vteri
sui? si esto (...) illae ego tamen (...) non (...) Will a wife forget the child
of her womb, and the son whom she has borne? and though she do forgette
him, yet will not I forgette thee. Here are (...) the affections and
unspeakable love, which GOD bears toward us. He says: (...) potest
(...)? May a woman? He speaks of the woman, meaning the man too: but because
women most commenly are more (...) toward their Children then men be,
therefore he names the woman. And it is a very unnatural woman that hates
her child or neglects the same. But O lord what crafts and conueiaunces
uses the devil abroad, that he can bring his matters so to pass, that some
women set a side not alonely all motherly affections, but also all natural
humanitye, in so much that they kill their own children, their own blood,
and flesh.

I was a late credibly informed of a priest which had taken A (...) the mid
wife.
in hand to be a middewyfe: O what an abominable thing is this: but what
followed? he ordered the matter so, that the poor innocente was lost in the
mean season. Such things the devil cannebrynge to pass, but what then: God
says. Though a woman do forgette her children, though they kill them, yet
will I not forgette thee says the Lord GOD almightye. Truth it is there be
some women very unnatural and unkind, which shall receive their
punishements of GOD for it. But for all that we ought to beware and not believe
every tale told unto us, and so rashelye judge, I know what I mean. There
has been alate such tales spread abroad, and most untruly, such false
taletellers shall have a grievous punishment of the Lord when he shall come to
reward eve rye one according unto his deserts.

Here I have occasion to tell you a storye which happened at Cambridge.
Master Bylney (or rather Saint Bylney that suffered death for Gods word sake)
the same Bilney was the instrumente whereby God called me to knowledge, (...)
was gods instrument to (...).
for I may thank him, next to god, for that knowledge that I have in the
word of GOD. For I was as obstinate a (...) as any was in England, in so
much that when I should be made Bacheler of Divinity, my whole oration went
against Philip Melanchton, and against his opinions. Bilney heard me at that
time, and perceived that I was zealous without knowlage, and he came to me
afterward in my study, and desired me for Gods sake to hear his confession,
I did so. And to say the truth, by his (...) by hearing (...).
confession I learned more than asore in many years. So from that time
forward I began to smell the word of god, and forsook the schole doctors and
such foolries. Now after I had been acquainted with him, I went with him to
visit Bilneys ex ercise
the prisoners in the tower at Cambridge, for he was ever visityng prisoners
and sick folk. So we went together, and exhorted them as well as we were
able to do, moving them to patience, and to acknowlage their faults. Among
other prisoners there was a woman which was accused that she had killed her
own child, which act she plainly and stedsastly donyed, and could not be
brought to confess the act, which denyeng gave us occasion to search for
the (...), and so we did. And at the length we found that her husband
loved her not. And therefore he sought means to make her out of the (...).
The matter was thus.

A child of hers had been sick by the space of a year, and Note this (...).
so decayed, as it were in a consumption: At the length it dyed in harvest
time. She went to her neighbors and other friends to desire their healpe, to
prepare the child to the buryall, but there was no body at home, every man was
in the field. The woman in a heaviness and trouble of spirit, went to
being her self alone prepared the child to the buryall: her husband coming
home, not having great love toward her, accused her of the murder, and so
she was taken and brought to Cambridge: But as (...) as I could learn,
through earnest inquisition I thought in my conscience the woman was not
gilty, all the circumstances well considered. Immediately He (...) king Henry
the eighte.
after this I was called to preach before the king, which was my first
sermon that I made before his (...), and it was done at Wyndsore: where his
majesty after the sermon was done did most (...) talk with me in a gallerye.
Now, when I saw my time, I kneeled down before his Majesty openyng the
whole matter, and afterward most humblye desired his Majesty to pardone that
womanne. For I thought in my conscience she was not giltye: else I would not
for all the world sewe for a murderer. The king most graciousely heard my
humble request, in so much that I had a pardon ready for her at my return
homewarde. In the mean season that same woman was delivered of a child in the
toure at Cambridge, whose Godfather I was, and mystresse (...) is godfather to
a child borne in prison.
Cheek was godmother. But all that time I hid my par don, and told her
nothing of it, only exhortyng her to confess the truth: At the length the
time came when she looked to suffer, I came as I was wont to do, to
instruct her, she made great moan to me, and most earnestlye Note one of the
(...) of ignorance
required me, that I would find the means that she might be (...) her
sufferynge. For she thought she should have been damned if she should
suffer without purification. Where master Bilney and I told her that that
that law was made unto the Jews, and not unto us, and that women lyeng in
chyldbedde (...) not unclean before God; neither is purification used to that
end that it should cleanse from sin, but rather a (...) and (...) law made for
natural honesty sake: signifieng that a woman before the time of her
purification, that is to say, as long as she is a grene woman, is not mete to
do such acts as other women, nor to have (...) with her husband, for it is
against natural honesty, and again the common wealth, to that end
purification is kept and used, not to make a (...) or holiness of it, as some
do, which think Note here one other (...) of ignorance.
that they may not fetch neither fire nor any thing in that house where
there is a green woman: which opinion is erroneous and wicked. For women (as
I said before, be as well in the favor of god before they be purified, Thus
has God
as after. So we travailed with this woman till we brought wrought a double
(...) uerance at one time.
her to a good trade, and at the length showed her the kings pardon and let her
go.

This tale I told you by this occasion, that though some women be very
unnatural, and forgette their children, The purpos of Latimers tale.
yet when we hear any body so report, we should not be to hastye in
beleuynge the tale, but rather suspende our judgments till we know the truth.

And again we shall mark hereby the great love and loving kyndnes of GOD our
loving father. Who shows himself so loving unto us, that notwithstanding
women forget sometimes their own natural children, yet he will not forgette
us, he will hear us, when we call upon him, as he says by the Evangelist
Matthew. Ask and it shall be Mat. 7.
given unto you: Seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto
you. etc. Then he comes and brings in a pretty similitude, saying: Is there
any man amongst you, A similitude.
which if his son ask bread, will offer him a stone? if ye then Cum sitis mali,
being evil, can give your Children good gifts etc. In these words where he
says: Cum sitis mali The mea ning of these (...) des, Cum (...) it is mali.
which be evil, he gives us our own proper name, he paynteth us out, he
pincheth us, he cutteth of our comes, he plucketh down our stomachs. And here
we learn to acknow lege our selves to be wicked, and to know him to be the
welspring and fountain of al goodness, and yt al good things come of him.
Therefore let every man think lowly of himself, humble himself, and call
upon god, which is redye to geus us, not only bread and drink, or other
necessaries, but the holy ghost: to whom will he give the holy ghost, to
lords and ladies? to gentilmen or gentilwomen? No not so, he is not ruled by
affections, he has not respect unto personages. Poscentibus (says he,) unto
those which call upon him, being rich or poor, lords or kinghtes, beggars
or rich, he is ready to give unto them when they come to him. And this is a
great comfort unto those which be God ge ueth his (...) respect of persons.
poor and miserable in this world For they may be assured of the help of
GOD, yea and as boldly go unto him and desire his help, as the greatest king
in earth. But we must ask, we must inquyre for it: He would have us to be
importune, to be earnest and diligent in desiring, than we shall receive when
we come with a good faith and He that vvil receive at go (...) hand any thing
must ask with faith. We must pray to god only.
confidence. To whom shall we call? not unto the Saints, poscentibus illum
(says he) those that call upon him shall be heard therefore we ought to come to
him only, and not unto his Saints.

But one word is left which we must needs consider. Noster, our, he says
not my, but our. wherefore says he, our? This word our teaches us to
consider that the Father (...) what is to be lear ned by this word our.
of heaven is a common father, as well my neighbors Father as mine, as well
the poor man's Father as the rich, so that he is not a pecultar father, but
a Father to the hole church and congregation, to all the faithful, be they
never so poor, so vile, so foul, and despised, yet he is their father as well
as mine: and therefore I should not despise them, but consider that God is
their father as well as mine.

Here may we perceive what communion is between us, so that when I pray, I
pray not for my self alone, but for all the rest: Again, when they pray,
they pray not for themselves only, but for me: for Christ has so framed this
prayer, that I must needs include my neighbor in it. Therefore all those
which pray this prayer, they pray as well Christvvold have our prayers common
to us all.
for me as for them selves, which is a great comfort to every faithful heart,
when he considers that all the church prays for him. For amongst such a
great number there be some which be good, and whose prayer God will hear. As
it appeared by Abraham's prayer, which prayer was so (...) 18.
(...), that God would have pardoned Sodom and Gemorre if he might have
found but ten good persons Act. 27.
therein. Likewise Saint Paul in shipwreck preserved his company by his
prayer. So that it is a great comfort unto us to know that all good and
faithful persons pray for us. There be some learned men which gather out of
scripture that the prayer of saint Stephen was the occasion Act 7
of the conversion of Saint Paul. Saint Chrysostom Chrisost. (...) is not to
be (...) in this point.
says, that that prayer that I make for my self is the best, and is of more
efficacy than that which is made in (...). Which saying I like not very well.
For our savior was better learned than saint Chrysostom. He taught us to
pray in common for all: therefore we ought to follow him and to be glad to pray
one for an other. For we have a common saying amongst us: Who so ever loves
me, loves A proverb love me love my hounde.
my hounde. So who so ever loves God, will love his neigh bor, which is made
after the image of God.

And here is to be noted that prayer has one propretie before all other good
works: for with my alms I healpe but one or two at ones, but with my faithful
prayer I help all. The property of prayer.
I desire God to comfort al men living, but specially domesticos fidei, those
which be of yt household of god. Yet we ought to pray with all our hearts for
the other which believe not, that God will turn their hearts and renew them
with his spirit: yea our prayer reaches so far, that our very capital
ennemie ought not to be omitted. Here you see what The excellency of prayer.
an excellent thing prayer is, when it proceeds from a faithful heart, it
does far pass all the good works that men can do.

Now to make an end, we are monished here of charity, and taught, that God is
not only a private father, but a common Father unto the whole world, unto all
faithful, be they never so poor and miserable in this world, yet he is
their Father. Where we may learn humility and lowlynesse, specially great and
rich men shall learn here, not to be lofty, or to despise the poor. For
when ye despise the What it is to despise the poor.
poor miserable manne, whom despise ye? ye despise him which called GOD his
father as well as you: and peradventure (...) acceptable and more regarded in
his syghte than you be. Those proud persons may learn here to leave their
stubbornness and loftynesse. But there be a great meany which little regard
this: they think them selves better than other men be, and so despise and
(...) the poor: in so much that they will not hear (...) men's causes, nor
defend them from wrong and oppression of the rich and myghtie. Such proud
men A lesson for them that (...) aloft.
despise the lords prayer, they should be as careful for their brethren as
for theymselues. And such humility, such (...) and carfulness toward our
neighbors we learn by this word Our. Therefore I desire you on Gods
behalf, let us cast away all disdainfulnesse, all proudenesse, ye and all
bybble babble. Let us pray this prayer with understanding and great
deliberation, not following the trade of monkerye, which was without all (...)
and understanding. There be but few which can say from the bottom of their
hearts, Our Father, a little number. Neither the Turks neither the Jews, The
number ofthem that may call god Fa there is but small.
nor yet the impenitent sinners can call God their Father. Therefore it is but
vain babblynge what so ever they pray: GOD hears them not, he will not
receive their prayers. The promise of (...) is made unto them only which be
faithful and believe in God, which endeavor them selves to live according unto
his commandments. For Scripture says: Oculi Domini super iustos, The eyes
of the Lord are over the ryghtuouse, and Psalm. 33.
his ears open unto their prayers. But who are those ryghtuous? every
penytente sinner that is sorye from the bottom of his heart for his
wickedness, and beleueeth that GOD will forgive him his sins, for his son
our (...) Jesus Christ's sake. This is called in Scripture a just man, that
indeuoreth him self to leave all wickedness. In such forte Peter and Paul were
just, because they What it is to be just.
did repent and believed in Christ, and so endeavored them selves to live
according unto Gods laws. Therefore like as they were made just before god, so
may we too, for we have even the self same promise. Let us therefore follow their
ensample, let us forsake all sins and wickedness: than god will hear our
prayers. for Scripture says, Dominus facit quicquid volunt timentes eum, and
clamorem eorum exaudit ac seruat eos, The Lord fulfylleth the desire of them
that fear him, he also will hear their cry, and healpe Psalm. 145.
them. In an other place he says: Si manseritis in sermon meo, and verba
mea custo diueritis quicquid volueritis petentes accipietis, If ye abide in me,
and my words abide in you, ask what ye will, and it shall be done for you.
So we see, that the promises pertain only to the faithful, to these which
endeavor themselves to live according to gods Who they be vvhomo God will
hear.
will and pleasure, which can be content to leave their wickedness and solowe
godliness, those God will hear at all times, whansoeuer they shall call upon
him.

Remember now what I have said. Remember what is meant by this word Our, namely
that it admonysheth us of love and charity, it teaches us to be ware of
stubburnesse and proudnesse, consyderyng that God loved as well the beggar as
the rich man: for he regards no persons. Again, what is to be understand
by this word Father, namely that he bears a good will toward us, that he
is ready and willing to healpe us. Heavenly, that admonishes us of his potencie
and ability, that he is ruler over al things. This I say remember and follow
it, then we shall receive all things necessary for this lyse, and finally
cuerlastyng joy and felicity. Amen. Let us pray. Our father.

The second sermon upon the Lords prayer made by master (...).
SANCTIFICETVR nomen tuum. Hallowed be thy name. These few words contain the
first petition of the Lords prayer, the other words which go before this, be
no part of this petition, but rather an introduction un to these petitions and
they be like a preface, or learned entrance to the matter, that the petitions
might be the sooner and with more favor heard. For our Savior being a
perfect scholemayster as a learned and an expert orator, teaches us, how we
should begin our prayer, that we might be spedily heard, and how to get
favor at gods hand.

I have a manner of teaching which is very tedious to them Repetitio^s are more
(...) then pleasant.
that be learned. I am wont ever to repete those things which I have said
before, which repetitions are nothing pleasant to the learned, but it is no
matter, I care not for them, I seek more the profit of those which be
ignorant, (...) is the (...) that preachers ought chief ly to (...).
than to please learned men. Therefore I often times repete such things which
be needful for them to know, for I would speak so that they might be
edified withal.

I spoke some things this day in the commendation of (...) prayer. And first I
told you that it was our (...) own making and handworke, which is a perfect
scholemaister put in authority by God the heavenly father himself, which says:
Hic est filius meus dilectus, in quo mihi been (...) (...) 17.
(...) ipsu^ audite, This is my well beloved son, in whom I have pleasure,
hear him. This prayer is a perfect prayer, The lords (...) is the su^me of
all (...) prayers.
an Abridgemente and compendious (...) of all other prayers. There is nothing
that we have need of, neither to our souls or bodies, but it is contained in
some of these petitio^s, nor nothing that god promises in his word to give us,
but it is expressed in one of these. vii. petitions. The cause why we call
god fa there.


I showed you this day why we call God (...), namely because he bears a
loving and fatherly heart toward us. It is a sweet word Father, and a
word that pleases GOD much, when it is spoken with a faithful heart, which
above all things God requires. This word To call god our father. is profita
(...) for us two vvais.
Father, moves Gods affection in a manner toward us, so that he hearing
the word Father, can not choose but she we himself a Father in deed. So
that it is a word profitable to us in gods behalf, and again for our
own selves. For it moves GOD to pity, and also helps our faith: So that
we doubt not, but that we shall find him a Father, which will grant our
requests and petitions made unto him in the name of Christ. Now what crafts
and conueyaunccs the devil uses to withdraw and let us from prayer, I
told you to day before noone. If you (...) prayers you shall find the
temptations of the devil, for he sleapeth not: he ever intends to withdraw
us from prayer. But I told With faith we must fight (...) the (...).
you what remedy you shall use against him, how you shall strive against
him, namely with Faith, (...) that our Savior has taken away our sins,
(...) that they can not (...) us. For they be no (...) in the Christ has
(...) away our sins and the (...) due (...) sins.
sight of GOD: for he has taken away both the giltinesse of sins, and the
pains and punishementes which follow sins. Christ has deserved that those
which believe in him shall be quite from all their sins. These benefits of
Christ are (...) out in Scripture in many places, and these be the weapons
wherewith we must fight against the devil, and his illusions: not with holy
water, for I tell you the devil is not afraid of holy water: It is Christ
The devil is not afraid of holy vva ter.
that has gotten the victory over him, it is he that vanquisheth the
serpents head, and not holy water. Further in that we call him Father, his
will and fatherly affections ar expressed: that we call him Heavenly Father,
his might and power, his (...) is expounded unto us. So that you perceive that
he is both loving and kind toward (...), that he hears a good will, and
also is able to help, able God is both vvilling and able to help (...).
to defend us from all our ennemies spiritual and temporal. Therefore
let us put our trust and confidence in him: let us not despair of his
healpe, seeing he is so loving, kind, and gentill toward us, and than so
mighty, We have no cause to dispeir of help at his hand that is both able
and vvil. (...) to help (...).
that he has all things in his hands. This affection and love toward us,
passes all motherly affections. And here I brought in to day a womanne
which was accused that she should have killed her child, I tolds you what
business good master Bilney and I had with her, before we could bring her to
a good trade. For she thought her self to be (...) if she should suffer
before her (...). There I told you that purification is Good Bil ney and good
(...) to (...) a poor vvo man.
continued in the Church of GOD, for natural honestles sake, that manne and
wife should not company together asore that time, and not to that end that
it should clcanse from sin. For there is nothing that cleanses from
sin, neither in heaven nor in earth, Only the (...) of (...) sethe from
sin.
saving only the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ.

For how can a woman having company; with her husband, and bringing forth
children according unto Gods Iniunction: How can she be made an heathen
woman, dooynge nothing but that GOD has To do that god com mauudeth is not
sin
commanded her to do? Therefore against such foolyshe opinions that women
baue have, thynkyng them selves out of the favor of GOD, lyenge in
chyldebedde. I spoke to day, and told you how that it is no offense before
GOD: only let every manne and wife A man may syn deadlye with his own wise
take heed and use themselves honestlye: for a man may sin deadly with his
own wife, if he (...) to Gods order mysuse her. Further you have heard how yt
good will of god toward us is set out by this word Father, and his power To
(...) us (...).
and omnipotency by this word Heavenly. But I would have you to consider
well this word Our. For it is a great help unto us, and strengtheth much
our faith, so that we may be assured, that every good man in the whole world
will pray for us and with us, whiles we have one father, and one manner of
prayer. And this word Our, puts us in remembrance that we be brethren in
Christ: where we be admonished to despise no man, be he never so Princes and
plovvmen are al made of one matter.
miserable or poor, for we have all one Father, which has made us all of one
metal of earth. So that the hygheste prince in the world is made as well of
earth, as the poorest, and so shall turn into the same again as well as the
poorest shepard. Let these proud persons mark this well, which be ever ready
to despise every man. Such proud persons say never the Lords prayer with
good mind: yea God is not their Father. For he abhors all prowdnes,
therefore The proud ma^s father is in hell.
such stubborn folowes when they will pray, they should not say, Our father
which art in heaven, but rather, Our father which art in hell. God is their
Father, as concerning their substance, for he gives them souls and bodies:
but they make them selves the members of the devil, contrary unto gods
will and pleasure. Therefore set aside all arrogancy and proudenesse. Like
wise all superstitious and hypocritical babblyng, speaking many (...) in
prayer is compared to the (...) of a false advocate at a (...).
words to littel purpose. As I heard say of some lawyers, which babble and
prate, and pretend a great diligence and earneste desire to defend the (...)
man's cause, but in their hearts they be false, they sceke money, and
nothing else, so that their hearts and mouth disagree.

Let us (I say) not follow such Lawyers, let us not make a show of
holiness with much babblynge: for GOD has no pleasure in it, therefore
away with it: yea not alone with this, but with all that may let us in our
prayer, set it aside, and (...) reucrentely to talk with GOD, like as when
you go to the communton you must be prepared unto it, you must be in charity
with As we com municate so when we pray we must be pre pa (...).
your neigbbor: so like wise when you will talk with god, and pray to him, you
must be prepared.

Here you may perceive, that all those persons that will not be corrected for
their faults, that can not bear godly admonitions, they talk never with God
to his pleasure, they be not ruled by Gods spirit, and so not mete for him.
What manner of per sons they be (...) god will not hear.
All rebellious persons, all bloodthirstie persons: all covetous persons, all
lecherous persons, all liars, dronkards, and such like, be not in the case to
talk with God. GOD will not hear them, he can not abide them: they stynke
before his face, as long as they come before him with such abominable sins,
not intending to leave them. Remember now what a doctrine is (...) in this
preface, One prayer with under standing is better then (...) without.
weigh it, for it is better to say it sententiously one time than to run it
over an hundredth (...) with humblynge and mumbling.

Now when we have begone as we ought to do, what shall we desire? (...) nomen
tuum, Hallowed be thy name. Thy name Father, be hallowed, be sanctified, be ma
(...). What is this? What meant our savior when he commands us that we shall
desire that Gods name (...) hallowed? There is a great number of people which
speak these words with their mouth, but not with (...), contrary to that
saying: Quicquid (...), (...), Musculus
tanquam cupientes habere. But they say it without knowledge, therefore they
say it not, vt oportet, as they ought to do. Thy name, we require not that
his name The mea ning of the second peti (...).
may be hallowed in him, for this is all ready done without our prayer: but
we desire that he will give us grace, and assyste us, that we in all our
doings thorough out our life may sanctify his name.

And here we are admonyshed again of love and charity: For when we say,
Hallowed be thy name, we ask in all men's names, where we may perceive what
Communion and felowshyppe is between the faythefull (...) of GOD. For every
faithful manne and woman requires, that the whole Church may halowe and
sanctify Gods word. What is it to be hallowed? We desire that the name of God
may be reveled, opened, manifested and credited through out all the world. What
is gods What the name of god is. Exo. 9.
name? mary all that is spoken of him in holy Scripture that is his name. he
is called clemens, gracious, misericors, merciful, iustus, rightuous, puniens
iniquitatem, a punisher of wickedness, verax, true, omnipotens, almyghtie,
(...), 9.
longanimis long suffryng, patient, fortis, hearty, ignis consumens, Romans 3.
a consumyng fire, Rex omnis tertae, the king oueryt (...). 10.
whole earth, iudex, a judge, saluator, a Savior. These Iosu. 4.
and such like are the names of God. Now when I make Deuteronomy 4.
my petition unto him, saying: Hallowed be thy name: I Psalm. 49.
desire that his name may be (...), that we may know Ne, 9.
what Scripture speaks of him, and so believe that same, Exodus 22.
and live after it. I do not desire that his name be hallowed Hie. 50.
of him self, for it needs not: he is holy already. But I Gene. 18.
desire that he will give us his Spirit, that we may express Exodus 15.
him in all our doings and conuersations: so yt it may Psalm 18.
appear by our deeds that god is even such one in deed as Psalm. 7.
scripture does report him. We are tried many (...) whether Psalm. 46.
his name be hallowed amongst us or no: he sends us Esa (...)
trouble and adversities to prove us whether we will halow What per sons they
be, that (...) lovv not gods name
his name or no, but he finds us clean contrary. For (...) of us when we be
in trouble do run hither and thither to sorcerers and wissardes to geat
remedy: some again swear and curse, but such fellows halow not the name of
God. But god is Vindex seuerus, a sharp punisher, he will Sapie. (...)
punish sin, and those which blaspheme his holy name.

I heard of late that there be somewicked persons (despisers of God and his
benefits) which say, It is no matter what so ever we do we be baptized, we
can not be damned: For all those that be baptized, and be called christians shall
be To be bap tised and not to (...) gods com (...) is to be vorse then a (...).
saved. This is a false and wicked opinion. And I assure you, that such which
bear the name of christians and be baptized, but follow not gods comandementes,
that such fellows (I say) be worse then the Turks and heathen. For the Turks
and heathen have made no promise unto Christ to serve him. These fellows have
made promise in Baptism to keep Christ's rule, which thing they do not. And
therefore they be worse than (...) Turks. For they break their promise made
before God and the whole congregation. And therefore such christians be most
wicked persured persons, and not (...) be (...), but they go about to make God
(...) so much as (...) in them. There be some again, which when they be in
trouble they call upon God, but he These fell lovves be to (...).
comes not by and by, mynding to prove their patience. They perceiving that he
comes not at yt first call, (...) over by and by, they will no more call upon
him. Do they believe now think (...) they sanctify gods holy name? God
promises in his holy word, Omnis qui petit, Every one that calls, Mat. 7.
that (...) help of me, shall have it. Item. Inuoca me in (...), and exaudiam
(...), and glorificabis me, Call upon Psalm 49.
me in the day of trouble, and I will here thee, and thou shall praise me.
Likewise saint Paul says: (...) est deus 1. Cor 10.
(...) non patietur vos tentari, supra id quod potestis, GOD is faithefull,
which will not suffer you to be tempted above it that ye be able. Now when
we (...) over prayer, To give (...) prayer in trouble is to (...) god a liar.
being in trouble, do we sanctify the name of God? No no, we (...) and
blaspheme his holy name, we make him a liar as much as lies in us. For he
says Eripiam te, I will deliver the, I will help thee. We will call no
more: for we say, he will not help. So we make him and his words Psalm. 49
a liar. Therefore god says to Moses and (...), Quandoquidem non credidistis
mihi, vt (...) me coram filiis Nume. 20
Israel, non introduceris coetum (...) in (...). Because ye believed me not, to
sanctify me in the sight of the children of Israel, therefore you shall not
bring this congregation into the land which I have given (...). Where it
appears what it is to (...) Gods (...), that is to believe his words, to show
our selves that he is true in What (...) is to halovv the name of god.
his doings and sayings. He say the further, A terrore eius ne (...), (...);
animo (...) quin potius Dominum exercituum ipsum (...), Fear them not, neither
be afraid of them, but (...) the Lord of hosts. Esd 8.
Here you see what is to sanctify his name, that is, to believe that all
things be true that be spoken of him, that is, to believe that our ennemies be
not able to go further than it pleases god. And so did the Apostles when they
suffered The Apo stles and (...) did (...) gods name
for gods sake, they believed that god would do with them according to his word
and promise. And so they sanctified god, that is, they declared with their
acts and deeds, that God is a true and faithful god. This did the martyrs of
god. This did the. iii. young men which would not worship (...). (...).
the Idol set up by the king, and therefore were cast into the bur ning oven, to
which pain they were willing to go. we know (said they) that god is able to
help and defend us when it plea seth him. So must we likewise (...) our
selves unto the cross, content to (...) what soever he shall lay upon us. We
may call upon him, and desire his help, but we may not appoint unto him wise
and way how he shall help, and We may not (...) god the manner and way how he
(...) help us, nor (...).
by what means: neither may we appoint him any time, but only sanctify his
name, that is, to call upon him for (...), not doutyng but when it is to his
honor and our profit to be delivered, that he will healpe. But if he help
not, but let us suffer death, happy are we, For than we be delivered from all
trouble. And so these three young men sanctified the name of god, they believed
that god was a helper: To suffer death is to be deliue red from trouble.
and so according to their belefe he help them, meruailously showing his
power, and defending them from the power of the fire. In such wise did (...)
that good man wha^ Holofernes that sturdy capitain made great bragges what
Achior did sanct: fie gods name
he would do, and how he would handle the Jews. This (...) knowing god, and
beleuyng him to be the ruler over heaven and earth, stepte forward, (...)
said to Holofernes: If this people have done wickedness in the sight Judith. 4.
of their GOD, than let us go up against them, but if this people have not
displeased their God, we shall not be able Dani. 4.
to withstand them, for God shall defend them. Here this Achior (...) 117
showed himself to believe that which was spoken of god (...). (...). 8.
in (...), namely yt god would be a deliverer and defender of those which believe
in him. But for all yt he (...), being be fore a great and mighty captain, he was
now handled (...) a vile beast, but what tha^? happy ar those that suffer for
gods sake The prophet says: Co^menda domino via^ tua^, and (...). (...).
Commit thy way unto the lord and he shall bring it to pass, that is to
say: when thou art in trouble call upon the lord, believe in him: and if it be
good for thee, he will deliver thee: so to sanctify gods name is to believe in
him.

Lady Judith that good godly and holy woman sanctified Judith did (...) gods
name
the name of the lord. For she and her people being in great distress and
miseries, she put her hope in God, she fasted and prayed devoutly, and
afterward being moved or monished Judith 13
by a secret admonition, was not afraid to put her self in great danger. In
so much that she took in hand, being a woman, to kill the great captain (of
whom all men were afraid) Holofernes (I say) she was not afraid of him. Judith
8
I trow she rebukes the priests which would appoint god The (...) did
wicked ly in apoin ting god a time.
a time, as who say, he shall be no more my GOD, except he come by that time,
which was very wickedlye done of them. For we ought to be at his pleasure,
whansoeuer and whatsoever he will do with us, we ought to be content withal.
If we were earnest and zelouse as we should be, O how hot we would be in
promoting Gods honor, and sanctifyeng his name: we would nor could not
suffer that any body should go about to dishonest the holy name of GOD.
But we be very cold, we care not for his honor: we ought to be paciente in
our own quarrel, when any body does us wrong, we ought to bear and forbear
it: but in gods behalf we ought to be hot and earnest In gods qua rell we
ought to be (...).
to defend his honor as much as lies in us to do. But it is clean contrary
with us: for in our own quarrel we be as hot as coals: But in gods cause,
for his honor, we care not, we regard it as nothing, whereas it ought most
above all to be regarded. For GOD he is just, rightuouse, faithful and
kind, and therefore we ought to take his part. But nothing makes more for
the sanctifieng of To be (...) full to God is to sancti fie his name
gods holy name, than to be thankful for such gifts, as we receive at his
hands.

And this halowing stands in all things yt may make for the furtherance of
gods honor. To hear gods word, and highlye to esteem the same, that is a
halowyng of gods name. How halowe now those the name of GOD, which refuse
to hear the word of God, or for lack of preachers can not hear it, and how
can they believe when they hear it not? Therefore they that do somewhat for the
furtherance Such as maintain learning (...) lovv gods name.
of learning, for mainteinyng of schools and scholars, they sanctify gods holy
name: As for those preachers which have be^ in my time, they go away. How shall
now this office of preching, ye office of salvation, how shall it be maintained,
except there be made some provision for the same? Here I could say much
against those which let that office, which withdraw the goods wherewith
schools should be maynteined, and take it to themselves, but my audience is not
thereafter. This office of preaching is ye office of salvation, for s. Paul 1.
Cor. 1.
says: Visum est deo per (...) saluos (...) The office of salvation.
credentes. It has pleased God to save the beleuers by the foolyshnes of
preaching: how can they then believe, but by and thorough the office of
preaching: preachers ar Christ's vicares, legatione funguntur pro Deo, they are
Christ's ambassadors. Saint Paul says. Euangelium est potentia Preachers are
Christ's vicares and ambassadors.
dei ad salutem omni credenti, The gospel is the power of god unto salvation
for every beleuer, it is the mighty instrument of God.

When we say, Hallowed be thy name: we desire God that he thorough his
goodness will remove and put away all things that may let and stop the
honor of his name. But I fear me there be many which would not that it
should be so: We desire here that God will remove all infidelity, we require
that all witchecraftes be removed, that art magike and sorcerie be pulled out,
nigromancy taken away: and so nothing left but his holy word, wherewyth we
may daily praise the name of God. For I fear me there Sorcerers dishonor the
name of god.
be a great meany in England which use such sorceries to the dishonor of God
and their own damnation. We require here further that all heresy, all poperye
may be abolished and extinguished. Further we require here that al wic ked
living may be amended and reformed. Next we require that all magistrates may
do their duties. Finallye we require that every man in his vocation may do the
work whereunto god has called him. There be many vocations.

The Magistrates vocation is to see that the common The magi strates of (...).
wealth be well ordered, to see that the schools be maintained, to see that the
universities be well furnished, to see that justice be executed, that the
wicked be punished, and the good rewarded: In summa, to keep every one in good
order. This is their duetye. Further we pray that the priests, the
spiritualtye, or the churchemen, (as they call them) do For church men.
their duties, to preach gods word, to live godly and to give a good
ensample by their conversation: else they do against the honor of GOD, and
their own honesty. Likewise we pray that servants may do their duties.
For For seruan tes.
to be a servant is an honest estate, and much commended in Scripture, and
Scripture speaks much to the comfort of them. And truly those that live in
the fear of god, (consydering that they serve not only their carnal masters,
but God himself,) they be in a good case: but they may not Servants that
serve not with eye service are in good case.
be eye servants. Saint Paul notes this fault, and says, that they
shall not be murmurers, nor froward answerers. Saint Paul would have them
to live so, that they may ornate and sanctifye the name of God. For that
servant that does the thing whereunto he is called, he does adorn his
estate: that servant is a good gospeller that will not be an eye servant.
There be some servants which do their duties as long as their master is
in sight: but as soon as their master is gone, they play the (...). Unto
such fellows I say beware, for though your bodily master see you not, yet your
great master god sees you, and will punish you. Quod agis, toto pectore
agito, What (...) do, do it from the bottom of thy heart, Colos 3
with a good will, go not away with the devils Pater no The devils Pater no
ster.
ster as some do, do all things with a good mind. For I tell you, you be
not forgotten in Scripture, you are much commended in the same. S. Paul
speaks very honorably Servants are not forgot ten in the scripture.
of you, saying, Domino Christo (...), you serve the lord Christ: it becomes
not you to put a difference what business you be commanded to do. For whatsoever
it be, (...) Colos. 3.
it with a good will and it is gods service. Therefore you ought This is to be
vndersta^ ded of all things lau full and god lie.
to do it in respect yt god would have you to do so, for I am no more assured in
my preaching, that I serve god, than the ser uant is in doing such business as
he is commanded to do, skouring the ca^delsticks, or whatsoever it be.
Therefore for gods sake consider the matter. Some of you think, if Christ were
here, you would go with him and serve him. I tell you when you follow your
service, and do such things as your master and maistresse shall command you,
you serve him as well as if he were here bodily. He is not here bodily now, but
his word is here. Domino Christo seruitis, says Saint Paul, you serve the
lord Christ. Therefore I desire you in gods behalf to walk uprightly, and
godly. Consider what god says unto you, (...) qui facit opus domini
negligenter, Cursed be he that does the work of the lord Hie. 48.
negligently. This scripture perteyneth to you as well as to me. For wha^ ye do
your business negligently you be cursed before the face of God. Therefore
consider the goodness of It is a greet (...) to be a servant,
God, that he would have you as well saved as your masters. Surely me
thinks it is a great benefit of God, to be a servant. For those that keep
houses, must make a count before god for their familye, they must watch and
see, that all things be well. But a servant when he can discern what
stands with gods commandments, and what is against it, it is enough for
him: but he must know that he ought not to obey his master or mastresse wha^
they would command him to do against god, in such a case he may re Act. 5.
fuse and withstand them. For it is written, we must more obey A servant may
with stand his master in deniyng to do wicked ly, but not in refusing to
suffer at his hand.
unto god, then man: we should not do against god, to please our masters.
Again, masters and mistresses, are bound to consider their duties, to pay unto
their servants their wages, and meat and drink conuentent. For it is a great
sin to defraud ye laborer of his wages: for it is written, ye cry of ye
laborers shall come before ye lord, it is a great faut before god to de fraud
the^: but there be some servants which be so wicked ye they will co^plain without a
cause, wha^ they cannot have yt that they would have, nor bear al ye rule
themselves. But I say, it is a A thing to be marked both of may sters and
servants.
great thing for a master to (...) his servant: and again yt ser ua^t which
has his whole wages, and does but half his work or is a sluggard, that same
fellow I say is a these before god. For like as the master ought to pay the
whole `wages, so likewise the servant ought to do his whole work.

Here I might have occasion to show how man and wife ought to live together,
how they ought to be faithful loving and friendly one to the other: how the man
ought not to despise the wise, consydering that she is partaker with him of
everlasting life. Therefore the man ought cohabitur, to dwell with her, which is
a great thing. Again, see how the woman ought to behave her self toward
her husband, how faithful she ought to be. Now when they both yield their
duties the one to the other, then they sanctify the name of Who so does
walk in his call (...), sancti fieth the name of god.
god, but when they do contrary to their calling, then they slander the holy
name of god. Therefore let every man and woman walk in their vocations.

We must have a good and earnest mind and will to sanctify the name of God,
for that person that prays and desires of God that his name may be
hallowed, and yet He that will sancti fie gods name, must have an ear nest de
(...).
has no will nor pleasure to do it in deed, this is not the right sanctifieng
of the name of god: S. Peter teaches us how we shall sanctify gods name
saying, Conuersationem (...) gentes habentes bonam, Have a good and holy
conversation, live vprightlye in your calling, so that your light may so
shine before men that they may see your good works, and so glorify god.

I will trouble you no longer, it is better a littell well perceived and borne
away, then a great deal heard and (...) short les son vveli learned.
(...) behind. Consider wherefore our savior commands us to call god our
Father, tha^ afterward way this, (...) art heaven. Than come to the petition,
halovved be thy name, way and consider this. For now is the time wherein the
name of god should be hallowed. For it is a pitiful thing to se what rule and
dominion ye devil bears, how shameless men be: how the name of god is
brought in derision. Therefore Every word must be weigh ed.
let us say from the bottom of our heart Sanctificetur, hallowed, that is to
say, lord God thorough thy goodness remove all wickedness, give us grace to live
vprightlye. And so consider every word, for it is better one word spoken
with good affection then an hundred without it. Yet I do not say this to
let you from saying the whole Pater noster, but I say one word well said, is
better then a great many else. Kede thoroughout all the Scripture, and ye shall
synde Faithful me make shorr prayers.
that all faithful men have made, but short prayers, Abraham Isaac, Jacob,
David, Ezechias, our sauieur himself in the garden says, Pater, si possibile
est tra^seat a me calix iste. Mat. 25.
Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me. This was but a short
prayer. So likewise satnet Stephen says: Act. 7.
Pater, ignosce iilis quia (...) quid faciunt. The publicane praying in the
temple made but a short prayer saying, propitius Lu. 18.
esto mihi peccatori, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. So the thief hanging
upon the cross says, Domine memento mei cum veneris in regnum tuum, Lord
remem Lu. 23.
ber me when thou come in thy kingdom: here was not much bablyng: But I
speak not this to dissuade you from long prayer, when the spirit and the
affections do serve: for our savior himself spente a whole night in prayer.
Sanctificetur, Hallowed be thy name, that is to say lord remove A short and
plain expo sition of this (...)
away thy dishonor, remove away sin, move the^ ye be in authority to do their
duties: move the man and wife to live rightly, move servants to do well. And
so it should be a great grief unto us when we should see any body dishonor
the name of God, in so much that we should cry out, our Father Hallowed be thy
name. This one thing bear away with you above all others: cousyder that when
we will A necessary lesson pla ced where it may best (...) in memory.
come to god and talk with him, we must be penitent sinners, we must abhor
sin, purpose to leave them, and to live uprightly, which grant us god the
Father, Son and holy ghost.

Amen.
The third Sermon upon the Lords prayer made by M. Latymer.
ADueriat regnum tuum. Thy kingdom come. This is the second petition of the
lords prayer. I trust you have not forgotten your. 2. lessons before
rehearsed unto you. First the beginning of the lords prayer, what a treasure
of doctrine is contained in every word. Our what it signifies. Father, what
it means: A short re hersall of that is raught in the other, (...).
and than this addition which art in heaven. How many thin ges is to be noted
by every one of those words: and I trust also you have remembered the contents
of the first petition Sanctificetur nomen (...), Hallowed be thy name. Here I
told you wherein stands the holiness of his name, and what it means namely
we require yt his name may be sanctified in us, that is to say, we require that
all our conuersati ons may be to the honor of God: which follows when we
endeavor our selves to do his pleasure, when we hear his word with great
diligence, and earnest reverence, and so walk in the works of our vocation
every man whereunto God has appointed him. And because the word of God is the
instrumente and fountain of all good things, we pray to god for the
continuance of his word, that he will send godly and well learned men
amongst us, which may be able to declare us his will and pleasure. So that we
may glorifye him in the honor of our visitation, when god shall visit us, and
reward every one according unto his desert.

One thing we must well consider and not forget it, namelye We must not forget
that we are able to do nothing of our self, ac cording to gods will.
that our savior teaches us to pray and desire of God that his name may be
hallowed. Where he paynteth us in our own color, and would have, us to
confess our own (...), that we be not hable to do any thing according to
gods will, except we receive it first at his hands. Therefore he teaches us
to pray, that god will make us able to do all things according to his will
and pleasure.

Adueniat regnum tuum. This is our request. Thy (...) We pray not for (...)
selves a lone.
come: you father we beseech let thy kingdom come to us. Here we pray yt the
kingdom of god come not to one only, but to us al. So yt when I say this
prayer, I require god that he will let his kingdom come to you, as well as to
me. Again when you pray, you pray as well for me as for your own selves.

Let thy kingdom come. You must understand that to speak properly, these
words are not to be understand of godnes inferior kingdom, of his earthlye
kingdom, as What king dome it is that we (...) for.
though it did hang upon our petitions, so that he could not be Lord and
ruler over the earth, except we pray for him. No, we pray not for his
inferior kingdom to come, for it is come already: he rules and governs all
things Ezech. 26
He is called in scripture Rex regum, The king above al kin 1. Tim. 6.
ges, Dominus dominantium, the lord above al lords, therefore be reuleth and
governs all things, according to his will and pleasure, as scripture says,
Voluntati eius quis resi Romans 9.
stet, who will withstand his will.

So our saulor reports saying Pater meus operatur vsque mo Ioh. 5.
do. My Father works hitherto and I work also. what worcester keth he? he works
the works of governance. For at the first beginning he did create all
things. But he left them not so. He assisteth them, he rules the^ according
to his will. Therefore our savior does not teach us to pray for his world ly
kingdom to come. For he rules already as lord and king yea and all the
kings and rulers rule by him, (by his permission) as Scripture witnesses: per
me Reges regnant. Prouer. 8.
Thorough me, that is, by my permission kings do reign: A good ad monitio^
for (...) and rulers.
I would wish of god that all kings and potentates in the world would
consider this well, and so endeavor themselves to use their power to the honor
and glory of god, and not to presume in their strength. For this is a good
monition for them, when god says: per me reges regnant, Thorough me kings do
reign: yet they be so under gods rule, that they can think nothing nor do
any thing without Gods Prouer. 2.
permission. For it is written: Cor regis in manu domini and A good les son for
sub iectes.
quo vult vertit illud. The heart of the king is in the hand of the lord, and
he turns the same whether soever it pleases him. This is good to be
considered, and specially subjects should mark this text well, when the
rulers be hard, and oppress the people, think ever: Cor (...) in manu
domini. The kings heart is in the governance of GOD. Yet when thou art led
to prison, consider that the gouernoures heart is in the hand of the Lord.
There fore yield obedience, make thy moan unto GOD, and he will help, and can
help. Surely I think there be no place in scripture more pleasant than
this. The heart of the king is in the hand of GOD. For it makes us sure,
that no man can hurt us without the permission of god our heavenly father.
For all those great rulers that have been from the beginning of the world
till now, have been set up by the appointmente of god, and he pulled them down
when it pleased him.

There have been principallye four monarchies in the Pour mo (...) have (...)
in the world.
world, the first were the Babilonians, which had great and many nations
underneath them: which was gods ordinance and pleasure, for he suffered them so
to do.

After those came the Persians, which were great rulers and mighty kings, as
it appears by stories written of learned men at that time.

Then came the Greeks and took the dominion from the Persians, and ruled
themselves for a while, till they were plucked down.

At the last came the Romans with their empire, which shall be the last: and
therefore it is a token that the end of the The cause (...) the monar chies
were pulled down,
world is not far of. But wherefore were those mighty potentates plucked
down? mary for wickedness sake. The Ba bilonians, Persians and Grecians (and a
good part of the Romans) were cast down for wickedness sake. what were
their doings? they would not execute instice: the magistrates were wicked,
lofty, and high minded. The subjects taking ensample of their magistrates,
were wicked too, and so worthy to be punished together. Therefore the wisdom
of god says, Vidi sub sole in loco iuditii impietate^ and Eccle. 3.
in loco iustitiae iniquitate^, in ye place where poor men ought to be herd,
there I have seen impiety, I have seen (...) and (...) this I have seen. Yea
and in ye place of justice, there I have seen bearing and bolstryng. So for
these causes sake these great emperors were destroyed: so shall we if we follow
their wicked ensamples. Esaias that heartye Prophet confirms the same, saying:
(...) vt facere^t (...), and ecce iniquitas, expectaui vt facerent institiam
and ecce clam of. I looked that they should execute justice, defend the good,
and punish the ill: but there was nothing but crying. This is a The cry of the
(...) is a great matter.
great matter (Clamor populi,) the cry of the people: when subjects be
oppressed so that they cry unto god for deliverance, truly god will hear
them, he will help and deliver them. But it is to be pitied, that the devil
bears so much rule, and so much prevails both in maiestrates and
subjects, in so much that (...) bears almost all the rule, not that he
ought to do so. For God he is the laufull (...) of the The devil is not the
right lord of the world.
world, unto him we owe obedience: but the devil is an usurper, he (...) to
his (...) by craft and subtlety, and so makes himself the great ruler over
the world. Now, he being the great ruler would have all the other rulers
to go after him, and follow his ensaumple, which (...) happens so. For you
know there is Like to like that is (...), delight (...) the great usurper (...)
than.
a common saying Similis simili gauder, Like to like: therefore he uses all
homely tricks to make all rulers to go after him: yea he intends to
inueigle even very kings, and to make them negligent in their business and
office. Therefore such kings and potentates were pulled down, because they
followed the instructions of the devil.

But our Savior speaks not of such worldley kingdoms, when he teaches us
to say: Thy kingdom come. For these worldly kingdoms bring us not to perfect
felicity, they be full of all manner of calamities and myseries, death,
perditions, and distructions. Therefore the kingdom God only (...) rule in his
kingdom.
yt he speaks of, is a spiritual kingdom: a kingdom where God only bears
the rule, and not the devil. This king dome is spoken of every where in
Scripture, and was reveled long ago. and daily God has his preachers, which
bring us to knowledge of this kingdom. Now we pray here that that kingdom of
God may be increased, for it is Gods felowshyppe, they are Gods subjects
that dwell in that kingdom, which kyngedome doothe consyste in Gods kingdom
(...) us from all mi (...).
righteousness and justice, and it (...) from all calamities and miseries,
from death and all peril.

And in this petition we pray that God will send unto us his spirit, which
is the leader unto this kingdom, and al those which lack this spirit, shall
never come to god. For (...) Paul says, Qui (...) non habet, Romans 8.
non est (...), Who so ever has not the (...) of Christ he pertayneth (...)
unto him: (...) our Sauyoure says, Regnum dei intia nos (...), The kingdom
of God is L 117.
within you, signifieng that those, which have the spirit of The king dome of
god begin neth here.
God shall be sure of that kingdom: yea it begins here in this world with
them that be faithful.

The instrument wherewith we be called to this kingdom is the office of
preaching. God calls us daily by preachers Preaching is the instrument to call
us to gods king dome.
to come to this kingdom, to forsake the kingdom of the devil, to leave all
wickedness. For customable sinners, those that be not content to leave sin,
they pertain not to that kingdom, they are under the dominion of the devil,
he rules them: like as our savior says to the Jews: Vos John 8.
ex patre diabolo estis, The devil is your father. Item, quifacit (...). John.
3.
peccatum ex diabolo est, he that does sin is of the devil. Therefore by
this petition we pray that we may be delivered This is a needful petition.
from all sin and wickedness, from the devil and his power. We desire God
that we may be his subjects, which is a very godly and needful prayer.

Further by this petition we be put in remembrance what we be, namely captives
of the devil, his prisoners, and bondmenne, and not able to come at (...)
thorough our own power: therefore we desire Gods healpe and aid, as Christ
has taught us to call him Father: he knew his Christ (...): (...) his
father is de lited with.
affection, therefore he commands us to call him Father, and to desire his
healpe to be (...) out of the kingdom of the devil. Happy are those which
are (...) this kingdom, for they shall lack nothing: and this kingdom
comes to us by preaching, by hearing of Gods word. Therefore those that
find scholars to schole they are helpers Exhibitors to scholars
and furtherers toward this kingdom, and truly it is needful that there be
made some provision for them. For except schools and (...) be maynteined, we
shall have no preachers: when we have no preachers, when we have none which
show unto us Gods word, how shall we come to It is better to lack live lode
than gods word
that blessed kingdom which we desire? What (...) it when you have gotten
many hundred pounds for your children, and lack gods word? Therefore I
say this office must needs be maintained: for it is a necessary office which
furthereth to this kingdom, of which our savior speaks in the gospel to the
Jews, saying: Instat regnum (...), The kingdom of God is come nere. Likewise
he says to one, Sequere me, and annuncia verbum Dei, Follow me, and preach
the kingdom of god. So ought all preachers to do, Luc 10.
they ought to allure every man to come to this kingdom, Luc, 9.
that this kingdom may be replenished. For the more that be The (...) of (...).
converted, the more is the kingdom of god. Again, those that be wicked
lyuers, they help to multiply the kingdom what vvic ked (...) do.
of the devil. To this heavenly kingdom our savior exhorts us, saying:
Querite primum regnum Dei and iustitiam eius, and caetera omnia aducientur
vobis, Seek first the kingdom of god and his righteousness, and all other
things shall come upon you unlooked for. Cast all thy care upon god, as David
says: Iacta super dominum curam tua^. Then Psalm. 54.
our principal study shall be to hear gods word, and when Two com modities
that come of casting our care up pon God.
we have (...) it, we (...) believe it and follow it, every man in his vocation.
Then servants shall yield their obedience to their masters, as god requires of
the^. The^ the parents shall bring up their children in the fear of god. Than
the children shall be obedient to their parents. Then subjects shall be
obedient to their king and prince, and all his officers under him. So go
thorough out all estates, every one shall live vpryghtely in his calling, than
god will bless us, so that we shall not lack necessaries in this world: and
than at the end we shall come to that perfect (...) and joy that god has laid
up and prepared for them that study here to live according to his will and
commandment. But we must labor and travail as long as we be in this
world: 2. Tess 3.
we must be occupied. For saint Paul says: Si quis non Psalm. 127.
vult operari, nec manducet, Who soever will not labor, let w hiles we shall
be in this lifevve must labor and (...)
him not eat. Likewise David says, Labores manuum tuarum comedes, and been
tibi erit, Thou shall eat the labors of thy hand, and it shall go well with
the. For he that will labor, and is content to travail for his living, god
will prosper him, he shall not lack. Let every man therefore labor in his
(...). For so did our Savior him self, which came into this world to
teach us the way to heaven, and to suffer death for us. Now how (...) he
has been in his office, it appears every where. For the Enangeliste says: I
oquebatur Illis de regno Dei, he talked with them of the kingdom of GOD.
Mark Christ (...) not of the king dom of this world.
here he taught them of the kingdom of God: he taught them nothing of the
kingdom of this world. For he says, standing before Pylate, Regnum meum non
est de hoc mundo, My kingdom is not of this world. He reigns Ioh. 18.
by faith thorough his holy ghost, in all those which pertain unto him. He is
not an earthly king (...) the Jews hope to have their Messiah. Therefore when I
feel such motions within me than is it time to call upon God: for such We
must fly to god for reskue.
motions come of the devil, therefore I must tun to God, saying: Thy kingdom
come most loving father: healpe thou, fight thou for me against my enemies,
suffer me not to be taken prisoner: let not my (...) have the victory over
me. So we must call upon god without (...). For you may be sure, we shall
never be without battle and travail, and we are not able to withstand our
adversary by our own power. Therefore it is most needful for us to call and
cry unto him for help: When we do so, than we shall have grace to withstand
the devil. For he can not, neither is he able to strive with God for all his
Prouer 21
craft. For Scripture says: Non est consilium contra dominum, None can (...)
a (...) god.
No wisdom, no craft can prevail against the Lord: He will healpe and
deliver us when he sees his time. For commonly the nature of God is to healpe
when all man's help is past: when the (...) thinks himself cocksure, than
GOD comes and subuerteth his wicked intentes, as it appeared in our savior
himself. For when the devil had brought the Jews to such a madness, that
they went and crucified him: when this was (...), the devil triumphed and
made merry: he thought himself The devils triumph is (...) to (...)
sure mough of him. But what was the end of it? his triumphyng was turned to
his own destruction. For Christ hangyng upon the Cross, did by his death
destroy the power of the devil. So we see how GOD suffers the devil for
a while, and then when he sees his time, he comes with his gracious helpyng
hand. But as I told you before, the devil has many inventions, many
impedimentes and lettes wherewith he trappeth us. For we see there be a great
many gospellers which begun very well A note (...).
and godly, but now the most part of them become ambicious and covetous
persons: all the world is full of such fellows.

But what than? God will preserve his kingdom: he will wrestle with the
deuylles kingdom, and so shall prevail and pull it down to the bottom.
Therefore all those which be in the kingdom of GOD must wrestle, strive and
fight with the devil: not as the carnal gospellers do, which Carnal gos
pellers.
commonly begin well at the (...), but now having rest and tranquillity, and
al things going with them, they leave the Gospel, and set their minds upon
this naughtye world. Therefore it is good and needful for us to have
afflictions and exercises, for as saint Augustine says. (...) The blood of
(...) is the seed of the (...) of the gospel.
Christianorum est veluti semen fructuu^ Eua^gelicorum. For when one is hanged
here, and another yonder, then God goes a sowyng of his seed. For like as the
corn that is cast into the (...), ryseth up again, and is multiplied: even
so the blood of one of those which suffer for Gods words sake, sturreth
up a great many: and happy is he to whom it is given to suffer for Gods
holy words sake. For it is the greatest promotion that a man can have To
dye for Christ is the greatest promotio^.
in this world, to dye for Gods sake, or to be despised and contemned for
his sake. For they shalbce well rewarded for their pains and labors. Merces
vestra multa est in coelis. Your reward, says our Savior, shall be great in
(...). Mat. 5.


Further when we say. Adueniat regnum (...). Thy kingdom come, we desire of
GOD that there may come more and more to the knowledge of Gods word. And
(...) we desire of GOD to bring those which be come already, to the
perfect knowledge of his word, He that en (...) shall be saved.
andso to keep them in it still to the very end, for not he that begins,
but he that endures shall be saved.

This kingdom of GOD is double. Regnum gratiae, Math. (...).
and regnum (...). The kingdom of grace and the kingdom The kingdom of (...)
is (...).
of glory, honor joy and felicitye. As long as we be in this world, we be
in the kingdom of grace: when we are gone, than we shall come to the kingdom
of glory. For as long as we be here god shows himself unto us by grace: he
ascertaineth us thorough his spirit, of his favor, and so he reigns within
us by grace. But when we be ones gone, than we shall see him face to face,
which we cannot as long as we be here. For he (...) himself unto us not
soplainly as he does unto his angels which be with him in The mea ning of this
(...) words
the kingdom of glory. Therefore when we say, Thy kingdom come, we desire of
God that he will help us to this perfect kingdom, that he will deliver us
out of this troublous world, and give us everlasting rest.

I fear there be a great Humbre in England which if they knew what they meant
in speaking these words, Thy kingdom come, they would never say them. For they are so given to the world, and so set their mind upon it, that they could be
content that there should never be any end of it. Such worldlings when they
say these words, Thy kingdom com, they pray against them selves. For they
desire god to take VVorldlin ges pray a against the^ selves (...) they say this
prayer.
them out of this world spedily, and yet they have all their delight in it.
Therefore such worldlyngs when they say, Thy kingdom come, either they mock
GOD, or (...) they understand not the meaning of these words. But we ought
not to (...) with GOD, we should not mock him, he will not be despised.
Quicquid petimus, ardenter petamus, tanquam cupientes (...). Let us pray
heartily unto We must be desirous to (...) we pray for.
him, desirous to have the thing wherefore we pray. But the customable
impenitent sinner, can not (...) from the bottom of his heart, this prayer.
For he would have no end of this worldly life, he would have his heaven here.
Such fellows are not mete to say. Thy kingdom come: for when they do, they pray
against them selves. Therefore none can say this petition, but such as be a
(...) of this world. Such faithful folk would have him to comme spedily,
and make an We ca^ not pray truly this petition (...) vvery of this world
end of their miseries. It is with the Christians like as it is in a realm,
where there is a confusion, and no good order, those which are good, would
feign have a parliament. For than they think it shall be better with them, they
trust all things shall be well amended. Sommetimes the councelles be good, but
the constitutions like not the wicked, and so they begin to cry out as fast as
they did before. Sometimes the councels be naught, than the good people cries
out, and so they be never at rest. But there is (...) A parlia meant thae
vvilieme die all mat ters.
parliament that will remedy all the matters, be they never so (...) or heavy,
it will dispatch them clean. And this parliament will be sufficient for all
realms of the wholle world, which is the last day. Where our savior himself
will bear the rule, there shall be nothing done amiss I warrant you: but
every one as he has deserved, so he shall have. The wicked shall have hell,
the good shall possess heaven. Now this is the thing that we pray for, when
we say, Thy kingdom come. And truly the faithful (...) sinners, do desire
that parliament, even from the botome of their hearts. For they know that
therein reformations of all things shall be had, they know that it shall be
well with them in that day. And therefore they say from the bottom of their
hearts, Thy kingdom come. They know The faith full and pe nitent sin ners make
this petition from the bottom of their hear tes.
that there shall be a great difference between that parliament that Christ
shall keep, and the parliamentes of this world. For in this world this is
the common rule, Quo sceleratior, eo fortunatior, the more wicked, the better
luck. Which is a wonderful thing to consider how it comes to pass, that
for the most part wicked bodies have the best luck: they are in wealth and
health: in so much that The more wicked the more lucky
a man may much marvel at it, as Esdras, David, and other do: specially
considering that God curses (...) in his laws, and threatens them that they
shall have none of his benefits. Sinon audieris vocem Domini, maledictus God
cur seth the wicked and yet they have the blessings of god in this world.
in agro, If thou will not hear the voice of the Lord thy GOD, thou shalt
be cursed in the field. etc. These be the words of God which he speaks
against the wicked, and it must needs be so, but yet we see by experience
daily the contrary. Wherefore does God suffer the wicked to subuerte his
order? the order is, that those which do well, shall receive good things
at gods hand, they shall be blessed, and all things shall go well with
them. Now, how chances it, that we see daily the wicked to be blessed of
God, to have and possess his benefits, and the good to be cursed? which is
a wonderful thing.

GOD the almyghtie, which is most (...), yea the truth it self, doothe it
not without a cause. One cause is, One (...) why ged (...) of this (...) the
(...)
that it is his pleasure to show his benefits as well unto the wyeked as to
the good. For he lets them have their pasty, ne here, as it is (...): Solemn
(...) sinit super iustos and iniustos, He lets his (...) shine as well over
the wicked as over the good. And I tell you this is for (...): A (...).
the exercise of those, which serve GOD with godly living: they are promised,
that it shall go well with them, and yet have they all the ill. This makes
(...) to think that there is an other world, wherein they (...) be rewarded:
And so gives them (...) to (...) and (...) for the other world, where as
otherwise they would forgette GOD, if they should have all things according
to their hearts desire, as the wicked have, which in very deed do forgette
God, their mind (...) so occupied with other (...), that they can have no
leisure (...) inquire for God or his kingdom. Again, he (...) them to turn A
third cause.
his (...), to the intent that they may be brought to (...) when they see his
great goodness (...) unto them in that not (...) all (...) wickedness he
(...) to enjoy the good things of the (...). And so by his (...) he would (...)
them occasion to leave (...) and (...). As S. Paul says (...) read
poenitentia^ adducit. The goodness of god allureth (...) to amendment of our
life, but when they will not amend, then (...) sibi ipsis (...) in (...) irae
they heap up to (...) the wrath of god in the day of wrath.

Now you have heard the causes, wherefore god suffers the wicked to (...) his
gifts. But I would will and desire you most heartely for gods sake, to
consider that the judgment of GOD at the latter day shall be right, according
Gods judge (...) be (...) ous.
unto justice. It will then appear who has been good or badde. And this is
the only comeforte of all (...) people, that they know that they shall be
delivered from all their troubles and vexations. Let us therefore have a The
comfort of all christians.
besyre that this day may come quicklye: let us hasten GOD forward: Let
us cry unto him day and night: Adueniat regnum tuum, most (...) father, thy
kingdom come. Saint Paul says, Non veniat dum nisi veniat defectio. The
Lord will not come till the swaruyng Antichrist is already known in all the
world.
from faith comes, which thing is already done and past: Antichrist is
known thoroughout all the world. Wherefore the day is not far of. Let us
beware, for it will one day fall upon our heads. Saint Peter says.
Finis omnium appropinquant, The end of all things draws very nere. Yfs.
Peter said so at his time, how much more shall we say so? For it is a long
time sense Saint Peter spoke these words. The world was ordained to endure
(as all learned men affirm and (...) it with scripture) The time of the
world.
sire thousand year. Now of that number there be paste five thousand
fyftie two, so that there is no more left but four hundred and forty eighte.
And furthermore those days shall be shortened, it shall not be full six
thousand year, Nam abbreuiabuntur dies propter electos, the days The days
shall be shortened for the cho sens (...).
shall be shortened for the elects sake. Therefore all those excellent learned
men, which without doubt God has sent into this world in these latter days
to give the world war nyng: all those men do gather out of Scripture that the
last day cannot be far of. And this is most certain and sure, that
whansoeuer he comes, he comes not to timelye, for all things, which ought
to come before are past now. So that if he come this night, or to morrow, he
comes not to early. Therefore good people let us make ready toward his
coming. And though he comes not at this time, yet let us make ready. For we
are not sure when we shall be called to make (...) before the Lord. All good and
godly people sense the world began (...) to make ready toward this day But O
Lord how (...) and (...), yea and how careless we be. Therefore it will be
like as he says, Cum (...) pax and (...), When they say, all thing is well
and quiet, Tunc repentious (...) illis interitus, than they shall be suddenly
taken and (...), like as Dives epulo, that rich glutton did: (...) eat and
drank, he builded a new barn, for the old was to little for him. Than he
said to himself. Now my soul, Now be merry and take thy pleasure: for thou
(...) riches (...) for many years. But what said God? what said he? (...),
hac (...). Thou (...), this night they will (...) do make (...) sion for ple
sure in this life.
fetch thy soul from thee: whose shall those riches be then, which thou
haste heaped up? And so shall all those be taken and trapped like this
epulo, which will not make ready, which (...) the warnynges of God: they shall be
taken so suddenly to their (...) woo. For Scripture gives warnyng unto every
one, saying: Sicut in diebus Noeh. etc Like The (...) shall be (...) the day of
Noah.
as in the days of Noeh, they will eat and drink, and mary. etc. To eat and
to drink, and marye is godly and lawful: but to do it otherwise then god
has commanded, it is wicked and damnable. To eat without thanksgeuyng, or to
eat either man's flesh, or to play the glutton, more than (...) He eats
other n (...) flesh that oppress other men to maintain his own delicious
diet.
nature, this is wicked. Item to marye upon other respects then god has
appointed and expressed in his most holy laws, is wicked and damnable. Else
Honorabile coniugium inter omnes, Marriage is honorable amongst all men, but to
marrye for wantonness sake that is wicked. Viderunt filii Dei fili as hominu^,
The somes of God saw the daughters of men, This did Noch rebuke in his time,
but they laughed at it: he (...) of god are the good men, and the children of
men the (...).
prepared the arc, and went into it: at the length the floods fell upon
their heads. Sicut in diebus Loath. As in the days of Loath, What did they?
Ingressus es aduena. Thou art come (...) a stranger; regardyng nothing gods
word which was showed unto them thorough that good man Loath, they were wicked,
whormongers, drunkardes, couetouse persons. But what follows: What follows (I
say?) consider the (...). The fire from heaven fell upon them suddenly and
consumed We are not in darkness.
them al. At nos non sumus in tenebris: we be not in darkness, we have the
word of god, we know what is his will. There fore let us watch, for he will
come like a thief in the night, happy are we if he shall find us watchyng.

This is the effect of this (...), wherein we desire that god will send down
faith from heaven, that he will continue The effect of this peti tion.
in me my faith and every man's, so that we may be rea dye to go with him when
his kingdom shall come.

Now as many as pertayne to this kingdom of god shall have one propertye
amongst other things. They shall have A note whereby we may (...) our
selves to ap pertain to gods (...).
an earnest mind and steadfast purpose to leave sin, according to S. Paul's
saying: Ne regnet igitur peccatum in vestro (...), Let not sin therefore reign
in your mortal bodies. Gods kingdom shall reign in us, and not the
deuilles. Therefore when the devil tempts thee, with stand him, give not
over, let him not have the victory: as for an ensample. When thou see a
fair woman, an ill desire God will help (...) we call.
ryseth up in thy (...) toward her, this lust is of the devil, call
therefore for help, let him not occupy thy heart, then surely god will help:
For he has promised. Nulla condemnatio (...) qui (...) in Christo. There is no
condemnation to such as are in Christ Jesus, When we do not allow sin
(...) agree unto it. Therefore dispose your selves so to live according unto
his will: which can and will preserve us from the (...), and bring us into his
kingdom. which grant us god the Father, god the Son and god the holy
ghost.

Amen.
The fourth Sermon of M. Latymer made upon the Lords prayer.
FIat voluntas tua,) thy will be done. After this form our savior a perfect
scholemaister taught Christen people to pray. Our father Christ is a perfect
scholemaister.
which art in heaven, thy will be done. And here he teaches us two things as
he did before in the other petitions. First he teaches us to understand what
we be of our selves namelye Christ teaches us (...) things in this (...),
nothing at all, not able to do any thing pleasant unto god: and so he
(...) us down, cutteth of our combs, brings us low, which else (...) be
proud, as though we could do somewhat, yt we cannot do in deed, like, as
these merits mongers do, which esteem themselves after Merltes mongers.
their merits, think themselves perfect: in so much that their works shall
not only help themselves, but also others: therefore they take in hand to
sell them for money. These fellows know not themselves, and therefore they do
contrary unto this petition. Where our savior (...) us that we can do nothing
of our selves. They (contrary to that petition) will do all things alone, and
with their merits To know our (...) is the first And what we shall do the
second.
bring to pass all matters. But our savior contrary to that teaches us two
things in this petition. First he pulls down our stomachs, and teaches
us to know our selves. Secondarely he shows us what we shall do, namelye,
call upon god our heavenly father that he will help us, that we may be able to
do his will. For of our own selves we are not able to doc any thing
acceptable unto him. And this is a good doctrine which admonishes us to give
all praise unto God, and not to ascribe it to our own selves. For so dyede
saint Paul when he said, omnia possum in eo qui comfortat Paul gave (...)
the praise to God.
me. I am able to do all things that pertayne to Gods honor and glory,
thorough him that strengthens me, he said not, thorough mine own self: but
thorough GOD which helps me. And here appears the right humiliation, and
lowlynes, which our sausour teaches us in this petition. For he would have
us to know our own impossibilitye and unableness to do any thing. And than
again he would have us to call for aid and help to God, therefore he teaches
us to say, A du eniat regnum tuum, Thy kingdom come. So that though we be
not able thorough our own selves to do any thing, yet when we call upon him,
he will help. For Christ knew his fathers will and loving affections toward
us: he knew that he would help us. For he was a perfect scholemaister, else
he would not have commau^ ded us to pray: Fiat voluntas tua. Thy will be
done. Here we must understand that the will of god is to be considered after
two sorts. First, as it is omnipotent, unsearchable, and Gods will must be
con sidered after (...) sor c. s.
that can not be known unto us. Now we do not pray that his will so
considered be done. For his will so considered is and ever shall be fulfilled,
though we would say nay to it. For nothing either in heaven or in earth is able
to withstand his will. Wherefore it were but folly for us to pray to have it
fulfilled otherwise then to show thereby that we (...) our consent to his
will, which is to us unsearchable.

But there is an other consyderation of Gods will, and in that consideration,
we and all faithful christians desire that it may be done. And so
considered, it is called a reveled, a manifested, and declared will: and it is
opened unto us in the Bible in the new and old testament. There GOD has
reveled a certain will, therefore we pray that it may be done, and
fulfilled of us. This will was opened by Gods will was open ned by Mo ses, the
Pro phetes Christ and the Apostles.
Moses, and the holy prophets: and afterward by our Savior himself and his
apostles, which he left behind him to that end, that they should instruct
the world and teach them his will: which Apostles have done according to
their masters commandment. For they not only spoke it, but also wrote it,
to that end that it should remayn to the worlds end. And truly we are much
bound to god, that he has set out this his will in our natural mother
tongue, In Eng lishe (I say) So that you may not only bear it, but also read
it your selves. which thing is a great comfort to every christian A blessing
of god.
heart. For now you can no more be dcceiued, as you have been in times
paste. when we did bear you in hand that poperye was the word of God: which
falshode we could not have brought to pass, if the word of God, the Bible,
had been abroad in the common tongue. For then you might They can not be (...)
that have Bible (...) their mo there tongue.
have perceived your selves, our falshode and blyndnes. This I speak to that
(...), to (...) you to thankfulness toward him, which so lovingly provides
all things necessary to our salvation.

Now to the matter, almightye God (I say) set out (...) will by Moses and
his Prophets, and this will is (...) in certain laws, which laws god
commands that we should keep ever before our eyes, and look upon them, as
in (...) law of god (...) be our loking (...).
a glass, and so learn to order our lives according unto the (...). And in
case that a man swerve from the same; and so (...) into the danger of
damnation, God reveled further his will (...) to remedy the matter, namely by
repentance and says. So that whosoever from the bottom of his heart (...)
sorry for his sins, and studieth to leave them and live uprightly and then
believes in our (...), confessyng that he came into this world to make amends
for our sins: this man, or woman, shall not perish, but have forgeuenes of
sins, and The way to arise from (...).
so obtayn everlasting life. And this will God reueleth specially in the new
(...), where our (...) says. Qui credit in me, habet vitam aeternam,
Whosoever believes in has everlasting life, where we learn that our Savior
is ordained of god to bring us to heaven, (...) we should have been all (...)
world without end. So that in this prayer when we say Thy will be done. We
desire of God that he will help and strenghthen us, so that we may keep his
The mea (...) of this petition.
holy laws and commandments. And then again we desire of him that he will
indue us with the gift of faith, so that we may believe that all those
things which we do contrary to his laws be pardoned and forgiven unto us
thorough his son for his passions sake. And further we desire him that he will
fortify and (...) us, so that we may with stand the deuyls will and our own,
which fight against gods will. So that we may be able to bear all
tribulations and afflictions willyngly and (...) for his sake. This is the
simple meaning of this petition, when we say, Thy will be done I will go a
little further, and show you some what more of it, yet I entende not to tarry
long, for I am not very well at ease this morning, therefore I will make it short.

I have said no we many times, and I say it yet again, Quod petimus ardenter
(...) tanquam cupientes habere, We must pray with the heart.
whatsoever we desire of god, let us desire it from the botome of our hearts:
but I fear me, there be many which say this (...) and yet cannot tell what
they say, or at the least their hearts ar contrary disposed unto it. Such
people I exhort on gods behalf to consider their duties, to consider that god
will not be (...) withal, he will not be derided. We laughe god Who they be
that laugh God to scorn.
to scorn when we say one thing with our mouth, and think an other thing
with our herts. Take this for an ensample. Our rebels which rose about (...).
year ago in Northfolke and (...), they considered not this (...), they said it
with their lips only, but not with their hearts. Almighty god has The
rebels were of this sort, that laugh ed God to (...).
reveled his will as concerning magistrates, how he will have them to be
honored and obeyed. They (...) utterly bent against it, he (...) this will in
many places of the (...): but specially by s. Peter where he says. Subd re
estore nimis, humanae creaturae that is thus much to say in effect, Be ye
subject to all the common laws made by men of authority, by the kings (...)
and his most honorable council, or by a common parliament, be subject unto
them, obey them (...) god. And here is but one (...), that is, against god.
When laws are made against God and his word, then I There is no obedience
against god
ought more to obey god then man. Then I may refuse to obey, with a good
conscience: yet for all that I may not rise up against the magistrates, nor
make any (...). For if I do so I sin damnablye: I must be content to suffer
whatsoever god shall lay upon me, yet I may not obey their (...) laws to do
them. Only in such a case, men may refuse to obey, else in all the other
matters we ought to obey. What laws soever they make as concerning (...)
things we ought to obey, and in no wise to rebel, although they be never so
hard, noisome and hurtful: our duetye is to obey, and commit all the matters
unto god, not douting but yt god will God will punish princes.
punish them when they do contrary to their office and calling. Therefore tarry
till god correct them, we may not take vpo^vs to reform them. For it is no
part of our duty. If the rebels (I say) had considered this, think you they
would have preferred their own will before gods will? For doing as they did they
prayed against themselves. But I think yt ignorance was a Ignorance is the
cause of rebellion
great cause of it, truly I think if this had been opened unto the^ they would
never have taken such an enterprise in hand. and here we have occasion to
consider how much we be bou^de^ unto god yt he opens unto us his word so
plainly, and (...) us so truly, how we should behave our selves toward yt (...)
and their laws: but for all yt I fear there be some of us which little regard
their laws and statutes, such despisers of magistra tes when they pray, they
pray against (...). There be laws made of dyete, how we shall feed our
bodies, what meat (...) shall (...) at all times, and this law is made in
policy (as I suppose) for vitailes sake, that fish might be uttered as well as
other meat. Now as long as it goes (...) from flesh.
so in pollicye, we ought to keep it. Therefore all, except those that be
dispensed with all, as sick, impotent persons, women with child, or old
folks, or licensed persons, all the rest ought to live in an ordinary
obedience to those laws, and not do against the same in any wise. There
(...) made of apparel how we shall cover our nature. Is there not A law for
(...).
many which go otherwise then god and the magistrates com maunde them to go?
There is made a law for (...), how we shall recreate our bodies: (For we must
have some recreation because of the weakness of our nature.) In that law A
law for gaming.
we be inhibited cardyng, dicyng, tablyng, and boulyng, and such manner of
games, which are expressed in the same (...): you may read it, and you ought
to read it, and to know the acts. For how can you keep them when you know them
not, every faithful subject will not disdain to (...) the acts All
subjects ought to (...) heat their (...) acts or laws.
and the kings majesty's procedynges, so that he may know what is allowed or
forbidden in the same acts. And I my self read the acts, for it is mete so
for us to do. Now again this is a great matter that God is so kind toward
us, that he disdayneth not to reuele his will, what order we shall keep in our
diet, (...) our refreshing and garments. Therefore it is most mete for us to
live in subjection, and not to prefer our own will before gods will. For when
I do stubburnely against those acts set out by our natural king and his most
honorable (...) to do a (...), is to do a against gods (...).
counselors, than I prefer my will before Gods will, and so (...) damnably.
These things ought well to be noted: for it is not a (...) matter, there
hangs damnation or salvation upon it. Therefore (as I said before) it is good
to know the laws, and I call him a good man, and her a good woman that are
content to be ruled by the laws, and so declare their subjection and
obeoience unto GOD and the magistrates. There be some men that say, when the
kings majesty him self (...) me to do so, then I will do it, not before, this
is a wicked saying, and damnable. For we may not so Such as (...) in (...)
tie under princes must be obeyed as well as (...) ces.
be excused. Scripture is plain in it, and she weth us that we ought to obey
his (...) having authority from the king, as well as unto the king himself.
Therefore this excuse will not nor can not serve before GOD. Yet let the
magistrates take he de to their office and duties. For the magistrates, may
not (...) all things according to their pleasures and minds, they have
authority of GOD to do well, and not harm: to edify and not to destroy: to
(...) the wicked and obstinate, The offices of maiestra tes.
and to comfort those which live well and godly, to defend the same from wrong
and injuries of the wicked. So it appears that every one in his order in his
degree and calling ought to do the will of god, and not our own will and
pleasure. This is our duetye, happy are we if we do it in deed. O that men
in authority would consider whereunto God has ordained them. Saint Paul
says, The magistrate is Vltor ad iram, He is Gods ordinary (...) to punish
malefactors and ill doers, god says, Mihi vindictam ego (...), I will avenge
my self says God, and so he does by (...) magistrates. For that is his
ordinary way where by he punishes malefactors. But magistrates must take Let
(...)
heed they go no further then god allows them to do: If they do, they
themselves shall be punished. As there be many ensamples in Scripture whereby
(...) how (...) god has punished wicked magistrates. In summa. s. Peter gives
a rule not only unto the magistrates, but also unto the subjects, saying:
Haec est voluntas Dei, vt obcuretis os ad (...) been agendo, it is the will of
god (says Peter) that you with your good godly and honest conversation shall
The mouths of the (...) stopped.
stop the mouth of your adversaries. What called s. Peter well doing? well
doing is to live according to gods laws and (...). Gods commandment is
that we shall obey magistrates: therefore those which disobey and trasgresse the
laws of the magistrates they do not according to gods will and pleasure: (...)
do but (...), they (...) not the mouth of the adue saries ((...) S. Peter
would have them to do) but they give (...) occasion unto the wicked to (...)
and (...) the holy word of God. S. Peter would have us to stop their mouth
with well (...). Many (...) en when they have been (...) of preachers (...) of
(...) wicked (...), they have gone about to stop (...) monthe with daunderous
words, this stopping is (...). (...). Wicked do (...) would stop prea chers
mou (...).
Peter (...) have us to stop with well doing. Now (...) magistrates not be
spoken ill of, and reproved of preachers? Let them do well. Likewise says S.
Paul of the subjects Vis non timere potestatem benefac and habebis laudem.
Will thou not fear the higher power? do (...) thou shall be comme^ ded. Now
eue^ as it is with the (...) sword, so is it with the spiritual. There be some
men which cannot away withal if they be rebuked: they cannot bear when the
preacher speaks against their wickedness, unto them I say: (...) non timere
predicatore benefac, will you not be rebuked of the preacher? the^ do well,
leave of your couctousnes, your am (...), your yrefulnes, vengeance, and
malice, your lechery Learn to stop the preachers mouth.
and (...), your bloudsheading and such like sins, leave them, amend your
life, or else the preacher according to his office will rebuke and reprove
you, be you never so great lords or Ladies: he will rub you on the galle.
For a good and godly preacher can do no less seeing god dishonored, per
ceiuing him to be blasphemed (...) will to be neglected and not executed of them
that ought withal their study and endeavor to apply them selves that his will
might be done. For he is well worthy, he is the lord, he created heaven and
earth, and is therefore the right natural lord over it. But for all that, the
(...) is lord more than he is, not by right or inheritance, but by conquest, by
usurpation, he is an usurper. God (as I said before) is the natural and
laufull lord over the earth, be cause he made it: yet it pleased his (...) to
make mankind, Mankind is gods lief tenant (...).
as ye would say liefetenant over it, so that mankind should bear the rule
over the (...). Therefore GOD said unto him: Dominaris, be ruler over it. Item
replete (...) and (...) illam. Also replenishe the earth and subdue it. Here
Adam and his wife and so al his posterity were by god made rulers over the
exth, as gods high debities or his liefe tenantes. So as concerning gods
ordenance mankind was the lawful inheritour of this kingdom. But now (...)
in the devil with his (...) and with his false suttelties: he inueigled first
the (...); and afterward the man, persuadyng them to transgress gods holy
(...) mentes: with which (...) doing they lost the (...) of god, and their
dignities: and so the devil thorough his (...) substituted The devil (...).
himself as an usurper or conqueror: and so he is a (...), non per fas, sed
nefas, not laufully, but wrongfully. Though he did say to our savior showing
him all the king domes of the world, Cuicunque volo do (...), I may give (...)
The devil (...).
to whom soever I will. He lies falsely, god will destroy him at the length
for at his (...) and lies, they shall not save him. Yet for all (...), he is a
great ruler. For this is most certain The (...) is a (...) ruler, and (...)
has many serve him.
and true, a great (...) more do the will of the devil, tha^ of god, whatsoever
they babble with their mouths, look upon their works, and you shall find it
so. For all proud persons, all ambitious persons, (which be ever clymyng up,
and yet never be well) all such do not (...) will of god, and therefore
pertayne not to his kingdom: all (...) rebellious Who so re (...) his (...)
quarrel does the vvil of the devil.
persons, all quarellers and wranglers, all bloudsheders, do the will of the
devil, and not gods will. God says: Mihi vindictam ego retribuam. I will
avenge my self, which he does thorough the magistrate, and when the
magistrate is slack, he does it himself. Now those yrefull (...) persons
that hate their neighbors, they do not the will of god, but of the devil. Also
these suttell, deceitful persons, which have no conscience to (...) and beguile
their neighbors, that care not for breaking their promises, nor are not
ashamed to utter false ware, they pertain al to the devil. Item these that
will not make restitution of gooddes ill gotten, they serve He that will not
serve the diue ll must restore (...) ges vvrong (...) got.
the devil: Scripture says: Qui peccat ex diabolo est. Who soever sins is
of the devil, which is a very hard word to be spoken of the holy ghost,
and a fearful word, able to withdraw us from sin, if we had any fear of
god in our hearts. Amongst those may be noumbred all slothful persons,
which will not travail for their lyuynges, they Sturdy beg gars do serve the
di uell.
(...) the will of the devil. GOD byddeth us to (...) our living with labor:
they will not labor, but go rather about a beggyng, and spoil the very
poor and nedye. Therefore (...) beggars are thieves before GOD. Some of these
valiant (...), when they came to my house I commoned with them, burthenyng
them with the transgression of gods laws. Is this not a great labor The
beggars (...) that they la bour.
(say they) to run from one town to an other to get our meat: I think
we labor as hard as other men do. In such wise they go about to excuse
their unlawful beggerye and (...): but such idle lubbars are much deceived.
For they consider not that such labor is not allowed of god. We must labor so
as may stand with godlynes, according to his appiontment: cls thieves, which
rob in the night time, do they not labor? ye sometimes they labor with great
care, peril, Thenes say that they la bour.
and danger of their lives. Is it therefore godly, because it is a labor? No
no, we must labor as god has appointed us every man in his estate. Further
these drunkardes which abuse Drunkards Lecherous persons.
the gifts of god. Item these lecherers and who or (...), that live in
adultery: These violaturs of holy matrimo nigh which line not according unto
gods laws. Item these swearers, for (...), liars, all those do not the will
of god. Therefore it is to be lamented of every christen heart, when God has
(...) ser uantes.
they see how many servants the devil has, and god so few: But all
those which serve the devil are rebels against God. God was their lord, they
swerve from him thorough wicked living, and so become servants of the devil.
Therefore those christian people that have a desire to live after gods will
and commandments, they live amongst the wic ked even as it were amongst
the rebels. They that dwelled in Northfolke or Deuonshtere at the time of
rebellion, they which were faithful to their king and prince, how think A
Symilitude taken of the Rebels.
you they were entreated? full miserably god knows: either they were
constrained to help their wicked purposes, or else they must suffer all
calamities which could be devised. Even so shall all those be entreated which
intend to live well, according to gods commandments. For the rebels that
is, the wicked which have forsaken their lord god, and taken the devil to be
ruler over them, they shall compel them to follow, Math. x.
or else to suffer al calamities and miseries. And so shall be How Christ sends
not peace but a sword.
verified the saying of our savior Christ. Non veni vt mitta^ pacem sed
gladiu^. I am not come (says he) to send peace, but the sword. which is in
deed a strange saying, but it has his understanding: god is a god of peace
and concord he loves unity and concord: but when he cannot have peace, by
the reason of the devil, than he will have the sword: that is to say, (...)
loves unity, he would have us all agree together: but because of the wicked
we cannot. Therefore he will father have us to choose the sword, that is, to
(...) and withstand their wickedness, then to agree unto them. And therefore
this They that call the gof pell (...). ous are (...).
doctrine is called a seditious doctrine: but who are those rebels? even they
them selves which call this doctrine seditious: they themselves (I say) are
traitors against GOD. Wherefore our savior seeing he can have no peace with
the wicked. he will have us rather to withstand their wickedness, God vvilhis
flock segregated from the wicked
and so bring them to reformation: and this is the cause wherefore he will have
his flock segregated from the wicked.

Therefore let us pray unto god our heavenly father, (...) voluntas (...), Thy
will be done. This is the prayer of all christian people, which have a will
to do gods will: but those impenitent sinners which are not yet weary of
their sins, do never pray, for though they say the words, yet it is to no
purpose, they say them without understanding, therefore it is but lyplabor, it
is no prayer, it is but the devils service. The devil served by saying the (...)
For a man may serve the devil with saying the Pater noster, when he says
it with a defiled mind. Let us therefore order our selves so that we may say it
worthily as it ought to be. Let us lay away al wickedness and ill living, so
that we may say from the bottom of our heart. Our father which art in
heaven, Thy will be done. And so did Susanna that godly woman: So did lady
Judith: So did Queen Esther. So did all good saints of god. And though this
prayer was The salucts before the coming of Christ used this petition.
not made at that time, by the reason they were a great while (...) Christ's
coming:) yet they had this prayer in effect. For they believed in almightye
god: they believed in Abrahames sede, which was promised: which says stood
them in as good stead, and they were as well saved thorough that same belief as
we now thorough our belief. For it is no difference The difference between
the fathers such and (...).
between their belief and ours, but this: They believed in Christ which was
to come, and we believe in Christ, which is come already. Now their belefe
served them as well as ours does us. For at that time God required no further
at their hands, than was opened unto them: we have in our time a further and
more perfect knowledge of Christ then they had. Now Susanna wha^ the judges
(the same wicked men) came unto her, and moved her with fearful (...) to do
their wills, that is, to sin against god in doing that filthy act of
lecherye: (for the same wicked Judges bare a wicked (...) love toward her:)
think you not she resorted un to god? Yes yes, without doubt, she said these
words in effect. Pater noster, Fiat voluntas tua. Our father, thy will be
done, and not the will of the wicked men. Therefore she putting her Susanna de
fired that gods will be done. God is even (...).
hope and trust in god, having a respect that his will might be done, and not
the devils will, god, which is ever true, (...) not fail her, for you know
how she was delivered thorough young Daniell. This is written to our
instruction: For he is now the self same god that he was at time: he is as
(...) as he was, he is as ready as he was, she was in anguishe and great
distress, she sought to halow his holy name: therefore he (...) help her, he
suffered her not to perish. (...) certainlye he will do unto us too. Therefore
wha^ (...) be in trouble let us halow his name, and then we shall find his
help like as Susaune did.

In such wise did Judith when she was provoked of Holofernes Judith (...) to
(...) low the name of god and to his will. Peter forgot his Pater noster.
to do wickedly. She sought rather to sanchfye gods name, to do his will,
then the will of the devil, therefore God gave her such a (...) victory. So did
queen (...), wha^ Hanian that wicked fellow had power over her: she committed
all the matter unto god, with (...) and prater. But S. Peter what did he? Mary
he forgate his (...) noster, for (...) there came but a (...) wenche askyng
him: art not thou a Gallilean? art not thou one of this new learning? art not
thou a gospeller? what did Peter? he was gone quite: he denied it, he forgate
his (...). For if he had had grace to consider that he ought rather to suffer
death than to forsake his ma ster Christ, then he would have said, Pater
noster. Fiat volun tas tua. Our father, Thy will be done. I am ready to suffer
for thy sake whatsoever thou shall lay upon me. but he did not so Christ loo
ked oa Peter.
he (...) himself. What did our savior? he turned back and looked upon him.
Happy was Peter that our savior (...) ked upon him again, for it was a
gracious token. Judas for gate this same peti tion.


Judas that false man that traitor, forgotte this same peti tien, and remained
so in his error still to the end. Surely he was a sorrowful and a heavy man
in so much that he made Judas was better then some that now live.
restitution. He was much better than a great many of us be, which when they
have iniuried and wronged poor men, will make no restitution. I tell you truth,
Judas was much better than such fellows be. Poenitentia ductus, says the
text, but he lacked faith. And so between Peter and him, which The difference
be twene Pe (...) and (...) das.
were both two sorrowful me^, this was yt difference. (...) had faith, Judas
lacked it: (...) he was excedyng sorrowful for his wickedness, in so much that he
went and hanged himself, therefore he forgate this petition. So likewise all
voluntary sinners, all unrepentant sinners, none of them all (...) this
petition as they ought to do: they say it not worthily nor profitably. For they
have no will to do his will, their will is to do their own will and pleasure.
But above al things these questmongers had need to take heed: for there all
things go Questmon gers must mark. c. (...).
eth by oath. They had need to say: Our father, thy will be done. For they
shall be moved to do this and that which is against God. They must judge by
their oath, according to conscience, guilty or not guilty. When he is guilty,
in what case are those which say, not guilty? Scripture doothe show what a
(...) it is, when a man is a malefactor, and the quest mongers justify him,
and pronounce him not guilty, saying: Et qui iustificat impium, and (...)
condem not iustum, ambo abhominabiles coram (...), He that (...) the wicked,
and he that condemns the just man, they are both abominable before the lord.
Who is (...)? he that does not the will of god, the will of god is, that the
wicked should be punished. Mark this history.
I my self did ones know where there was a man slain of an other man in an
anger, it was done openly, the manqueller was taken and put in prison. Suit was
made to yt questmongers (for it was a rich man that had done yt act.) At the
length every man had a (...) for his good will: and so this open mankiller was
pronounced not guilty. Lo, they sold A dousen (...) for v (...) a piece.
their souls unto the devil for. v. shillings. For which (...) Christ suffered
death. And I dare (...) except they amend and be forye for their faults, they
shall be damned in hell (...) without end. They had clean forgotten this
petition, Thy will be done. For they did the will of the devil. It had been a
good deed to cut of their crounes by their necks to the ensample of all other.
Therefore (I say) these questmongers had need to say: Our father which art
in, heaven; Thy will be done For truly it is marvel yt this realm synketh
not (...) to hell hedlong, what periuries, swearing, cursyng is every where in
every corner? Therefore (I say) we had need to pray earnestly, that gods will
may be done. And we should be con To lose life is to find it.
tent to lose our lives for righteousness sake. For he yt loses his life for
because he will not agree to the (...) of god, he seeks that gods will may be
done. Happy is that man, for he syndeth his life, he loses it not. For Christ
wylbe his keeper. Ioab looked thorovv his fingers.


Ioab that great and valiaunte captain, he knew well enough when David sent
unto him good Urias, with letters: he knew (I say) that the kings will was
against gods will, yet he looked thorough his fyngers, he wynked at it, he would
rather do the wicked will of the king, than the will of God. Chaplains about
the (...).


Of such (...) there be a great number, which care not for the honor and
will of god. These chaplaynes about the king and great men, had need to say:
(...) voluntas tua, Our father, Thy will be done, but they are very slow and
slack: they wink commonly at all matters be they never so (...). They be
Capellani ad manus. They will not (...) mundum de peccato they dare not rebuke
the world of sin: they dare not do as the prophet commands unto them to
do, when he says: Audiant montes (...) domini, let the (...) hear the
judgments of the lord, though the smoke, as he says: (...) montes and
fumigabu^t. Touch the (...) and they will smoke, Yea and though they smoke,
yet stryke the^, spare the^ not tell the^ their faults. But great me^ cannot
suffer that, to be so rebuked, their chapleins must be faught a discretion, if
A mean vvherbyma gistrates may keep themselves in estimation
they will go so to wurke. They (...) commonly magistrates should be brought
out of estimation, if they should be handled so. Syrs, I will tell you what you
shall do to keep your estimation and credit: do well, handle uprightly and
indifferently al matters, defend the people from oppressio^s, do your office as
god has appointed you to do, when you do so (I war rant you) you shall keep
your estimation and credit. And I warrant you again, the preacher will not
strike nor cut you with his sword, but rather praise you and commend your
weldoings. Else when you do naught and wickedly, oppress the poor, and give
false judgments: when you do so, that is The good preacher must strike with
his svvorde.
negodly preacher that will hold his peace, and not strike you with his sword,
that you smoke again. But it is commenly as the scripture says, Laudatur
impius in desideriis animae (...). The wicked is praised in the desires of his
wickedness. Chaplains will not do their ducties, they will not draw
Chaplains vvil not (...) their due (...),
their swords, but rather flatter, they will use discretion: But what shall
follow? Mary they shall have gods curse upon their heads for their labor: this
shall be al their gains that they shall get by their flatterings.

An other scripture says: Qui po estatem exercent hi benefi cia vocantur. The
great and mighty men be called benefactours, Flatterers call men of might been
factours.
weldoers, but of whom be they called so? Mary of (...) terers, of those which
seek not to do the will of God, but the pleasures of men.

S. John Baptist that hardy knight, and excellent preacher (...) Bap tist said
this pet tion a right.
of god, he said this petition right with a good faith. Our father Thy will be
done. Therefore he went to the king, saying: No^ licet tibi. Sir it is not
lauful for thee to do so. See what bold nes he had? how hoate a stomach in
gods quarrel to defend Chaplains vvinke.
gods honor and glory? But our (...) what do they now a (...)? Mary they wink
at it, they will not displease: for they seek (...), they seek benefices,
therefore they be not worthy I say is a (...) sell (...).
to be gods officers. Esaias that faithful minister of god, he is a good plain
fellow, he tells them the matter in plain, saying: Argentum tuum versum est in
(...), principes tui infideles, socii furum, Thy silver is turned to dross,
thy princes are unfaithful, and fellows of thieves. he is no flatterer,
hetelleth them yt truth. Thy princes said he, are (...) I say percei ued
things amiss.
subuerters of justice. This Esaias did: for he had respect to gods word, he
perceived things amisie, he knew that it was his part to admonish, to cut them
with his sword. Would god our preachers would be so fervent to promote the honor
and glory of god, to admonish the great and the small to do the wit of the lord.
I pray god they may be as fervent as our savior was when he said to his
disciples Moos (...) est vt faciam vo luntatem patris mei qui est in coelo. My
meat is to do the wit of my father which is in heaven (that is to say) you are
no more The hunger that prea chers should have.
desirous to eat your meat when you be a hongry, then I am to do my fathers
will which is in heaven. By what occasion our savior says these words you shall
perceive wha^ you consider the circumstances, I pray you read the chapter it
is the. 4. of John. The story is this. He sends his disciples to a town to
bye meat (where it appears that our savior had money:) Christ had money.
after their departure he sets him down, which was a soken that he was a
weary, and I warrant you he had never a cusshyne to lay under him. Now as he
was syttyng so, there com meth a woman out of the town to fateh water: he or
syred her to give him drink. She made answer: will you drink (...) whi cheam a
Samaritain? So they we^r (...) in their talk: at yt length he bad her go call
her hus ba^d, she made answer, I have no husband, you say well said our
savior, for you have had 5. and this yt you have now, is not thy husband: and so
he reveled himself unto her.

(...) men peradventure will say: what means this that our (...) talks
alone with this woman. Answer, his humility The cause (...) Christ (...) with
the woman alone.
and gentilnes is showed herein. For he was consent to talk with her, being
alone, and to teach her the way to hea uen. Again some men may learn here not
to be so (...) in their judgments: that when they see (...) persons talk
together to suspect them. For in so doing they might (...) our savior himself.
It is not good, it is against the will of god to judge rashely, I know what I
mean. I know what vnhay Rash judge meant.
py tales be abroad, but I can do no more but to give you war ning. Now ye
woman went her way into ye city making much (...) how she had found the
Messiah, ye savior of the world: in so much yt a great many of the Samaritaines
came out unto him. Now as ye woman was gone, ye disciples desired him to eat,
he made the^ answer. Ego aliu^ cibum habeo, I have other Christ's (...) is to
do his fa there is will.
meat: tha^ they thought some body had brought him some (...) at yt length he
breaks out and says. Hic est cibus mcus vt (...) is (...) quod misie me, I
am as desirous to do my fathers will, as you be of meat and drink. let us now
for gods sake be so desirous to do the will of god, as we be to meat and drink,
let us endeavor our selves to keep his laws and commau^ dement, then whatsoever
we shall desire of him he will give it unto us, we shall have it. We read often
times in scripture that our savior was preaching according unto his vocation, I
would every man would go so diligently about his busmes: The priests to go to
their books, not to spend their times so shame A lesson sopriestes.
sully in hauking, hu^ting, and keeping of alehouses, if they would go to their
books, in so doing they should do the will of God: but the most part of the^ do
their own will, they take their (...), but god wilf nd the^ out at length, he
will mete with them when he sees his time. On a time when our famour was pre
chung, his mother came unto him, very desirous to speak with Our lady was a
(...) pry ked (...) vain glory
him, in so much that she made means to speak with him, in terrupting his
sermon, which was not good manner. Therefore after s. Augustme and s. Hieromes
mind, she was pricked a little with vain glory, she would have been known to be
his mother, else she would not have been so hasty to speak with (...). And here
you may perceive ye we gave her to much, thin (...) her to be without any
sparkle of sins, which was to much: for no man borne into this world is
without sin, save Christ only. The scheledoctors say the was arrogant. One
came and told our sautor as he was teaching: Sir thy mother is here, and would
speak we thee, he made answer like as he did wha^ he was but 12. year old:
opoitet meesle so he says now stretthing out his hands who is my mother?
(...) facit volutate^ patris He that does gods vvilis (...) stes mother
mei (...) est in (...) he yt does ye will of my father yt is in heaven. Lucas
says, qui audit verbu^ dei and facit istud, he yt hears ye word of god and
does it. Mark this well he says yt does it: let us (...): let us not only be
hearers, but doers, then we shall be accor ding to his promise, his brethern,
and sistern, we must hear his word and do it. For truly if Mary his mother had
not heard his Mary was saved be cause she believed in Christ.
word and believed it, she should never have been saved. For the was not saurd
because she was his natural mother but because she belcued in hi, because she
was his spiritual mother. Remember therefore ye all yt do his will, are his
kinsfolk. But remember yt in an other place he says No^ om^es qui dicu^t
(...) Domine domine introibunt, Not all that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven; here you see that the matter stands not in saying,
but in doing, do his will, and than resort unto him and thou shall be welcome.
We (...) in Luke: where our savior said, (...) qui (...) domini, and non facit,
vapulabit multis, that servant that (...) weth the will of his master and does
it not shall be (...). We must first know and then do the will of god.
with many strypes: He that knou (...), but not so much. We must first know
and than to, it is a good thing to know, but it is a (...) thing to know and
not to do: it is a great sin, to slander gods word with wicked if uyng, as
it is commonly seen amongst men. But this fault if it be not amended shall
have grievous punishment.

Now some men will say, (...) it is so, that those which know (...) word and
do not the same, shall be beten with ma ny strypes, then I will keep me from it,
and so when I am VVilfull lg norance ex ouseth not
damned I shall have the easyer punishment. No no my friend ignorantia non
excusat praesertim voluntaria, and affectata, will full ignorance excuses not.
To say, I will not hear it, for I entend to do as it shall please me, this is
not ignorancye brother, but rather contumacy, or despising of gods word. These
which would feign know, but cannot for that they have no teacher, they shall be
excused somewhat. for they shall have casier pain than the other have, as he
says: Vae (...) Chorazin quia si in Sodoma, meaning that the Sodemites shall
have easier judgment tha^ the other. But as for those which refuse to hear
when they might hear, they are in an ill case, and shall be punished with
unspeakable (...). And I tell you the very The very ig norant is no. excused
ignorant man is not all excused, for so says god by his prophet, Si non
annunciaueris vt conuertatur a viae sua mala, impius in iniquitate sua
morietur. the wicked says he, morietur, he shall die, though he has had never
warning before, so we see that ignorancy excuses not: but the ignorant are the
less punished: because of their ignorancye, as there be degrees in bell, one
shall be punished more grievously then the other accor ding to their deserts.
There be some men in England whi chc say, No, (say they) I will not hear none
of them all, till they agree amongeste them selves. Such fellows truly
shall never come to the gospel. For there will be contentions as long as the
devil is alive: he cannot suffer gods word to Despisers of gods word.
be spread abroad. Therefore he does and will do till the worlds end, what he
can to let the word of god: then it is like that those fellows shall never
come to hear gods word, and therefore worthily be damned as despisers of Gods
most holy word.

Further this petition has an addition Quemadmodum in coelo, as it is in
heaven, the writers make two manner of heavens, Two ma ner of hea uens.
a spiritual heaven, and a temporal heaven. The spiritual heaven to where
gods will is fully done, where the angels be, which do the will and pleasure
of god without dilation. Now when we say, As it is in heaven, we pray god that
The mea ning of this pention.
we may do his will as perfectly as the angels do. Ensamples in Scripture we
have many which teach us the diligent service which the angels do unto the
Lord.

When king David fell in a presumption, so that he commanded his captain
Ioab to noumber his pcople, which Ioab did naught in obeying to do that the
king com maunded.
thing was against the Lord, and Ioab did naughtily in obeiyng the king in such
things, but he went and numbered eight hundred thousand, and five hundred
thousand men, able to fight, beside women and children. For this act God was
angry with David, and sent his Prophets which told him that God would plage
him, and bad him to choose whether he would have. vii. years hunger, or that his
enemies should prevail against him three months long, or to have. iii. dais
(...) silence. He made answer, saying. It is better to fall into the hands of
god, then of men: and so chose pestilence. After that within three days there
died three score and ten thousand.

This storye is a great declaration how angrye GOD is with sin. Now David
that good king seeing the plague of God over the people, said unto god: Lord, it
is not they that have sinned, it is I my self, punish me and let them alone:
This An example to be folo wed of all men.
was a good mind in David: there be but few kings now that would do so. Now
at the length god was moved with pitye, and said unto the angel, Sufficit,
contine manum, it is though, leave of: by and by the plague cessed. Where you
see how redye the angels of GOD be to do the Lords comma^vemit. After that
David was minded to be thankful un to god, and offer a great sacrifice unto
him, and so remove yt wrath of god. And therefore he made suit to one of his
subjects for cer tain grounds to build an altar upon: yt same man was willing
to give it unto yt king freely. But David would not take it at his An example for
kings to (...).
hands. where kings (...) learn yt it is not lauful for them to take a way
other men's lands, to their own use: This good kig David would not take it
when it was offered unto him He did not as Achab yt wicked (...), which did
Naboth wro^gin taking away his vinyard against his will. An other ensample
wherein apereth how dilige^ily yt angels do gods co^ma^deme^ts Senacherib king
of yt (...) having a capitam called (...) which captain after yt he had
besieged Jerusalem, spoke (...) words against god yt almighty, saye^g to yt
Jews Think you yt your god is able to help you? or to defend you from my hand?
Now Ezechias yt good king hering such blasphemo' Another ex ample for kings to
fo lovv.
words to be speak against god, fell to prayer, desired god for aid sent for the
prophet Esai, and asked him counsel. Thend was god sent his angels which killed
an. Clxxx. and. v. thousand of yt Assiria^s 4. Re. 19.
in one night: yt king him self sca^t escaped, and with great danger and fear
gat him home. Here you see what a god our god Job. 9.
is, whose will we ought to do Therefore let us endeavor our selves The corpo rail
heaven does gods command meant.
to do his will and pleasure: and when we are not able to do it (as we be not in
deed) let us call unto him for help and aid.

The other heaven is called a corporal heaven, where yt son and the moon and
the stars ar, which heaven does gods commandment to. As it appears in yt
books of Iosue, and yt kings: how yt son stood at yt commandment of god. Ite^,
how yt shadow went backward like as Job says, Precepisti soli (...) no^
oritur, Thou gave co^ ma^dement to yt sun, and it arose not: therefore at yt
commandment of god they keep their ordinaric course, as god has commanded
them in yt first beginning. Ite^, the rain, yt snow, come at his
co^mandemi^ts: in su^ma, nothing rebelleth in his estate wherein Nothing
disobeyeth god saving only man.
it was set at yt first but Man: yt man will not be ruled by him, all other
things be, obedieut: rain comes wha^ god will have it and snow at his time. We
read in Achabs time that Elias yt pro phete (...) yt rain for. iii. year, and.
vi. months, for to punish the people, whereof followed a great dearth.
Afterward at yt request of the same Elias, god sent rain, which tempered the
ground to bring fruits. I think there be some Elias abroad at If we do gods
vville we shall have all things ne cessarie.
this time, which stops the rain, we have not had rain a good while.
Therefore let us pray to God that we may do his will, and than we shall have
al things necessary to soul and body. For what was this Elias? obnoxious
affectibus, a sinful man borne and co^cesued in sin: yet god seeing his
confidence granted his requests. For he was a man yt feared yt lord, and
trusted in him therefore god loved him and heard his prayer. Therefore (I say)
let us do as he did, tha^ god will hear our prayers: but we are flesh ly, we
are carnal, we do ca^ nothig perfectly as we ought to do God must do in us
that he co^ (...) to do.
wherefore we have need to say with s. Augustine, (...) preci pis and precipe quod
uis. Lord do thou with in me what you co^mau^ dest, and then co^mau^d what you
wilt. For we of our own strength and power are not able to do his
commau^deme^ts: but yt lack oursa uior will supply with his fulfillig, and with his
perfectnes he will take away our imperfectnes. Now since we have spoken much of
prayer I will desire you let us pray together, and so make an end but you must
pray with a penitent heart. For god will not hear God hea reth not (...)
penitente (...).
yt prayer yt proceeds from an impenitent heart: it is abominable in his
sight. I desire you to say after me. Our father. etc.

Amen.
The. v. sermon upon the Lords prayer made by master Hugh Latymer.
PAne^ nostru^ quotidianu^ da nobis hodie. Give us this day our daily bread.
This is a very good prayer if a body should say no more at one time but yt: for
as we see our need, so We should pray for those thyn ges that (...) lackyng.
we shall pray, when we see gods name to be dishonored, (...) and ill (...)
of, then a man, a saithfull man should say. Our father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. When we see the devil reign, and all the world follow
his kingdeme, then we may say: Our father which art in heaven, thy kingdom
come. When we see that the world follows her own desires and lusts, and not
gods will and his commandments, and it greeueth us to see this, we (...)
sorye for it, we shall make our (...) unto god for it, (...): Our father
which art in heaven Fiat voluntas (...), Thy (...) be done, when we lack
necessaries for the maintenance of this life, every thing is dear, then we may
say, Our father which art in heaven, give us this day our daily bread. One of
the se short pra yers with faith, is bet ter tha^ the whole psalm ter without.
Therefore as we see cause, so we should pray. And it is better to say one of
these short prayers with a good faith, then the whole psalter without faith.

By this now that I have said, you may perceive that the common opinion and
estimation which the people have had of this prayer (the lords prayer I say)
is far from that that it is in deed. For it was (...) for nothing, for wha^
we be disposed to despise a man, and call him an ignoraunte fool, we say, he
can not say his (...) noster, and so we made This prayer is not so light a mat
ter as it is made.
it a light matter, as though every man knew it. But I tell you it is a great
matter, it contains weighty things, if it be wayed to the very bottom, as
a learned man could do: but as for me, that that I have learned out of the
holy scripture and learned men's books, which expound the same. I will she we
unto you, but I entende to be short: I have been very long before in the other
petitions which some thing expound those that follow, therefore I will not tarry
so long in them as I have done in the other.

Give us this day our daily bread: Every word is to be considered: for they
have their importance. This word bread Bread does siguifie all manner susti
nance.
signifies all manner of sustinance for the preservation of this life: all
things whereby man should live, are contained in this word Bread.

You must remember what I said by that petition Hallowed be thy name. There we
(...) unto god that he will give us grace to live so, that we may with all our
conuersations, and doings halow and sancrify him, according as his word
tells us. Now forasmuch as the preaching of gods word is most
necessary to bring us into this halowing, we pray in the same petition for the
office of preaching. For the sanctifyeng of the name of god can not be, except
the office of Gods name can not (...) sanctified (...) be maintained
(...) be maynteyned, and his word be preached and known, therefore in the
same petition when I say Sanctificetur, Hallowed Le thy name, I pray that his
word may be spread abroad, and known, thorough which comes sanctifying.

So likewise in this petition, Give us this day our dailye The meaning of this
petitions.
bread, we pray for all those things which be necessary and requisite to the
sustinance of our souls and bodies. Now the first and principal thing that we
have need of in this life, is the magistrates, without a magistrate we should
never live well and quietly. Than it is necessary and most needful to pray
unto god for them, that the people may have rest, and apply their business,
every man in his calling, the husbandman in tillyng and plowing, the artificer
in his business. For you must ever consider, that where war is, there be all
discommodities, no man can do his duty according unto his calling, as it
appears now in Germany, the Emperor and the French king being at
controversy: I warrant you there is little rest, or quietness. Therefore in this
petition we pray unto god for our (...) that they may rule and govern this
realm well and godly, and keep us from invasions of alienates and strangers,
and to execute justice, and punish malefactors: and this is so requisite that
we cannot live without In this peti tio^ we pray for the king and all his
officers.
it. Therefore when we say, Give us this day our dayelye bread: we pray for
the king his counselors and all his officers: but not every man that says
these words, understands so much. For it is obscurely included, so that none
perceive it but those which (...) and diligently consider the same. But S.
Paul he expresses it with more words playnelye, saying: I exhort you to
make supplications and prayers for all men, but specially pro regibus and qui
in sublimitate constituti sun, for the kings and for those which be aloft,
whereto (...) vt placidam and quietam vitam agamus, that we To pray for rulers
is to pray for our selves also.
may live godly and quietly, with all honesty and godlynes. And when I pray for
them I pray for my self. For I pray for them that they may rule, so that I
and all men may live quietly and at rest. And to this end we desire a quiet
life, that we may the better scrue god, hear his word, and live after it.

For in the rebels time I pray you what godliness was showed amongst them?
they went so far (as it was told) that they defiled other men's wives: what
godliness was this? In what estate think you were those saithfull (...) which
at the same time were amongst them? they had sorrow enough I warraunte you. So
it appears, that where war is, there is right godliness (...) and gone.
Therefore to Good men lack no so (...) among (...).
pray for a quiet life, that is as much as to pray for a godly life, that we
may serve god in our calling, and get our lyuinges uprightly. So it appears
that praying for (...) is as much as to pray for our selves.

They that be children, and live under the rule of their parents, or have
tuto^rs, they pray in this petition for their pa rentes, and tutors. For they
be necessary for their brynging up. And god will accept their prayer as well as
theyrs which be of age. for god has no respect of persons: he is as redye to
God respe cteth no persons. The, educa tion of chil dren.
hear the youngest as the oldest. Therefore let them be brought up in godliness,
let them know god. Let parents and tutors do their duties to bring them up
so, that as soon as their age serves, they may taste and savor god: let them
fear god in the beginning, and so they shall do also when they be old.
Because I speak here of Orphans, I shall exhort you to be pitiful unto them,
for it is a thing that pleased god, as S. James witnesses, saying: Religio
pura. etc.

It is a common speech amongst the people and much used, that they say, all
religious houses are pulled down, whi Religious howles are not pulled down.
che is a very (...) saying, and not true, for they are not pull led (...). That
man and that woman that live together god ly and quietly, doing the works of
their vocation, and fear God; hear his word, and keep it: that same is a
religious house, that is that house that pleases god. For religion, pure
religion (I say) stadeth not in wearing of a monks coule, but in
righteousness justice and weldoings, and as (...) James says, in visiting the
Orphans and widows, that lack their True Religion.
husbands, Orphans that lack their parents to help them when they be
poor, to speak for them when they be oppres sed, herein stands true
religion, Gods religion (I say:) The other which was used was an vnreligious
life, yea rather an hypocrisye. There is a terte in Scripture I never read it
but I remember these religious houses. Estque recta homini via, cuius tamen
(...) iter est ad (...), There is a Pro. 14.
way, which (...) seemed to men to be good, whose end is eternal perdition:
when the end is naught, all is naught. So were these monks houses, these
religious houses. There were many people, specially wydowes, which would give
over The madness of such as did bye their (...) in abbeys.
housekepyng, and go to such houses, when (...) might have done much good
in mainteynyng of servants, and releuyng of poor people, but they went their
ways. What a madness was that? Again, how much cause we have to thank
GOD, that we know what is true religion, that GOD has reveled unto us the
deceiptfulnesse of those Monks, which had a goodly show before the world
of great holiness, but they were naught within. Therefore Scripture says,
Quod (...) est hominibus, abhominabile est coram Deo, That which is hyghly
esteemed before men, is abominable before GOD. Therefore It is better to live
in the fear of God tha^ to be a monk.
that man and woman that live in the fear of God, are muc he better than their
houses were.

I (...) ones a story of a holy man, some say it was saint (...), which had
been a long season in the (...), eating nor drynkyng nothing, but (...) and
water: at the length he thought him self so holy, that there should be no
body like unto him. Therefore he desired of God to know who should be his
fellow in heaven? GOD made him answer, and commanded him to go to
Alexandria, A Cobbler
there he should find a Cobbler which should Thalbe saint Anthonies fellow
in heaven.
be his fellow in heaven. Now he went thither, and sought him out, and
fell in acquaintance with him, and tarried with him three or four days to see
his conversation. The cobblers matteus.
In the (...) his wife and he prayed together, than they went totheyr
business, be in his shop, and she about her houswyferye. At dynner time they
had breadde and cheese, wherewyth they were well content, and took it
thankefully. Their children were well taught to fear GOD, and to say their
Pater noster, and the Creed, and the ten Commandments, and so he spente
his time in dooynge his duty trewely, I warraunt you he did not so many false
stitches as cobblers do now a days. S. Anthony perceiving that, came to
knowledge of himself, and laid away all pride and presumption. By this ensample
you may learn that honest conversation and godly living is much regarded
before god, in so much that this poor cobbler, doing his duty diligently was
made S. Anthonies fellow. Such scholars (...) bereligious houses.
So it appears that we be not destituted of religious houses: those which
apply their business uprightly and here gods word, they shall be s. Anthonies
fellows, that is to say, they shall be numbered amongst the children of god.

Further in this petition the man and wife pray one for the other. For one is
a help unto the other, and so necessary Man (...) pray one fot an other.
the one to the other. Therefore they pray one for the other that god will
spare them their lives, to live together qui etly and godly, according to his
ordinance and institution: and this is good and needeful. As for such as be
not married, you shall know that I do not so much praise marriage, yt I should
think that single life is naught: as I have heard some whith will scante allow
single life. They think in their hearts that Some alovve no single life.
all those which be not married be naught, therefore the yt have a (...) saying
amongst them? What? (say they) they be made of such metal as we be made of,
thinking them to be naught in their living, which suspicions ar damnable (...)
god. For we know not what gifts god has given unto the^ therefore we cannot
with good couscience condemn them or judge them. Truth it is marriage, is good
and honorable amongst all men, as s. Paul witnesses (and (...) and
fornicatores iudicauit dominus, And the lord shall and will judge God vvylle
judge adul (...) and whore kepers.
that is, coudemne adulterers, and whoremongers, but not those which live in
single life: when thou live in lechery, orarte a whore or whoremonger, then
thou shalt be damned: but when thou live godly and honestly in single life,
it is well and allowable before god: yea and better then marriage. For s. Paul
says, Volo uos absque sollicitudine esse, I will Love life is better than
marriage.
have you to be without carfulness, that is unmarried, and shows the
commodities, saying, They that be unmarried sct their minds upon god, how to
please him, and to live after his co^mandementes. But as for the other, the man
is careful how to please his wife, and again, the woman how to please his
wife, and again the woman how to please her hus band: and this is S. Paul's
saying of the one as well as of the other. Therefore I will wish you not to
condemn single life, but take one with the other, like as saint Paul teaches
us: not so extolle the one that we should condemn the other. For saint Paul
praises as well single life as marriage, yea Saint Paul does (...) love life
above marriage.
and more to. For those that be single have more liberties to pray and to
serve god, then the other, for they that be married have much trouble and
afflictions in their bodies. This I speak because I hear that some there be
which condemn single life: I would have them to know that matrimonye is
good, godly, and allowable unto all men, yet for all that, the singule life
ought not to be despised, or condemned, seeing that Scripture allows it: yea
and he affirms that it is better than matrimony if it be clean without sin
and offense.

Further we pray here in this petition for good servants, We pray for
trustye and true ser uantes.
that god will send unto us good faithful and trusty servants for they are
necessary for this bodily life that our business may be done, and those
which live in single life have more need of good trustye servants, than
those which are married. Those which are married can better ouersee their
seruanntes. For when the man is from home at the least the wife ouerseeth them
and keeps them in good order. For I tell you Servants must be ouerseene.
servants must be ouersene and looked to, if they be not ouersene what be
they? it is a great gift of god to have a good servant. For the most part of
servants are but eye servants: when their master is gone, they leave of from
their labor, and play the sluggardes, but such servants do contrary unto gods
commandment, and shall be damned in hell for their slouthfulnes, except they
repent. Therefore (I say) those that be unmarried have more need of good
servants, than those which be married, for one of them at the least may
always ouersee the family. For as I told you before, the most part of
servants be eye servants, they be nothing when they be not ouersene. There was
once a fellow asked a philosopher a question The masters (...) makes the (...)
fat.
saying, quomodo saginatur (...), how is an horse made (...), the philosopher
made answer saying: oculo dn^i, with his masters eye: not meaning that the
horse should be fed with his masters (...), but that the master should ouersee
the horse and take (...) to the horse keeper, that yt horse might be well fed. For
when a man (...) by the way and (...) his Inn and gives unto the hostler his
horse to walk, and so he himself sits at table and (...) good chere and
forgets his horse, the hostler (...) and says, Sir how much (...) shall I
give unto your horse? he says give him ii. d. I warrant you this horse shall
never be fat. Therefore a man should not say to the hostler, go give him: but
he should see himself that the horse have it. In likemaner those that have
servants must not only command them what they shall do, but they must see that
it be done: they must be present, or else it shall never be done. One other
man asked that same philosopher this question saying: What dounge is it that
makes a ma^s land most fruitful in bringyng forth much corn? Marry, The
foot steps of the owner do (...) the land,
said he, Vestigia domini, the owners footsteps: not meaning that the master
should come and walk up and down and tread the ground, but he would have
him to come and over see the servants tilling of the ground, commanding
the^ to do it diligently, and so to look himself upon their work: this shall be
the best donge (saycth the philosopher.) Therefore never trust servants
except you may be assured of their diligence: For I tell you truly, I can
come no where but I hear masters complainyng of their servants. I think
verily they fear not God, they consider not their duties. well I will (...)
them with this one text of Scripture, and than go forward in my matters, the
prophet Jeremy says. Maledictus qui facit opus domini negligenter, an other
tran Iere. 48
slation has fraudulenter but it is one in effect. Cursed be he (...) are
cursed of god.
says the prophet Jeremy that does the work of the lord negligently or
fraudulently take which you will.

It is no light matter that god pronounces them to be cursed. But what is
cursed? what is it? Cursed is as much to say as it shall not go well with them,
they shall have no luck, my face shall be against them. Is not this a great
thing? Truly consider it as you list, but it is no light matter to he cursed
of God, which rules heaven and earth. And though the Prophet speaks these
words of warriors going to war, yet it may be spoken of all servants, yea
of all estates, but specially of servants. For. S. Paul says Domino Christo
Servants serve the lord Christ.
seruitis you servants (says he) you serve the lord Christ, it is his
work. Than when it is the lords work take (...) how you do it: for cursed is
he that does it negligently. But where is such a servant as Jacob was to
Laban? how pain full was he? how careful for his masters profit? in so much
Jacob was a painfulser uant. (...) Ab (...) servant.
that when somewhat perished, he restored it again of his own. And where is
such a servant as Eleazar was to Abraham his master? what a journey had he?
how careful he was, and when he came to his iorneyes end, he would neither
eat nor drink before he had done his masters message, so yt al his mind was
geuenonly to serve his master, and to do according to his commandments: In
so much that he would neither eat nor drink till he had done according to
his masters will. Much like to our sauiors sayyng: Cibus meus est vt faciam
voluntatem eius qui misit me. This is my meat, to do the will of him that sent
me. I pray you servants mark this Eleazar well, consider all the
circumstances of his diligent and faithful service, and follow it: else if you
follow it not, you read it to your own condemnation. Likewise consider the true
service which Iosephe (that godly young man) did unto his master Potiphar,
liefetenaunt Potiphar was liefetenant of the toure in Egypt.
of the tower hew faithfully he served without any guile or fraud, therefore
god promoted him so, that he was made afterward the ruler over all Egypt.

Likewise consider how faithful Daniell was in seruyng Daniel ser ued king
Darius.
king Darius. Alack, that you servants be so stubburne hearted and will not
consider this, you will not remember that your service is the work of the
lord, you will not consi der that the curse of god hangs upon your heads for
your slouthfulnes and negligence. (...) therefore and look to your duties. Now
further whosoever (...) this prayer with a good faithful heart, as he ought to
do: he praith for all plough men and husbandme^: that God will prosper and (...)
their labor, for except he give (...), al their labor and (...) is (...).
Therefore it is (...) to pray for them, that God may send his benediction by
their labor, for without corn and This petition (...).
such manner of sustinance we cannot live. And in that prayer we include all
artificers: for thorough their labors god gives us many commodities which we
could not lack.

We pray also for wholesome air. Item we pray for seasonable wether, when we
have to much rain we pray sor fair weather: again when we lack rain we
pray that god will send rain. And in that prayer we pray for our cattle, that
god will preserve the^ to our use, from al diseases: for without cattle we can
not live, we can not till the ground nor have meat, therefore we include them
in ou re prayer to.

So you see that this prayer contains innumerable things. For we pray for
all such things as be expedient and needful for the preservation of this
life. And not alone this, but we have here good doctrine and admonitions
besides.

For here we be admonished of the liberality of god our hea uenly father, which
he shows daily over us. For our savior This petition doothe (...) us in
(...) of gods libera litie.
knowing the liberalitye of god our heavenly father com maundeth us to pray, if
he would not give us the things we ask. Christ would not have commanded us to
pray, if he had born an ill will against us. Christ would not have sent us to
him. But our savior knowing his liberal heart toward us, commands us to
pray and desire all things at his hands.

And here we be admonished of our estate and condition, (...) we leasne that
we are beg gers.
what we be, namely beggars. For we ask bread, of whom? marry of god. What are
we than? Marrye beggars, the grea test lords and ladies in England are but
beggars before god. Seeing then that we all are but beggars, why should we the^
(...) and despise poor men? (...) us therefore consider that we be but
beggars: let us (...) our stomaches, for if we consider the matter well, we are
like as they (...), before 1. Cor 4.
god: for saint Paul says, Quid habes quod non accepisti? What have thou
that thou have not received of god? Thou art The rich man is a beggar before
God.
but a beggar whatsoouer thou art: and though there be some very rich and have
great abundance, of whom have they it? of god. What says he, that rich man?
(...) says. Our father which art in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
then he is a beggar before god as well as the poorest man. Further how
continues the rich man in his riches? who made him rich? Marry god. For it
is written, benedictio dei facit (...) Prouer ye Gods blessing makes rich.
yt blessings of god makes rych, except god bless, it stan death to no
effect: for it is written. comedent and non (...) they shall eat but yet
never be satisfied. (...) as much as you will except god feed you, you shall
never beful. So likewise as rich as a man is, yet he cannot augment his
riches, nor keep that he has except god be with him, except he bless him:
therefore let us not be proud for we be beggars the best of us.

Note here that our savior bids us to say, Us: this Us: lappeth in all other
men with my prayer. For every one of us prays for an other, when I say. (...)
us this day our daily bread. I pray not for my self only (if I ask as he
byddeth me) but I pray for all other. Wherefore say I not, Our father give me
this day my daily bread? for because god is not my god alone, he is a common
god. And here we be admo nished to be frendlye, loving and charitable one to an
other, for what god (...), I can not say this is my own: but I No man (...)
says is is mine own to do do with it what I (...)
must say this is ours. For the rich man can not say: this is mine alone, god
has given it unto me for my own use. Nor yet has the poor man any titel unto
it, to take it away from him. No, the poor man may not do so, for when (...)
does so, he is a theife before god and man, but yet the poor man has (...) to
the rich man's good, so that the rycheman ought to let the poor man have part
of his riches, to help and to com fort? him withal. Therefore when god sends
unto me much, it is not mine but Ours, it is not (...) unto me alone, but I
must help my poor neighbors withal. But here I must ask you rich men a
question, how chances it you have your riches? we have the^ of god, you will
say. But by what Poor (...) held rich men to goods.
means have you the^? by prayer you will say: we pray for the unto god, and he
gives us the same. Very well. But I pray you tell me, what do other me^ which
are not rich? pray they not as well as you do? yes you must say, for you
cannot deny it. The^ it (...) yt you have your riches not thorough your own
prayers only but other me^ help you to pray for the^. For they say as well Our
father, give us this day our daily bread as you do: and peradventure they be
better than you be, and God hears their prayer sooner than yours. And so it
appears (...) manifestly that you obtain your richesse of god, not only
through your own (...) but through other men's to. Other men help you to get
them at gods hand, tha^ it follows that seeing you get not your richesse alone
through your own prayer, but through the poor manspraier: it is mete yt the
poor man should have part of them, and you ought to (...) his necessity and
poverty. But what means God by this inequality that he gives to sum an.
100. pound, unto this man. 5000. pound unto this man in a manner nothing at
all, The rich man is gods treasurer.
What means he by this inequality? Here he means that the rich ought to
distribute his riches abroad amongst the poor, for the rich man is but
gods officer, gods treasorer, he ought to distribute them according unto his
Lord gods commandment. If every man were rich than no man would do any thing:
therefore god makes some rich and some poor. Again that the rich may have
where to exercise his God se^deth the poor to the rich,
charity, God made some rich and some poor: the poor he sends unto the
rich to desire of him in gods name help and aid. Therefore you rich men when
there comes a poor man unto you, desiryng your help, think none otherwise
but god has set him unto you, and remember that thy riches be not thy own,
but thou art but a stuard over them. If thou will not do it, tha^ comes in s.
John which says: He yt has yt substance of this world, and sees his brother
lack and helps him not, hold remains the love of god in him? he speaks
not of them yt have it not, but of them yt have it: that saw man loves not
god, if he help not his neighbor having wherewith to do it. This is a sore and
hard word: There be many which say with Many say they love god.
their mouth, they love god: And if a man should ask here this multitude
whether they love God or no: they would say (...), god forbid else. But if you
consider their (...) unto the poor, you shall see as saint John said, the love
of god is not within the^. Therefore you rich me ever (...) This petition is god
store house.
you have your riches. be it a thousand (...). yet you (...) of this petition.
For this petition, (...) us this day our (...) bread, is gods storehouse, gods
(...) his provision, and here you fetch it. But ever have in remembrance, that
this is a common prayer, a poor man prays (...) as thou, and peradventure
god sends this riches unto thee for an other man's prayers sake, which prays
for thee, whose prays is more effectual than thin own. And therefore you
ought to be thankful unto other men, which pray for you un A remedy against
(...) ked careful nes.
to god and help you to (...) your riches. Again, this petition is a remedy
against this wicked carfulness of men, when they seek how to live, and how to
get their linings, in such wise, like as if there were no god at all. And than
there be some which will not labor as god has appointed unto the^: but (...)
them to (...) salse ware, and deceue their neighbors, or to (...) other men's
(...) or conies. Those selowes ar (...) wide, let the^ com to gods (...) house,
yt is to say, let them com to god, and call upon him with a good faith,
saying: Our father give us this day our Daily bread, truly god will hear them.
For this is yt only remedy that we have here in earth, to come to his treasor
house, and (...) there such God promi seth to sede us daily.
things as we lack. Consider this word daily, God promises us to feed us
daily. If ye believe this, why use ye tha^ falshod and deceit? Therefore good
people leave your falshode, get you rather to this treasure house, then you may
be sure of a living: for god has determined that al yt com unto him desi ring
his help, they shall be helped, god will not forget the^. But our (...) is so
great, we will not com unto him, we will rather go about to get our living with
falshod, than desire yt same of hi. O what falshod is used in England, yea in
yt hole world? It were not (...) if the fire from heaven fell upon us like as it
did upon yt Sodomites, only for our falshodes sake. I will tell you of some
which are practiced in my contry A falls prac tise much v sed among the men of
the country
where I dwell. But I will not tell it you to teache you to do yt same, but rather
to abhor it. For those which use such deceitfulnes shall be damned world without
(...), except they repent I have known some yt had abarant (...), they would
fain have had a great deal of money for her, therefore they go and take a calfe
of another cow, and put it to this barain cow, and so com to yt market,
prete^ding yt this cow has brought yt calf and so they sell their barant cow 6.
02. 8. (...). derer tha^ they should have (...) else. The man which bought the
cow comes home, peradventure he has a many of children, and has no more
cattle but this cow, and thinks he shall have some milk for his children:
but when all things comes to pass, this is a barrant cow, and so this
poor man is deceived. The other fellow which sold the cow, thinks him
self a (...) fellow, and a wise merchant, and he is called one that can make
shyfte for himself. But I tell thee, who so ever thou art, do so if thou
lust, thou shall do it of this price: thou shalt go to the devil: and there
be hanged on the fyry galowes world without end: and thou art as very a
these as The (...) de of these witty felllovves, is damnation except (...).
when thou take a ma^s purse from him going by the way, and thou sinnest as
well against this commandment, Non (...) furtu^, Thou shall do no theft. But
these fellows commonly which use such deceiptfulnesse and guyles, can speak
so fine ly, that a man would think butter should scant melte in their mouths.

I (...) you one other falsehode: I know that some husband An other countreye
deceit.
men go to the market with a quarter of corn: Now they would feign sell dear
the worst as well as the best, therefore they use this policy, they go and put
a strike of fine malte or corn in the bottom of the sack, than they put.
(...). strike of the worst that they had: than a good strike aloft in the
sackes mouth, and so they come to the market. Now there comes a byar, asking,
Sir is this good malt? I warrant you says he, there is no better in this
town: and so he sells all his malt or corn for the best, when there be but.
ii. strikes of the best in his sack. The man that byeth it, thinks he has
good malte, he comes home: When he puts the malt out of the sack, the
stryke which was in the bottom covers the ill malte which was in the
mids, and so the good man shall never perceyne the fraud, till he comes to
the occupyeng of the corn: the other man that sold it, takes this for a
policy, but it is a theft before God, and he is The gains that he shall have
that sell evil for good
bound to make restitution of so much as those two strykes which were
naught, were sold to dear, so much he ought to restore, or else he shall
never comme to heaven, if GOD be true in his word. I could tell you of one
other falshode, how they make (...) to way much, but I will not tell it you.
If you learn to do those falshodes whereof I have told you now, then take
the sause with it, namely that you shall never see the bliss of heaven, but be
damned world without end with the devil and all his angels. Now go to when
it please you, use falshode. But I pray you wherefore will you deceive your
neighbor whom you ought to love as well as your own self? consider the matter
good people what a dangerous thing it is to fall in yt hands of the ever living
God: leave falshode, abhor it, be true and faithful in your calling, Querite
regnum dei and iustitiam (...) and cetera omnia (...) vobis. Seek the king dome
of god and the righteousness thereof: than all things ne cessary for you, shall
come unto you unlooked for.

Therefore in this petition note first gods goodness how ge^till God would have us
to com to him for all (...) ges.
he is toward us, in so much that he would have us to come unto him and
take of him all things. Then again, (...) what we be, namely beggars, for we
beg of him, whi (...) us to leave stoutnes and proudenes, and to be humble.

Note what is Our, namelye that one prays for an other and that this
storehouse is common unto all men.

Note agayns what we be when we be false, namely the children of the devil
and enemies unto god.

There be some men which would have this petition not to The mind of some (...)
ned men.
importe or contain these bodily things, as things which be to vile to be
desired at gods hand: Therefore they expound it altogether spiritually, of
things pertaining unto the soul only, which opinion truly I do not greatly
like. For shall I trust god for my soul, and shall I not trust him for my body?
Therefore I take it that all things necessary to soul and body are contained
in this petition: and we ought to seek all things necessary to our bodily
food only in this storehouse.

But you must not take my sayings after such sort as though you should do
nothing but sit and pray: and yet you should have your dinner and supper made
ready for you. No not so, but you must labor, you must do the work of your
vocation. Querite (...) dei, seek the kingdom of heaven, you must set those
two things together, works and prayer. The way to be sure of lyuinge.
He that is true in his vocation, does according as god wills him to do, and
then pray they unto god: that man or woman may be assured of their living, as
sure (I say) as god is God. As for the wicked. in deed god of his excedyng
mercy and liberalitle fyndeth them, and sometimes they fare better then the
good man does: but for all yt, the wicked man has ever an ill conscience, he
does wrong unto god, he is an usurper, he has no right unto it: the good and
goodly man he has right unto it, for he comes by it lawfully, by his prayer
and trauail. But these (...) men, think ye, say they this prayer The (...) man
does but mock god (...) he prays.
with a faithful heart? Our father which art in heaven, Give us this day
our daily bread: Think ye they say it from the bottom of their hearts? No
no, they do but mock god, they laughe him to scorn, when they say these
words. For they have their bread, their silver and gold in their (...), in
their chests, in their bags or bougets, therefore they have no savor of god,
(...) they would show them selves liberal unto their poor neighbors, they
would open their chestes and bags, and lay out and help their brethern in
Christ. They be as yet but (...); they say this prayer like as the Turk
might say it.

Consider this word Give, Certainly we must labor, yet we must not so
magnify our labor as though we gat our living by it. For labor as long as
thou will, thou shall have no profit by it except the lord increase thy
labor. Therefore we must thank him for it, he does it, he gives it: to
whom? laboranti, and (...), unto him that laboreth and prayth: that man that
is so disposed shall not lack, as he says, dabit (...) sanctum (...) illum, He
will give the holy (...), unto them that desire the same. Then we must ask:
for he gives not to (...). In deed they have (...) benefits: they live
wealthily: but as I told you before, they have it with an ill conscience, not
laufully. Therefore Christ (...)
says. Solemn (...) super iustos et iniustos. Ite^, Nemo (...) show not who
are in Gods favor.
(...) an (...) vel amore sir dignus. We can not tell outwardlye by these
worldly things which be in ye favor of god and which be not: for they be
common unto good and badde. But the wicked have it not with a good conscience
The upright good man has his living thorough his labor and faithful prayer,
beware that you trust not in your labor, as though ye got your living by it:
for as saint Paul says. Qui plantat nihil est, neque qui tigat, sed (...)
dat incrementum deus. Neither 1. Cor. 3.
he that planteth is ought, nor he that waters, but god that gives the
increase: Except God give the increase all our labor is lost. They that be
the children of this world, What they be that com not to gods storehouse.
(as covetous persons, extorsioners, oppressoures, caterpyllers, usurers)
think you they come to gods storehouse? No no, they do not, they have not
the understanding of it, they cannot tell what it means. For they look not
to get their lyuynges at gods storehouse, but rather they think to get it
with deceit and falshod, with oppressions, and wrong doings. For they think
that al things be lauful unto them, therefore they think that though they take
other men's goods thorough sutteltie and crafts, it is no sin. But I tell
you, Those things which we bye or get with our labor, or are given us by
inheritance or other ways, those things be ours by the law, which makes
meum and tuum mine and thine. Now all things gotten otherwise are not ours: as
those things which be gotten by crafty conueiaunces, by guile and fraud, by
robbery and stealing, by extortion and oppression, by handemakyng, (or how
soever you come by it, beside the God hates alms of (...) g (...).
right way) it is notyours in so much that youmay not give it for gods sake,
for god hates it. But you will say: what shall we do with the good gotten by
unlawful means? Marye I tell thee, make restitution, which is the only way
yt pleases god. O lord what bribery, falshod, deceiving, false getting of
goods is in England? And yet for all yt we hear nothing of (...), which is a
miserable thig. I tell you none of the^ whi che have taken their neighbors good
from him by any manner of (...), (...).
falshod, none of the^ (I (...)) shall be saved except they make resti tution,
either in affect, or effect: in effect, when they be able, in (...), (...)
they be not able in no wise. (...) sayethe. Si impius egerit (...). and
rapinam (...). When the ungodly does repent, and restores the good gotten
wrongfully and unlawfully. For unlawful good ought to be restored again:
without restitution look not for salvation. Also this is a true sentence used
of s. Augustine. Non remittitur peccarum, nisi restituatur ablatum, Robbery,
falsehode, or otherwise ill gotten goods, can not be forgiven of Ziche is an
example for all (...) to (...).
god, except it be restored again. Zacheus that good publican that common
officer, he gave a good ensample unto al (...) and extorsioners, I would they
all would follow his ensample, he erercised not open robberye, he killed no man
by the way: but with crafts and suttelties he deceived the poor. When the
poor men came to him, he had them to come again an other day, and so delayed
the time, til at the leugth he weried poor men, and so gate somewhat of them.
Such fellows are now in our time very good chepe: but (...) will not learn the
second lesson. They have red the first lesson, how Zache was a bribetaker, but
they will not read the second, (...) vvil not read (...) second lesson.
they say A. but they will not say B. What is the second lesson? (...) quem
defraudaui reddam quadruplum. If I have decetued any man, I will restore it
four fold. But we may argue that they be not such fellows as Zache was,
for we here nothing of restitution, they lack right repentance. It is a
wonderful thing to see yt christen people will live in such an estate, wherein
they know themselves to be damned: for wha^ they go to bed, they go in the name
of the devil. In summa, (...) go to bed in the deuyls name.
what so ever they do, they do it in his name, because they be out of the
favor of god. God (...) them not: therefore (I say) it is to be lamented,
that we here nothing of restitution. S. Paul says. Qui furabatur non amplius
furetur, he that stale, let him steal no more. which words teach us, that he
which has stolen or deceived, and (...) it, he is a strong these, so long
till he restore again the thing taken, and shall look for no (...) of his
sins at gods hand, till he has restored again such goods.

There be some which say, repentance or (...) will serve it is enough when I am
(...) for it. Those fellows can not tell what repentance means. Look upon
Zacheus, he did It is not e nough to be (...).
repent, but restitution by and by followed. So let us (...) too: let us live
uprightly and godly: and when we have done (...) or deceived any body, (...) us
make (...): and after beware of such (...), of such (...), (...) let us call
upon God, and (...) to (...), (...) (...) of (...).
(...), what it (...) I told you. (...) I have occasion to speak of the (...):
for I fear if I should leave it so, some of you would (...) wrongfully, and
affirm, that all things should be There is (...) in things.
(...). I say not so. Certain it is, yt God has (...) proprieties of things,
so that that which is mine, is not thine: and what thou have I can not take
from thee. If all things were common, there could be no theft, and so this
(...) Non (...) furtum. Thou shall not (...), were in vain, butit He (...) has
things by the (...) of his (...) trey has well.
is not so. The laws of the realms make (...) and (...), mine and (...). If I
have things by those laws, tha^ I have them well. but this you must not forget
that s. Paul says Sitis necesitatibus sanctorum communicantes, Relieve the
necessity of those which have need. Things are not so common, that another
man may take my good from me, for this is theft: but they are so common that we
ought to distribute them unto the poor, to help them and to comfort them
with it: we ought one to (...) an other: for this is a standing sentence: Qui
habue rit substantia^ huius mundi, and viderit fratre^ suu^ necessitatem (...).
habere and clauserit viscera sua ab co, quomodo (...) Dei manet in eo? He yt
has the substance of this world, and shall (...) his brother to have need, and
shuts up his entier affection from him, how dwells the love of God in him?

There was a certain manner of having things in common in the time of the
apostles. For some goodme^ (as Bernabas was) sold their lands and possessions,
and brought the money The cause why che (...) had things in (...).
unto the apostles, but that was done for this cause: there was a great meny of
christen people at: that time entreated very ill in so much that they left all
their goods. Now such folk came unto the apostels for and and help. Therefore
those which were faithful men, seeing the poverty of their brethren went and
sold that that they had, and spente the (...) amongeste such poor (...) and
Saphi (...) his (...)
which were newly made christians. Amongst other which sold their goods, there
was one Anauias and Zaphira his wife two very subtle persons: they went and
sold their good so, but they (...) a wise part, they would not stand in danger
of the losing of al their goods: Therefore they agreed together, and took the
one part from the money, and laid it up: with the other part they came to Peter,
affirming that to be the whole money. For they thought in their hearts like
as al unfaithful men do. It is good (...) wise.
We can not tell how long this religion shall abide: it is good to be wise, and
keep somewhat in store, what soever shall (...). Now Peter knowing by the holy
ghost their falshoode, first (...) him with one word, and after her too: which
in deed is a fearful ensample, whereby we should be monished to beware of lies
and falsehode. For though god punish the not by and by as he did this (...),
yet he shall find thee, surely he will not forget the. Therefore (...) here to
take heed of falshad I (...) to bevvare of falsehod.
and beware of lies. For this (...), this wilful Ananias I say, because of this
wilful lie, went to hell with his wife: and there shall be punished world
without end. where you see what a grievous thing it is to make a lie: This
(...) neded not to sell his (...), he had no such co^mande meant: but seeing he
did so, and then came and brought but half the price, making a pretense as
(...) he (...) brought all, for that he was punished so (...). O what lies ar
made now adays in England here and there in the markets, truly it is a pitiful
thing that we nothing (...) it. This one (...) of Ananias and (...), their
(...) is able Ananias was punished for his (...).
to (...) the whole world. You have hard now how (...) had things in common in
yt first (...) s. (...) us how things ought to be in (...) saying, (...) it is
(...), help the (...) of those which be poor. Our good is not so ours, that
(...) We may not do what we (...) with our goods
may do with it what us (...), (...) we ought to (...) it unto them which have
need. No man ((...) I (...) you (...)) ought to (...) away my good (...) but I
(...) to (...) yt that I may spare, and help the poor (...). (...) says s.
Paul: distribute (...) yt poor let (...), (...) help them (...) things as you
may spare. For so it is (...), Cui plus datum est, plus (...) ab illo, (...)
that (...) much must make (...) for much and if he have not spent it well, he
must make the (...) account: But I speak not this to (...) poor (...)
labor, He rhat (...) for (...).
for we must labor, and do the works of our (...) one in his calling, for so
it is written, (...) manducabis and been tibi (...), you (...) eat thy (...),
and it shall go well with thee: that is to say, every man shall work for his
(...), and shall not be a (...), as a great many be: every man shall labor and
pray, than god will send him his living: s. (...) says: Qui non laborat, no^
(...); He that labors not, let him not eat. Therefore those lubbers which
will not labor, and might labor (...) that vvylle not labor.
it is a good thing to punish them according unto the kings most godly
statutes. For god himself says, In sudore vul (...) pane (...), in the sweat
of thy face thou shalt eat thy bread. Than (...) in s. (...) which says.
Magis We must labor that we may have vvher with to (...) leave the poor.
(...) digentibus, let him labor the sorer that he may have where with to help
the poor, and Christ himself says. Melius (...), (...), it is better to give
than to take. So Christ and all his apostles, yea the whole scripture
admonishes us ever of our neighbor to take heed of him, to be pitiful unto
him: but god knows, there be a great many which care little for their
neighbors. They do like as (...) did, when god asked him, Cain, where is thy
brother Abell? (...) men (...) like unto Cain.
what? (says he) am I my brothers keeper? So these rich fra^klings these
couetouse fellows, they scrape al things to themselves, they think they should
care for no body (...), but for themselves: god (...) the poor man to labor
the so (...), to yt end that he may be able to help his poor neighbor how
much more ought the rich to be liberal unto them?

But you will say, here is a maruailous doctrine, which (...) nothing but
Give, Give, if I shall follow Give give is a (...) leus (...) to the (...) man.
this doctrine, I shall (...) so much, that at the length I shall have
nothing left for my self. These be words of (...), he that speaks such
words (...) a (...) manne. And I pray you tell me, have ye heard of any man
that came to pouertye, because he gave unto the poor? have you herd tell of
such a one? No, I am sure you have not. No man co meth (...) po (...) by (...)
the poor.
And I dare lay my head to pledge for it, yt no man living has come, or shall
hereafter come to poverty because he has been liberal in helping the poor.
For God is a true god, and no liar: he promises us in his word yt we shall
have the more by giving to the nedie. Therefore yt way to get is, to scatter
that that you have. Give and you shall gain: If you ask me how shall Giving is
gainyng, if we gene as we should:
I get riches? I make yt this answer: Scatter yt that thou have: for (...), is
gaining. But you must take heed and scatter it ac cordyng unto gods will and
pleasure: yt is, to relieve ye poor wtal, to scater it amongst the (...) of
Christ, who soever gives so, shall surely gain. for Christ says, Date, and
dabitur vobis, (...) and it shall be given unto you. Dabitur, it shall be given
unto you. This is a sweet word, we can well away with that: but how (...) we
come by it? Date, give. This is the way to get, to releue the pore. Therefore
this is a false and wicked (...) to think that with geuyng unto the poor we
shall come to poverty. What a geuer was Loath, that good man: came he to Loath
was a large (...)
poverty through giving? No, no, he was a great rich man. Abraham, yt father
of al beleuers, what a liberal man wash, in so much yt he sat by his door
watching wha^ any body went by the way that he might call him, and releue his
necessity. what? came he to poverty? No no, he died a great rich man.
Therefore let us follow yt ensample of Loath and Abraham: let us be liberal,
Abraham was a liberal man (...).
and than we shall augment our stock. For this is a most certain and true word,
Date and dabitur vobis, give, and it shall be given unto you. but we believe it
not, we can not a (...) with it. The most part of us are more given to take
(...) poor, tha^ to relieve their (...). They be so careful for their
children, yt (...) We ca^ not away with this (...).
cannot tell (...) they be well, (...) purchase this house and yt house: but what
says the prophet? Voe qui (...) is (...) woe be unto you yt (...) house to
house, yt curse of god hangs over your heads. Christ says, Qui (...) vel
(...) vel (...) me, (...) est me (...), He yt loves his father or mother, Who
the be that rey (...) god
or children more tha^ me, he is not mete for me. Therefore those which (...)
and gather ever for their children and in yt mean season forget the poor, whom
God would have releued, these I say) regard (...) more then gods co^mandementes.
For their children must be set up, and the poor miserable people is
forgotten in the mean season. There is a common Happy is the child whose
(...) to the (...)
saying amongst the worldlings, Happy is that child whose father goth to the
devil: but this is a worldly happiness. The same is seen wha^ the child can
begin with. (...). hundred (...) where as his father began with nothing, it is a
wicked happiness if the father gate those goods wyckedly. And there is (...)
doubt but many a father gothe to the devil for his childs (...), in that he
neglected gods (...), scraped for his child, and forgot to relieve his poor
miserable neighbor. We have in Scripture, Qui (...) pauperis, (...) Deo, Who so
ever has pity over the poor, he lends unto god upon usury, that is to
say, God will give it unto him again with increase: this is a laufull and
godly usury. (...).


Certain it is, that usury was allowed by the laws of this (...), yet it
(...) not that usury was godly, nor allowed before god. For it is not a good
argument, to say it is forbidden to take. x. li. of the hundred, (...) I may
take five. Like as a thief can not say, it is forbidden in yt law to steal.
xiii. d. ob. No good (...).
ergo I (...). vi. d. or. iii. d. or. ii. d. No no, this reasoning will not
serve before god. For though the law of this realm hangs him not, if he
steal. iiii. d. yet for all that he is a thief before god, and shall be hanged on
the fyry galowes in hell. So he that occupies usury, though by the laws of
this realm, he might do it without punishment (for the laws are not so
precise) yet for all that he does wickedly in the sight of (...) are both
(...).
god. For usury is wicked before god, be it small or great: like as theft is
wicked. But I will tell you how you shalbevsurers to get much gain: Give it
unto the poor, than God will give it to the with gain, give. xx. d. and thou
shall have. xl d. If god be (...) we can not lose (...).
It shall come again (thou shall not lose it) or else God is not god. What
needs it to use such deceitfulness and falshode to get richesse: Take a
lauful way to get them, that is, to scatter To (...) we have (...) the (...)
way (...)
this abroad that thou have, and tha^ (...) shall have it again with great
gains, quadruplu^, 4. times, says scripture. Now gods word says that I shall
have again that which I laid (...) with usury, with gain. Is it true that god
says? yes, than let me not think that giving unto the poor does (...) stock
(...) god says the contrary, namely that it shall increase: or else we make
God a liar. For if I believe not his sayings, tha^ by mine (...) I make him a
liar, as much as is in me. Therefore learn here to commyt bsurie, and specially
you rich men, you must learn this lesson well, for of you it is A lesso for
rich men
written. Who (...) has much, must make account for much: and you have much,
not to that end, to do with it what you lust, but you must spend it as God
appoints (...) in his word to do. For no rich man can say before god, this is
my own. No, he is but an officer over it, an almener gods treasurer. Our
savior says, Omnis qui reliquerit agru^ etc. centuplum accipiet. Who soever
shall leave his field, shall receive it again an hundred fold. As if I
should be examined now of the papists, if they should ask me, believe you in
the mass? I say No, according unto gods word and my conscience, it is naught,
it is but deceiptfulnesse, it The mass is the (...) doctrine.
is the (...) doctrine. Now I must go to prison, I leave al things behind me,
wife and children, good and land, and all my friends: I leave them for Christ's
sake, in his quarrel. What says our savior unto it, Centuplum accipiet, I
shall have an hundred times so much. Now though this be spoken in such wise,
yet it may be understood of alms giving to. For that man or woman that can
find in their hertes for gods sake to leave. r. s. or. r. li. they shall have an
hundred fold again in this life, and in the world (...) come life everlasting.
If this will (...) move our hertes, than they are more than stome and slintie,
then our (...) is just and well deserved. Stony and (...) her (...).
For to give alms it is like as when a man comes unto me, and desires an
empty purse of me: I lend him the purs he comes by and by and (...) it full
of money, and gives it me: So that I have now my purse again, and the money
to. So it is to give alms, we lend an empty purse, and take A good si (...).
a full purse for it. Therefore let us persuade our selves in our hearts, that
to give for gods sake, is no (...) unto us but great gain. And truly the poor
man does more for the rich man, in taking things of him, than the rich doothe
for the Scarce auy rich man will beleus this.
(...) in giving them. For the rich gives but only (...) goods: but the poor
gives him by the promise of god al (...). Quotidianu^, Daily. here we learn
to cast away all carfulness, and to come to this storehouse of god, where
we shall have all things competent both for our souls and bodies. Further in
this petition we desire that god will feed (...) for (...) gie.
not only our bodies but also our souls: and so we pray for the (...) of
preaching. For like as the body must be fed daily with meat: so the soul
requires her meat, which is the word of god. Therefore we pray here for all
the clergy, that they may do their duties, and feed us with the word of god
according to their calling. Now I have troubled you long, therefore I will make
an end: I desire you remember to resort to this storehouse: whatsoever ye have
need of, come hither, here are all things necessary for your soul and body,
only desire them. But you have heard how you must What apparel they must
have that vville comme to Gods store house.
be apparelled, you must labor and do your duties, and than come and you shall
find all things necessary for you: And specially now at this time let us
resort unto god, for it is a great brought, as we think, and we had (...) of
rain. Let us there fore resort unto our loving father, which promises, that
wha^ we call upon him with a faithful heart, he will hear us. Let us therefore
desire him to rule yt matter so, that we may have God heard Elias (...)
our bodily (...). we have the ensample of Elias, whose prayer god heard:
therefore let us pray this (...), which our savior and redemer Jesus Christ
himself taught us, saying: Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Amen.
The. vi. Sermon upon the Lords prayer made by master Hugh Latymer.
ET remitte nobis debita nostra sicut and nos re mittimus debitoribus nostris,
And forgive Never man said this (...) with his heart, but he had forgeuenes
us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. This is a
very good prayer if it be said in faith with the whole heart. There was never
none that did say it with the heart, but^ he had forgeuenes, and his
trespasses, and al his sins were pardoned and taken from him. As touching yt
former petitions, I told you yt many thin ges were contained in the^, which you
may perceue (...) by yt yt I have said, (...) partly by (...) and (...). Truly
there is a great doctrine in it, yet we (...) it to be but a light matter to
understand the lords prayer, but it is a great thing. Therefore It is a great
thing to (...) the lords prayer.
I would have you to mark it well. But spccially keep in your remembrance
how our savior teaches us to know the liberality of god, how god has
determined to help us, in so much that we shall lack nothing, if we come to
his treasor house, where is locked up all (...) necessary for our souls and
bodies.

Further consider by the same petition that we be but beggars all together. For
the best of us has need to say daily: (...) he best of (...) is (...) a
beggar.
Our father, give us this day our daily bread. I would these proud and lofty
fellows would consider this, namelye that they be but beggars as S. Paul
says. Quid habes, quod no^ accepisti: what have ye yt you have not gotten with
begging.

Yet most above all things, I would have you to consider this word Our, for
in that word ar contained great mysteries, and much learning. All those that
pray this prayer (that is to say, all Christen people) help me to get my
living at gods hand: and therefore (as I told you before) they ought to be
partakers of my substance, seeing they help to get my living Every man helps
to get others (...).
at gods hand: for when they say Our, they includs me in their prayers.

Again (...) the remedy against carefulnes, which is, to trust in god, to
hang upon him, to come to his treasure house, and then to labor, and to do
the works of our vocati on: then undoubtedly God will provide for us, we shall
not lack. Therefore learn to trust upon the lord, and leave this wicked
(...), whereof our (...) monisheth us.

Specially I would have you to consider what a wicked (...)o^ this is, to
fantasy yt giving to the poor is a diminishing of our goods. I told you of
late of the proprieties of things how things (...), and how (...) be not ours;
al those things (...) men (...) pro (...) in things.
which we have either by laboar or by inheritance, or else by gifts, or else by
bying all those things which we have by such tytles be our own: but yet not
so, that we may spend them according to our own pleasure. They be ours upon yt
condition that we shall spend them to the honor of god, and (...) of our
neighbors. And here I spoke of (...), how we ought to make amends unto that
man, (...) we have deceived, or taken good wrongfully from him. There be some
men which think there is no other theft but only taking purses and killing
men by the way, or stealyng other men's good: Those men are much deceived: For
there be (...) genera furti, a great number of thieves. What was this but a
(...) when Esaias says, principes tui infideles so (...) furum, Princes
companions of thieves.
Thy princes are (...) and are companions with thieves. This was a theft, but it
was not a common theft, it was a (...) theft: they could tell how to weary
men, and so to take (...) of them. Such (...) was Zachei, he robbed not me^ by
the high way, but he was an oppresser, and forced men to pay more than they
ought to pay: which his so doing, was as well a theft, as if he had robbed men
by the high way. There be many which follow Zachee in his yllnes, but there
Few follow Zache in this point.
be but few, or none at all, which will follow him in his good ness. Siquem
(...) reddam quadruplum, If I have deceived any man, I will pay it again four
fold. I would wish that al bribers (...) false tollers would follow his
(...). But I tell you without restitution, there is no salua tion. This is a
certain sentence, allowed and approved, first by the holy scripture. (...) by
all the writers that ever wrote upon scripture, yea the very scholedertors, (as
bad Restitution is (...) of (...). (...).
as they were) yet they never (...) in that, but said (...) famae (...) sunt
opera debita, We ought to make (...) of a (...) good name, and of his goods
taken from him wrongfully: that is to say, when we have (...) any body, we
ought to (...) him amend (...) when we have taken any man's good wrongfully,
we ought to make him (...), else we shall never be sauch, for god abhors me,
and al things that I (...), (...) before him.

Remitte, who is in this world which has not need to say, Lord forgive me? No
man huing, nor never was: nor shall be, (our (...) only excepted) he was agnus
immaculatus, an vnde (...). I (...) a versc which I learned almost 4c. years We
(...) for (...) c (...) ges to (...) for other some
ago, which is this, Saepe praecor (...), mortemque deprecor idem. I pray many
times for (...) to coure: and again I pray that he shall not com. This verse
put (...) in Precor and deprecor. Precor, is when I would same have a thing,
deprecor, is when I would avoid it. Like as Elias the prophet we pray to be
deliue red from them.
when Iezabel had killed the prophets of the lord, Elias being in a hole in
the mount, desired of god to dye, and this is precor. Now deprecor is his
contrarium, when I would avoid the thing then I use deprecor. Now in the
lord prayer till hither we have been in precor that is to say, we have Now
we come to de sre god to take things from us.
desired things at gods haude. Now (...) deprecor, I desire him now to remove
such things which may (...) me (...), as (...) which does harm, therefore I
would have him to take away my trespasses. Now who is in the world or ever
has been, which has nor need to say this deprecor, to desire god to take from
him sins, to forgive him his tres passes. Truly no saint in heaven, be they
as holy as ever they will, yet they have had need of this deprecor, they have
had need to say, lord forgive us our trespasses. Now you ask wherein
stands our righteousness? Answer. In that that Our good nes stands in gods
goodness.
god forgiueth unto us our unrighteous. Wherein stands our goodness? In
that that god takes away our ylnes, so that our goodness stands in his
goodness.

In the other petition we desire al things (...) for our bodily life, as long
as we be here in this world. Vnusquisque enimtempus certum haber predefinitum a
domino. For every man has a certain time appointed him of god, and god hides
yt same time from us: for some die in young age, some in old age, according as
it pleases him: he has not manifested to us the time, because he would have
us at all times ready: else Why god (...) from us our last day.
if I knew the time, I would presume upon it, and so should be worse. But he
would have us ready at al times and therefore he hides the time of our death
from us. And it is a com mon (...): there do come as many skins of calves to
the market as do of bulls or kyen. But of that we may be sure there shall not
fall one hear from our head without his will, and we shall not die before yt
time that god has appointed unto God has (...) hour of our death.
us, which is a comfortable thing, specially in time of sickness or wars. For
there be many men which are afraid to go to war, and to do the king service,
for they fear ever they shall be (...). Ite^ (...) and persons be afraid when
there comes a sickness in yt town therefore they were wont commonly (...) get
(...) out of yt way, and se^d a friar thither, which did nothig else but rob and
spoil the^: which doings of the vicar was damnable, for it was a diffidence
and a mistrust in god. Therefore ye An (...) tion to cu rates.
(...), persons, or curates, what name so ever you bear, wha^ there comes
any sickness in your town, leave not your flock (...) a pastor, but comfort
the^ in their distress, and believe certainly yt with your well doings you
cannot shorten your lives. Like wise thou subject, when yt art commanded by
the king, or his officers, to go to war, to fight against the A man can not
shorte^ his life by well doing
kings enemies, go with a good heart and courage: not douting but yt god will
preserve thee, and that you can not shorte^ thy life with weldoing. Peradventure
god has appointed thee to dye there, or to be slain: Happy art thou when thon
die in gods quarrel. For to fight against the kings enemies, being called unto
it by the magistrates, it is gods service: therefore when thou dicst in that
service with a good faith, happy art thou.

There be some which say, when their friends are slain in battle, O if he had
tarried at home, he should not have lost his life: these sayings are naught.
For god has appointed every man his time. To go to war in presumptiousnes without
an ordinary calling, such going to war I allow not: but wha^ you art called, go
in yt name of yt lord, and be well assured in thy heart, that thon (...) not
shorten thy life with well doing.

(...) forgive us, Here we sue for our parden: and so we We suefor a pardon.
acknowledge our selves to be offenders. For the unguilty needs no pardon. This
pardon or remission of sins is so ne cessary, yt no man can be saved without
it. Therefore of remission stands the christian man's life: for so says David:
Beati quo rum remissae sunt (...) and quoru^ recta (...) peccata. Who is (...)
of god: Marry he whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins ar covered. He
says not: blessed be they which They that (...) ned (...) no where.
have never sinned. For where dwell such fellows, whi che never sinned? Marry
no where, they are not to be gotten. Here the Prophet signified that all we be
sinners: for he (...), quorum peccata su^r remissa, whose sins are pardoned:
And here we be painted out in our colors, else we would be proud, and so he
says in yt gospel. Cum sitis mali. There he geneth us our own title and name,
calling us wicked and ill. There is neither man nor woman that can say they
have no The blood of Christ is (...) the sins of all the (...),
sin, for we be al sinners. But how can we hide our sins? Marie the blood
of our savior Jesus Christ hides our sins and washes thom away. And though
(...) man had done all the worlds sins, sens Adams time, yet he may be
remedied by the blood of Jesus Christ: if he believe in him, he shall be cleansed
from all his sins: Therefore all our comfort (...) in him, in his love and
kyndnesse. For Saint Paul says: Charitas operit multitudinem (...). So
does in (...) the love of our Savior Jesu Christ: His love toward us,
covers and takes away all our (...): in so much that the almighty God shall
not condemn us, nor the devil shall not prevail against us. Our nature is ever
to hide sin, and to Our nature is to cloak sin.
cloak sin: but this is a wicked hidyng, and this hiding will not serve. Videt
and requiret, he sees our wickedness, and he will punish them, therefore our
hiding can not serve us. But if you be disposed to hide your sins, I will
tell you how you shall hide (...). First acknowleage them, and than believe
in our savior Christ, put him in trust withal: he will (...) his father, for
to that end he came into the world, to save sinners. This is the right way
to hide sins, not to go and excuse them, or to make them no sins. No no,
the (...) says: Beatus vir cui dominus non imputat iniquitatem, Psalm. 71. Who
it is that is blessed.
Blessed is that man to whom the Lord imputes not his sins: He says not,
Blessed is he that did never sin: but blessed is he, to whom sin is not
imputed.

And so here in this petition we pray for remission of our sins: which is
so requisite to the beginning of the spiritual life that no man can come
thereto, except he pray for remission of his sins, which stands in Christ
our redemer: he has washen and cleansed our sins, by him we shall be clean. But
how shall we come to Christ? how shall we have him? I hear that he is
beneficial, as scripture witnesses, (...) The way to come to (...).
est a pud Deum redemptio. There is full and plentuous redemption by him. But
how shall I get that? How shall I come unto it? Mary by faith: Faith is the
hand wherewith we (...) his benefits, therefore we must needs have faith. But
how shall we obtain faith? Faith in deed brings Christ, and Christ
brings remission of sins, but how shall we obtain faith? Answer S: Paul
teaches us this, saying, (...) ex (...), Faith comes by hearing of gods
word. Then if we will come to faith, we must hear gods word: if we must
hear gods word, than we must have prea chers which be able to tell us gods
word. And so it appears that in this petition we pray for preachers: we pray
unto god that he will send men amongst us, which may teach us the (...)
neglected.
way of everlasting life. Truly it is a pitiful thing to see scho les so
neglected, scholars not maintained, every true christian ought to lament the
same. But I have good hope, since God has done greater things in taking away
and extirping out all popery, that he will send us a remedy for this matter to.
I hope he will put into the magistrates heart, to consider those (...) comes
by preaching.
things: for by this office of preaching GOD sends faith. This office is the
office of salvation: for it has pleased God, per stultitiam predicationis
saluos facere credentes, by the foolishnes of preaching to save the beleuers.
So (I say) we pray for this office which brings faith: faith brings to
Christ, Christ brings remission of sins, remission of sins brings
everlasting life.

O this is a godly prayer, which we ought at all times to say, for we sin
daily, therefore we had need to say daily, forgive (...). 142.
us our trespasses, and as David says, Ne intres in iudi cium cum seruo (...),
lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, for we be not able to abide his
judgment, if it were not for this pardon, which we have in our savior Jesu
Christ we should al perish eternally. For when this word Remitte, (...) might
have been saved if (...) had said this (...) a good (...). the.
was spoken with a good faith, and with a penitent heart, there was never man
but he was heard. If Judas (that traitor) had said it with a good faith, it
should have saved him: but he forgot that point, he was taught it in deed, our
savior himself taught him to pray so, but he forgot it again. (...) he
remembered that point, he (...) Remitte, Lord forgive me and so he obteyued his
pardon, and so shall we do: for we be ever in that case, that we have need to
say Remitte lord forgive us, for we ever do amysse.

But here is one addition, one hanger on. As we forgive (...) (...) trespass
against us. What (...) this: In deed it (...) after the words, as though we
might or should me rite remission of our sins with our (...): as for an
ensample. That man has dene unto me a foul turn, he has wronged me: at the
length he (...) his (...), and comes to me, and (...) me to (...) him, I
forgive (...). Do I now in (...) neighbor his sins which he has done
(...), (...) I (I say) (...) or (...) at Our forgeuing other deserves not
forge (...) at Gods hand
gods hand (...) of my (...)? No, no, god (...); (...): for if this should
(...) so, the^ (...) well Christ, it (...) him clean away, it diminishes his
honor, and it is (...) wroughte against Christ. This (...) in (...) paste
taught openly in the (...), and in the schools but it was (...) (...) a gainste
Christ.
treason against Christ, for in him only, and in nothing else, neither in (...)
nor in earth, is (...): unto him only pertayneth this honor. For remission of
sins, wherein consists (...), is such a treasure, that passes all (...), it
must not be our merits that shall (...) but his: he is our comfort, it is the
(...) of Christ and his blood shedding that cleanses us from our sins.
Therefore whosoever is minded contrary unto this he robs (...) of his
majesty: Factus est reus lesae (...), and so (...) himself into everlasting
(...). For though the works whi che we do be good outwardly, and god be
pleased (...), yet they be not perfect, for we believe imperfectly we love vnper
Our do inges are all imperfect.
fectly, we suffer imperfectly notas we ought to (...), and so al thy ges that
we do ar done imperfectly. But our savior, he has so (...) the matter, and
taken away our imperfectness so, that they be counted now before God most
perfect and holy, not for our own sake, but for his sake: and though they be
not perfect, yet they be taken for perfect: And so we come We come to (...) by
Christ.
to perfectnes by him. So you see as touching our salvation we must not go to
working, to think to get everlasting (...) with our own doings. No, this
were to deny Christ. Salvation, and remission of sins, is his gift, his
own and free (...). As touching our good works which we (...), GOD will
reward them in heaven, but they can not get heaven. Therefore (...) every
man do well, for it he shall be well rewarded: but let them not think that
they with their doings may get heaven, for so doing, is a robbing of Christ.

What shall we learn now by this addition, where we say. As we forgive them
that trespass against us, I (...) you this addition is put unto it, not
without great cause, for our savior being a wise and perfect (...) would
speak no words in vain. This addicion is put unto Christ would (...) no
words in vain.
it, as to be a certain and sure token unto us, whether we have the (...)
says in our hearts or no. For says, the right (...) I say, consists not
in the knowledge of the stories, to believe the stories (...) in the new and
old (...), that is not the lively faith, which brings salvation with her.
For the devil himself believes the stories, and yet is and The (...) believes
the hystories.
shall be damned world without end. Therefore we must have the right faith, the
lively faith, the faith that brings salvation, which consists in believing
that Christ died for my sins sake. With such a faith I draw him unto me,
with all his (...). I must not stand in generalities, as to believe yt Christ
suffered under Poncius Pilate, but I must (...) The true belefe.
that that (...) done for my sake, to redeem with his pas sion (...) sins,
and (...) theyrs which believe and trust in him, (...) I (...) so, then I shall
not be deceived. But this (...) is a hard thing to be had, and many a man
thinks himself to have that faith, when he has nothing (...). Therefore I
will tell you how you shall (...) whether you have yt right (...) or no, lest
you be (...) a (...) of faith, as many be, therefore prove thy self on this
wise, here is a (...) which has (...) me (...) taken away my (...) or my (...)
name, he has (...) me, or otherwise hurt me. (...) at the length he (...)
unto me, and acknowlegeth his fautes and (...); and desires me to forgive him:
if I now (...) my (...) and wylling to forgive him from and bottom of (...),
(...) that he has done (...), then I may (...) that I have and (...) faith:
yea, I Learn (...) a linely faith
may be (...) yt god will (...) me my sins for Christ's his sons (...): but
wha^ my neighbor (...) unto me confessing his (...), and desiring (...): if I
tha^ be sturdy and proud, my heart is flyntye, and my stomach (...) him, in
so much that I refuse his request, and have an appetite to be avenged upon
(...) I have such a (...) stomach, then I may pronounce (...) my self, that
I have not that lively faith in (...). It is a sure token that I am not (...)
the (...) of the (...) of god as long as I abide in this (...).

There is no good body but he is (...) or (...) by (...) mean or other, and
commenly it is (...), yt those which line most godly, have in this world the
(...), they (...) The more godly the sooner (...)
(...) and backbitten, and diverse ways vexed of the wicked. Therefore thou
(whosoever thou art) that suffer such wrongs, either in thy good and
substance or in thy good name and fame ex amine thy self, go into thy heart,
and if thou caust find in thy heart to forgive all thy enemies what soever they
have done against thee, than thou may be sure that thou art one of the flock
of god: yet thou must beware (as I said before) that thou think not to got
heaven by such remitting of thy neighbors ill doings. But by such forgeuyng, or
not (...), thou shall know whether thou have faith or no. Therefore if we have
a rebellious stomach, and a flyntye heart against our neighbor, so that we
are minded to avenge our selves upon Heb. 10
him, and so take upon us gods office, which says: Mihi vindictam Deuteronomy. (...)
ego retribuam, yield unto me the vengeance, and I 1. Ioh. 4.
shall recompense them (as I told you) we be not of the flock Love both or
neither
of Christ. For it is written. Si quis dixerit quoniam diligo de (...) and odio
habet (...) suum, mendax est, whosoever says I love god, and hates his
brother, that man or woman is a liar. For it is impossible for me to love god
and hate my neigh bour. And our savior says, Si orauetitis remittite, wha^
you will pray, forgive first, else it is to no purpose, you get nothing by
your prayer. Like wise we see in the parable of that king which called his
servants to make an account, and pay their dettes: where he remitteth one of
them a great sum of money. Now that same fellow, whom the lord pardoned, went
out and took one of his fellow servants by the neck, and handled him most
cruelly, saying: give me my money. He had forgotten belike that his lord had
forgiven him.

Now the other servants, seeing his cruelnes, came unto the king, and told him
how that man used himself so cruelly to his fellow: The lord called him again,
and after great (...) cast him in prison, there to lie till he had paid the
least farthing. Mat. 18.
Upon that our savior says Sic and pater meus coelestis faciet vobis si non
remiseritis vnusquisque fiatri suo de cordibus (...), Thus will my heavenly
father also do unto you, if ye forgive not every one his brother even from your
hearts. Therefore let us take heed by that wicked servant which would not
forgive his fellow servant when he desired of him forgeuenes, saying:
patientiam habe in me, and omnia red (...), have patience with me, says he,
and I will pay thee all my dettes. But we can not say so unto god, we must
only call for pardon.

There be many folk which when they be sick they say: O yt A naughty saying.
I might live but one year longer, to make amends for my sins, which saying
is very naught, and ungodly. For we Christ must satisfye Only
are not able to make amends for our sins: only Christ, he is the lamb of
god which takes away our sins. Therefore when we be sick we should say: Lord
god, Thy will be done, if I can do any thing to thy honor and glory, Lord,
suffer me to live longer, but thy will be done. As for satisfaction, we can not
do the least piece of it.

You have heard now how we ought to be willing to forgive our neighbors
their sins, which is a very token that we be children of god: to this our
savior also exhorts us, saying: Si frater (...) habet aliquid (...) te,
relinque etc. If Mat (...).
thou offerest therefore thy gift before the aultare, and there remembrest that
thy brother has somewhat against thee, leave thou thy gift there before the
aultare, and go first, and be reconciled (...) tion must first be (...)
unto thy brother. Leave it there (says our savior) if thy brother have any
thing against thee: go not about to sacrifice to me, but first above all
things go and reconcile thy self unto thy brother. On such wise saint Paul
also exhorts us, saying: Volo viros orare (...); ira and disceptatione, I
would have men to pray without anger and disceptation. There be many wranglers
and braulers now a days, which do not well: they shall well know that they be
not in the favor of god, god is displeased with them: let us therefore give us
our (...) to (...), so that we may love god and our neighbor. It is a very
godly prayer, to say: Lord forgive us our trespass ses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us. But there be peradventure some of you, which will say. The
priest can absolve me, and forgive me my sins. Sir I tell thee, the (...) uen
to the (...).
priest or minister (call him what you will) he has power given unto him from
our savior, to absolve in such wise as he is commanded by him: but I think
ministers be not greatly troubled therewith: for the people seek their carnal
liberties, which in deed is not well, and a thing which misliketh god. For I
would have them that are grieved in conscience, to go to some godly man which
is able to minister gods word, and there to fetch his absolucion, if he can
not be (...) inthe public sermon, it were truly a thing which would do much
good. But to say the truth, there is a great fault in the priests, for they
(for the most part) be unlearned: and wicked: and seek rather means and ways
to wickedness than to godliness. but a godly minister, which is instruct in the
word of god, can and may absolve in open preaching, not of his own authority,
but in the name of god: for god says: Ego su qui deleo (...), I am he (says
god) that cleanse thy sins. But I may absolve you as an officer of Christ, in
the (...) pulpet in this (...). As in any The absolu tion (...) Latymer (...)
give
as (...) their sins unto god, acknowleging (...) to be sinners, and believe
yt our (...) has take away their sins, and have an (...) to (...) sin, as many
(I say) as be so (...), (...). as an officer of Christ, as his tresurer, (...)
you in his (...). This is the (...) yt I ca^ make by (...) word. Again, as many
as will (...) in defense of their (...) will not acknowledge them, nor purpose
to leave them, and so (...) no (...) in our savior to be saved by him (...)
his (...): to them I say, Ego ligo (...), I (...) you: and I (...) not (...)
The manner of binding
they shall be bound in heaven. Forthey be the (...) of (...) devil as long as
they be in such (...) and purpose to sin. (...) you see how, and in what wise,
a preacher may absolve (...): but he can not do it of (...) or (...). (...) in
(...) wise: he mast do it according as Christ (...) him. If god now command
to forgive him, qui (...) contra me, that sins against me, how much more
must I be reconciled to him, whom I have offended: I must go unto him, and
desire him to forgive me, I must acknowledge my fault, and so humble my self
before him. Here a man might ask a question, saying: What if a man have
offended me grievously, and has hurt me in my good, or slaundred me, and is
(...) in it, stands in defense of himself and his own wickedness, he will
not acknowledge himself: shall I forgive him? Answer. Forsothe GOD himself
Man is not bound to forgive ehe impenitent
does not so, he forgeueth not sins, except the sinner acknowledge himself,
confess his wickedness, and cry him mer cye. Now I am sure, god requires no
more at our hands, than he does himself. Therefore I will say this: if thy
neighbor, or any man has done against thee, and will not (...) his faults,
but wickedly defends the same, I for my own discharge must put away all
rancour and malice out of my heart, and be redye as far forth as I am
able, to help him: if I do so, I am discharged before god, but so is not he.
For truly that sturdye fellow shall make a heavy count before the rightuous
judge.

Here I have occasion to speak against the Nouatians, The (...) opinion.
which deny remission of sins: their opinion is, that he which comes
once to Christ, and has received the holy (...), and after that, synneth
again, he shall never come to Christ again, his sin s shall never be
forgeuen him: which opinion is most erroneous and wicked: yea and clean
against Scripture. For if it should be so, there should no body be saved: for
there is no man but he synneth daily. I told you how you should understand
those two places of Scripture, which seem to be very hard. Non est (...).
etc. As concerning the sin against the holy ghost we cannot judge aforeha^d,
but after I know now yt Iudashad sinned against ye holy ghost, also Nero,
Pharao, and one Fra^ciscus Spera, which man had (...) popery, and done very
boldly in gods quarrel: at the length he was complained of, the holy ghost moved
him in his heart to stick unto it, and (...) to forsake gods word: he contrary
to that admonition of the holy ghost denied the word of god, and so finally
died in desperation: him I A remedy for the sin against the holy ghost.
may pronounce to have sinned yt sin against yt holy ghost. But I will show you
a remedy for yt sin against yt holy ghost. Ask re (...) of sin in yt name of
Christ, and the^ I ascertain you, yt you sin not against the holy ghost. For,
gratia (...) supra pecca tu^ yt mercy of god sar excedeth our sins. I have
heard tell of some which wha^ they said this petition, they perceived yt they
asked of god forgeuenes, like as they themselves forgive their neigh bors, and
again perceiving themselves so unapt to forgive their neighbors fautes, came to
yt point, yt they would not say this prayer at al: but took our ladies psalter
in hand and such foolries, Someleaue out this petition.
thinking they might than do unto their neighboar a soul turn with a better
conscience, than if they should say this patition: for here they wish
themselves the vengeance of god upon their heads, if they bear grudge in
their hearts and say this petition. But if we will be right christians, let us
set aside all hatered and malice, let us live godly and forgive our enemy: so
that we may from the bottom of our heart say. Our father which art in heaven,
forgive us our trespasses. etc There be some when they say, Forgive us our
trespasses, they think yt god will forgive culpa^ only, sed no^ poena^,
giltines, and not yt pain: and therefore they believe they shall go into purgatory
and there to be cleansed from their sins, which thing is not so: they be liars
which teach such doctrine. For god forgiueth us both yt pain and the giltines
of sins. Like as it appeared in Da uid, when he repented, Natha^ said unto
him: abstulit dn^s iniqui tate^ tua^, yt lord (says he) has taken away thy
wickedness. But they will say: god took away the giltines of his sins, but not yt
pain for he punished him afterward. Sir, yt must understand, yt god punished
him, but not to yt end that he should make satis The cause why god punishes
sepentant sinners.
faction and ame^ds for his sins: but for a warning god would give him a Cave,
therefore he punished him. So likewise whosoever is a repenta^t sinner, as
David was, and believes in Christ, he is clean a poena and a culpa, both from
the pain and giltines of his sins: yet god punishes sins, to make us to
remember and to beware of sins.

Now to make an end: you have heard (...) needeful it is for us to cry unto
god, for forgiveness of our sins: where you have heard wherein forgeuenes of
our sins stands, namely in Christ the son of the living god: Again I
told you how you should come to Christ, namely by faith, and faith comes
thorough hearing the word of god.

Remember then this addition, As we forgive them that trespass against us: which
is a sure token whereby we may know whether we have the true faith in Christ or
no. And here you learn that it is a good thing to have an enemy, for we may
use him to our great commodity, thorough him or by him we may prove our selves
whether we have the true faith or no.

Now I shall desire you yet again, to pray unto almightye god that he will
send such water, whereby the fruits of the field may increase, for we think
we have need of rain. Let us therefore call upon him, which knows what is
best for us. Therefore say with me the lords prayer as he himself has taught
us. Our father which. etc.

The vii. sermon upon the Lords prayer made by the right reverend Father in
God, M. Doctor Latyiner.
ET ne nos inducas in tentatione^, sed li bera nos a malo. In the petition
before where we say, Forgive us our trespasses: there we fetch remedies for
sins paste, for we must needs have forgeuenes, we can not remedy the matter
of our selves, our sins must be remedied by pardon, by remission: other
righteousness we have not. but forgeuyng of our unrighteous, our goodness
stands in forgeuing of our ylnes. All Al mankind must (...) pardon.
mankind must cry, Pardon, and acknowledge themselves to be sinners, except
our savior, which was clean without spot of sin. Therefore wha^ we feel
our sins, we must with a penitent heart resort hither and say: Our father which
art in (...) forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us. Mark well this addition (as we forgive them yt tres pass) for our savior
puts yt same unto it, not to that end that we should merit any thing by
it: but rather to prove our (...). Whether we be of the faithful flock of
god, or no. For the right faith abides not in that man, that is disposed
(...) to sin, to hate his (...), or to do other manner of sins. For whosoever
purposely sins contra conscien tiam, against his conscience, he has lost yt
holy ghost, the (...) sio^ of sins, and finally Christ himself. But wha^ we are fall so The (...) of (...) mission.
we must fetch them again at goos hand by this prayer, which is a storehouse,
here we shall find remission of our sins.

And though we be risen never so well, yet when we fall again, when we (...)
again, what remedy than? What (...) leth it me to be risen once, and fall by
and by into the self same sin again? which is a renouation of the other
sins. For whosoever has done wickedly an act against god, and afterward is
sorry for it, cries god mercy, and so comes to forgeuenes of the same sin,
but by and by willingly and wittingly does the self same sin again: he
renouateth by so doing al those sin He that (...) to sin loses his former (...)
nes which before times were forgiven him. Which thing apeareth by the lord
that took rekening of his servants, where he found one which ought him a great
sum of money, the lord (...) him and remitted him all the dets. Now that same
man afterward showed himself unthankful and wicked, therefore the lord called
him, and cast him into prison, there to lie till he had paid the uttermost
far thing, not withstanding that he had forgeuen him before. etc.

So we see that the (...) of the former sins turn again, when we do the
same sins again. Seeing then that it is so dangerous a thing to fall into
sin again, than we had need to have some remedy, some help, that we might
avoid sin, and not fall thereto again. Therefore here follows this petition,
Lead us not into temptation.

Here we have a remedy, here we desire god that he will preserve us from
falling into sin. Our savior (that (...) scholemaster) knew whereof we had
need, therefore he teaches us to beg a preservation of god, that we fall not.
Lead us not, it. that is to say, lord god, lead us not (...) trial, for we
shall (...) be overcome, but preserve us, suffer us not to sin again, let us
not fall, help us yt sin get not the victory over us. And this is a necessary
prayer: for what is it that we ran do: Nothing at all but sin, and therefore we
have need to pray unto god, yt he will preserve and keep us in the right way,
for our enemy the devil is an unquiet spirit, ever lying in the way, seking
occasion how to bring us to ungodliness. Therefore it appears how much we have
need of the help of (...): The (...) is ancient.
for the devil is an old enemy, a fellow of great antiquity, he has endured
this five thousand and 52. years, in which space he has learned al arts and
cunningcs, he is a great practiser, there is no suttelty, but he knows the
same. Like as an ar tificer that is cunning and expert in his craft and knows
how to A similitude.
go to work, how to do his business the rediest way: so the de uyll knows all
ways how to tempt us, and to give us an overthrow: in so much that we can
begin nor do nothing, but he is at our heels, and works some mischief,
whether we be in prosperity or adversity, whether we be in health or sickness,
life or death, he knows how to use the same to his purpose. As for an
ensaumple: When aman is rich and of Richesse.
great substance, he by and by sets upon him with his crafts, intending to
bring him to mischief. And so he moves him to despise and contemn god, to
make his riches his god. Yea he can put such pride into the rich man's heart,
that he thinks himself able to bring all things to pass, and so begins
to oppress his neighbor with his riches. But god by his ho ly word warns us,
and armeth us against such crafts and suttel ties of yt devil, saying: Diuitiae
si afflua^t (...) cor apponere, Psalm. (...).
If riches come upon you, set not your hearts upon the^. He com mau^deth us not
to cast the^ away, but not to set our herts upon the^ as wicked men do. For to
be rich (...) a gift of god, if riches be rightly used: but yt devil is so
wliy, he (...) up (...) hearts to abuse the^. Again, wha^ a man falls into
poverty, (...)
so yt he lacks things necessary to yt (...) of this bodily life: lo yt
devil is eue^ ready at hand to take (...) by yt (...), to bring him to mischief.
For he (...) and stir up the heart of yt (...), yt is in poverty, not to
labor and calling upon god but rather to stealyng and robbyng, notwithstanding
that God forbids such sins in his laws, or else at the least he will bring
him to use deceyte and (...) with his neighbor, (...) that way to bring him to
everlasting destruction.

Further when a man is in honor and dignity, and in great estimation, this
serpent slepeth not, but is ready to give him an overthrow. For though honor be
good unto the^ which come Honor.
laufully by it, and though it be a gift of god, yet the devil will move yt
that man's heart, which has honor, to abuse his honor. for he will make him
lofty, and high minded, and fill his heart full of ambitions, so that he shall
have a desire ever to come higher and higher: and all those which will
withstand him, they shall be hated, or ill entreated at his hand: and at the
length he shall be so poisoned with this ambition, yt he shall forget all humanitye
and godliness, and consequently fall in the fearful The devil is an old
doctor.
hands of god, such a fellow is the devil that old doctor.

If it comes to pass that a man fall into open ignominy and shame, so that
he shall be nothing regarded before the Ignominy
world: then the devil is at hand, moving and styrryng his heart to (...),
and at the length to desperation.

If he be young and (...), the devil will put in his heart, and say Youth.
to him: What? thou art in thy flowers man, take thy pleasure, make merry with
thy companions, remember the old proverb young saits, old devils: which proverb
in very deed is naught A (...) of the (...) inuen (...).
and deceitful, and the devils own invention, which would have parents
negligent in bringing up their children in good nes: he would rather see them
to be brought up in ylnes, and wickedness, therefore he found out such a proverb,
to make the^ careless for these children. But (as I said before) this proverb
is naught: for look commenly where children are brought up in wickedness, they
will be wicked al their lives after: and therefore we may say thus, young devil,
old devil, young saints, old saints. Quo semel imbuta est recen s seruabit
odorem testa (...). The erthen pot will long savor of that licoure that is first
put into it. And here appears how the devil can use the youth of a young man
to his destruction, in exhorting him to follow yt fond lusts of that age.
Likewise when a man comes to Age
age, that old serpent will not leave him, but is ever styrring him from one
(...) unto the other, from one wickedness to another: and commonly he moves old
folks to avarice and covetousness: for then old folk will commonly say, by yt
inspira The devils inspiration
tion of the devil. Now it is time, for me to lay up, to keep in store
somewhat for me, yt I may have (...) to live when I shall be a crippell: and so
under this color they set al their hearts and minds only upon this world,
forgetting their poor neighbor, which god would have relieved by them. But (as
I told you before) this is the devils invention and suttelty, which blyndeth
their (...) so, and withdraws their hearts so far from god that it is scant
possible for some to be brought again: for they have set al their hearts and
fantasies in such wise upon their goods, that they cannot suffer any body to
occupye their goods, nor they themselves use it not: to the verifiyng of this
common sentence. Auarus caret quod habet, aeque (...) quod no^ habet, the
couetuous man lacks as well those things which The co^mo ditie of (...).
Health.
he has as those things which he has not. So like wise when we be in health,
yt devil moves us to al wickedness and naughti nes: to horedom, lechery, theft,
and other horrible fautes, put ting clean out of our (...) the remembrance of
god and his judgments, in so much that we forget that we shall dye.

Again, when we be in sickness, he goes about like a Lion, Sickness.
to move and stir us to impatiency and murmuryng against god: or cls he
makes our sins so horrible before us that we fall into desperation. And so
it appears that there is nothing either so high or so low, so great or small,
but the devil can use that self same thing, as a weapon to fight against The
devil is able to make wea (...) of (...) thing
us withal, like as with a sword. Therefore our savior, knowing the crafts
and suttelties of our enemy the devil how he goes about day and night (...)
intermission to seek our destruction teaches us here to cry unto god our
heaven ly father for aid and help, for a subsidy against this strong and
mighty enemy, against yt prince of this world, as saint Paul (...) not to call
him, for he knew his power and subtle (...). belyke s. Paul had some
experience of him.

Here by this petition wha^ we say, Lead us not into temptation, we learn to
know our own impossibility and infirmity, namely that we be not able of our
own selves to withstand this great and mighty enemy the devil. Therefore
here we resort to god, desyring him to help and defend us, This petition is
most needful.
whose power passes the strength of the devil. So it appears yt this is a
most needful petition, for when the devil is busy about us, and moves us to
do against god and his holy laws, and co^mandementes, ever we should have in
reme^mbra^ce whither to go, namely to god, aknowleging our weakness that we be
not able to withstand yt enemy. Therefore we ought ever to say, Our Father
which art in heaven, Lead us not into temptation. This petition (Lead us not
into tentation) the meaning of it is, Almighty God we desire thy holy majesty
for to stand by and with us with thy holy spirit, so that tentation overcome us
not, but that we through thy goodness and help, may vanquishe and get the
victory over it, for it is not in our power to do it, thou O god, must help us
to scriue and fight. It is with this petition, Lead us not (...) temptation,
even as much as saint Paul says, Ne (...) igitur (...) in vestro mortali
corpore, Let not syn We ca^ not (...) without sin.
reign in your corruptible body, says S. Paul, be does not require that we
shall have no sin, for that is impossible unto us, but he (...) that we be
not servants unto sin, that we give not place unto it, that sin rule not in
us. And this is a commendement, we are commanded to forsake and hate sin, so
that it may have no power over us. Now we shall turn this commandment into
a prayer, and desire of god that he will keep us, that he will not lead us
into tentation, that is to say, that he will not suffer sin to have the rule
and governance over us, and so we shall say with the Prophet, Domine dirige
gressus meos, Lord rule and govern thou me in the right way, and so we shall
turn Gods commandment into a prayer, to desire of him help to do his
will and pleasure. like as S. Augustine says, Da quod iubes, et iube quod vis,
Give that thou commaundest, and then command what thou will. As who say, if
thou will command only, and not give, than we (...), we shall perish
Therefore we must desire him to rule and govern all our thoughts, words,
(...), (...) that no sins bear rule in us: we must require him to put his
helping (...) to us, that we may overcome temptation, and not temptation us.
This I would have you to consider, that every morning when you rise from your
bed, you would say these (...) with a faithful heart and earnest mind Domine
gressus meos (...) ne dominetur peccatum in (...) A good morning prayer.
(...) corpore, Lord rule and govern me so, (...) my wais so, that sin get
not the victory of me, that sin rule me not, but let thy holy ghost
inhabit my heart. And specially when any man goes about a dangerous business,
let him ever say: domine dirige grossus (...), Lord rule thou me, keep me in
thy custody. So this is the first point, which you (...) note in this petition,
namely, to turn (...) commandments of god into a prayer, he commands us
to leave sins, to (...) them, to hate them, to keep our heart clean from
them: then let us turn his commandment into a prayer and say, Lord lead
us not into (...), that is to (...) Lord keep us that the devil (...) not
against us, that wickedness get not the victory (...) us.

You shall not think that it is an (...) to be tempted, (...) into
temptations. No, for it is a good thing, and scripture commends it, and we
shall be rewarded for it. For S, It is a blessedness to endure (...).
James (...), Beatus (...) suffert (...), Blessed (...) that man that suffers
temptations, patiently. Blessed is he that suffers, not he that (...), not he
that is led by the^, and follows the motions thereof. The devil moves me to
do this thing and that, which is against god, to commit (...) dome, or
lecherye, or such like things. Now this is a good thing: for if I withstand
his motions, and more regard god tha^ his suggestions, happy am I, and I shall be
rewarded for it in heaven. Some think that (...) Paul would have (...) without
such temptations, but GOD would not grant his request. (...) tibi gratia
mea, Paul, (...) content Paul to have my favor. For temptations be a
declaration of gods favor and might: for though we be most weak and feable,
Tentatio^s declare gods (...)
yet thorough our weakness GOD vanquisheth the great strength and might of
the devil. And afterward he promises us that we shall have Coronam vitae, the
croune of life, that is to say we shall be rewarded in everlasting life. To
whom did GOD promise (...), ever lastyng life? Marye diligentibus se, says
(...) James, unto James. (...).
the^ that love him, not unto them yt love the selves and follow their own
affections, (...) se, it is an Amphibologia and therefore Erasmus turns it
into latin with such words, The root of mischief
A quibus dilectus est Deus, non diligentibus se, Not they that love them
selves, but they of whom god is beloved: for self love is the root of all
mischief and wickedness.

Here you may (...) who are those which love GOD, namely they that fight
against temptations and assaults of the devil. For this life is a warfare, as
S. Job says, Militia est vita hominis super terram, The life of man is but a
warfare: not that we should fight and braule one with an other. No not so, but
we should fight against these (...) that are Learn against (...) hold (...).
within us. We may not fight one with an other, to avenge our selves, and to
satisfy our (...): but we should fight against the ill motions which rise up in
our hearts against the law of God. Therefore remember that our life is a
warfare, let us be contented to be tempted. There be some when they fall into
temptations, they be so yrkesom that they give place they will fight no more.
Again, there be some so weary, that they ryd them selves out of this life, but
this is not well done: they do not after saint James mind, for he says:
Blessed is he that suffers temptation, and takes it (...). Now if he be
blessed that suffers tentatio^, than it follows, that he that curses and
murmureth against God, being tempted, that that man is cursed in the sight of
God, and so shall not enjoy coronam vitae, everlasting life.

Further it is a necessary thing to be tempted of God: for (...) temp. (...) us
for our (...)
how should we know whether we have the love of God in our hearts or no, except
we be tried, except God tempt and prove (...). Therefore the prophet David
says: Proba me Domine Psalm. 25.
and renta me, Lord (says he) prove me and tempt me. This prophet knew that
to be tempted of God is a good thing. For temptations minister to us occasion
to run to god and to beg his help. Therefore David was desirous to have
some thing whereby he might exercise his faith. For there is nothing so
dangerous in the world, as to be without trouble without temptation: for look
when we be best at ease, wha^ all things go with us according unto our will
and pleasure, then we are commenlye most farthest of from God. For our nature
is so feeble that we can not bear tranquillity, we forgette god by and by:
therefore we should say, proba me, Lord prove and tempt me.

I have red ones a story of a good bishop, which rode by the An history of a
bishop
way, and was werie, being yet far of from any town: therefore seeing a fair
house, a great man's house, he went thither and was very well and honorably
received: there was great preparations made for him, and a great banquet, all
thing was plenty. Then the man of the house, set out his prosperity, and
told the bishop what richesse he had, in what honor and dignities he was, how
many fair children he had, what a virtuous wife god had provided for him, so
that he had no lack of any manner of thing, he had no trouble nor verations,
neither inward nor outward. Now this holy man hering the good estate of that
man, called one of his servants, and commanded him to make ready the horses:
for the bishop thought that God was not in that house, because there was no
tempta tion there: he took his leave and went his (...). Now when he came a two
or three mile of, he remembered his book which he had left behind him: he sent
his man back again to fetch that book, and when the servant came again, the
house was sonke^, and all that was in it Here it appears, that it is a good
thing to have temptation. This man thought himself a toly fellow, because all
things went with him: But he knew not S. James lesson: Beatus qui (...). Let
us therefore learn here, not to be (...) when God lateth his erosse upon us.
Let us not despair, but call upon him: let us think we be ordained unto it.
For truly we shall never have done: we shall have one (...) or other, as long
as we be in this world. But we have a great comfort, which is this: Fidelis 1.
Cori. 10
(...) deus (...) non (...) nos tentari (...) quam (...), If we mystrust God,
than we make him a liar: for God will not suffer us to (...) further tha^ we
shall be able to bear: and again he will reward us, we shall have (...) vitae,
everlasting life. If we consider this, and po^der it in our hearts, wherefore
should we be troubled? Let every man when he is in trouble, call upon God with a
faithful and (...): Lord let me not be tempted further then thou shall make me
able to (...). And this is (...) of (...) christen man: and look (...) no
better chere as long as thou art in this world: but trouble and verations thou
shall have Vsque ad (...), thy belly We shall never lack (...).
full. And therefore our savior being upon the mount Oliuete, knowing what
should come upon him, and how his disciples would forsake him, and mistrust him,
taught them to fight against ie^tation, saying: Vigilate and orate, As who say,
I tell you what you shall do: resort to God, seek comfort at him, call upon him
in my name, and this shall be the way (...) to escape tentations without your
peril and loss. Now (...) us follow that rule which our Savior (...) unto
his disciples. Let us watch and pray, that is to say, let us be ernest and
fervent in calling upon him, and in desyryng his help: and no doubt he will
order the matter so with us, that (...) shall not hurt us, but shall be rather
a furtherance, and not an impediment to everlasting (...). And this is our
only (...) to (...) help at his hands. Let us therefore watch and pray,
let not temptations bear (...) in us, or gouerue us.

Now yeraduenture there be some amongst the ignorant unlearned sort, which
will say unto me: You speak much of temptations: I pray you tell us, how
shall we know when we be tempted? Answer. When you feel in your selves (in
your hearts) some concupiscence or lust toward any thing that is against the
law of god, rise up in your hertes, that same is a temptyng. For all manner of
(...) motions What tentation is.
to wickedness are (...). And we be tempted most commonly two manner of ways,
A (...) and a (...), on the right hand, and on the left hand. Whenever we be
in honors, wealth, and presperityes, then we be tempted on the right hands.
But when we be in open shame, Two manner of tentations.
outelawes, or in great extreme (...) and penuries, then that is on the left
hand. There has been many that whenne they have been tempted a (...), on the
left hand, that is, with adversities and al kind of myscries, they have been
hardye, and most godly have suffered such calamyties, (...) GOD thanks (...)
all their troubles: and there has been many which have written most godly
books in the time of their temptations and miseries. Some also there were
which stood heartilye, and godly (...) temptations, as long as they were in
trouble: but Would god this were printed in all men's (...).
afterward when they came to rest, they could not stand so well as before in
their trouble: yea the most part go, and take out a new (...) of discretion,
to slatter theimselues and the world withal: and so they verify that saying:
Honores mutant (...). For they can find in their hearts to approve that thing
now which before time they reproved. Before time they sought the honor of GOD:
now they seek their own pleasure. Like as the rich man did, saying: (...),
(...) ede, (...) etc But it follows, Stulte, Thou fool. Therefore let men
beware of the right hand, for they are gone by and by, (...) god with his
(...) illuminate their hearts. I would such men would begin to say with
David, Proba (...) domine, Lord prove me, spur me forward, send me somewhat
that I forgette not thee. So it appears, that a Christian ma^s life is a (...),
a warrefare: but we shall overcome all our enemies, yet not by our own power,
but thorough god, which is able to defend us.

Truth it is that god tempts. Almightye (...) God and the (...) do (...) to
(...).
to our commodities, to dot us good withal: the (...) tempts to our
everlasting desiruction. God (...) us for (...) sake, that we should not (...),
therefore he pro (...) us diversely. (...) had (...) to (...) this prayer, Lord
lead us not into (...), wha^ we rise up in a morning or whatsoever we do, when
we (...) the (...) busy about us, we should call upon god.

The (...) of the (...) should make (...) watchful, (...) we (...) with what
(...) he applies his business. (...) sleeps not, he (...) not, he (...) bys
own business, he is (...), and (...) mind of (...) matters. To what end is
he so (...), (...) and searchyng like a hunter? (...) to take (...) at a
vauntage. (...) calls him a (...) Lion: (...) is (...) power: for you know
the Lion is the (...) of all (...) beasts. (...), he goes about. Here is
(...) (...). No^ est potestas etc. There is no power to be likened The devils
power is nothing without gods (...).
unto his power: yet our hope is in god, for as strong as he is our hope is in
god, he cannot hurt or slay us without the permission of god. therefore let us
resort unto god, and desire him, that he will able us to fight against him.

Further his (...) is expressed by this word, serpent: he is of a swift
nature, he has such compasses, such fetches, that he passes all things in
the world. Again consider how long he has been a practicioner: you must
consider what Satan is, what (...) he has, so yt we are not able to match with
him. O how fervently ought we to cry unto god, considering what danger and
peril we be in: and not only for our selves we ought to pray, but also for all
other, for we ought to love our neighbout as our selves.

Seeing then that we have such an enemy, resist, for so it is needful: for I
think that now in this hall, amongst this audi ence, there be many thousand
deuilles, which go about to let Our (...).
us of the hearing of the word of god, to make hardness in our hearts and to
stir up such like mischief within us. But what remedy? Resistite, withstand,
withstand his motions, and this must be done at the first. For as strong as he
is, when he is resisted at the first, he is the weakest: but if we suffer him
to come into our hearts, than he cannot be driven out, without great labor and
travail. As for an ensample, I see a fair woman, I like her very well, I wish
in my heart to have her. Now withstand, this is a temptation. Shall I follow my
affec tions? No, no, call to remembrance what the devil is: call god to
remembrance and his laws, consider what he has commanded thee: say unto god:
Lord lead us not into (...), but deliver us from evil. For I tell the, when
he is entered once, it wilbee hard to get him out again: therefore suffer him
not to long, give him no mansion in thy heart, but strike him with the word of
god, and he is gone, he will not abide. An other ensample. There is aman that
has done me Use the sword of the spirit.
wrong, taken away my living, or hurt me of my good name: the devil stirs
me against him, to acquit him, to do him an other foul turn, to avenge my
self upon him. Now wha^ there rise up such motions in my heart, I must
resist, I must strive, I must consider what god says: Mibi vindicta^, let me
have the vengeance. Ego (...), I will punish him for his ill doings. In
such wise we must fight with The (...) be (...) led.
Satan, we must kill him with the word of god, Resistite, away thou Satan,
thou mouest me to that, which god forbids, god will defend me: I will not
speak ill of my neighbor, I will do him no harm: so you must fight with him.
And further remember what S. Paul says: If thy enemy be hungrye, let him
have meat: this is the shroude turn that scripture allows us to do to our
enemies, and so we shall cast hoate (...) upon his head: which is a (...)
speech: (...) ye may understand it, take an ensample. This man has done harm
unto thee, make him warm with thy benefits, bear patie^tly the injuries done
unto thee (...) him, (...) to heap (...) thine enemies head.
and do for him in his necessities, then thou shall heat him, for he is in
coldenes of charity: at the length he shall remember himself, and say: what a
man am I? This man has ever ben friendly and good unto me: he has born
patiently al my wickedness, truly I am much bound unto him: I will leave of
from my wrong doings, I will no more trouble him. And so you (...) yt this is
the way to make our enemy good, to bring him to reformation. But there be some,
that when they be hurt, they will do a foul turn again: but this is not
as GOD would have it. Saint Paul commands us to pour hoate coals upon
our enemies head: that is to say, if he hurt thee, do him good, make him
amends with weldoyng, give him meat and drink, whereby is understand all
things: when he has need of council, help him, or whatsoever it is, that
he has need of, let him have it. And this is the right way to reform our
enemy, to amend him, and bring him to goodness. For so Saint Paul
commands us, saying: Noli vinci a malo, be not overcome He that (...) is
(...).
of the wicked. For when I am about to do my enemy a (...) turn, then he
has gotten the victory over me, he has made me as wicked as he himself
is. But we ought to overcome the ill, with goodness, we should overcome our
enemy with well doing.

When I was in Cambridge, Master George Stafforde red a lecture, there I heard
him: and in expounding the (...) to the Romans, coming to that place, where
S. Paul Romans (...).
says, that we shall overcome our enemy with welding, and so heap vphoate
coals upon his head. Now in expounding of that place, he brought in an
ensample: saying, that he knew in London a great rich merchaunte, which
merchant had a An history of a Londo ner.
very poor neighbor, yet for all his pouertye, he loved him very well, and
lent him money at his need, and let him to come to his table whansoeuer he
would. It was even at that time, when Doctor (...) was in trouble, and should
have Doctor Colette (...) have (...).
been burnt, if GOD had not turned the kings heart to the contrary. Now the
richeman began to be a (...) man, he began to smell the gospel, the poor
man was a papiste still. It (...) on a time, when the rich manne talked of the
gospel sittyng at his table, where he reproved popery, and such kind of
things: the poor man being then present, took a great displeasure against
the richeman: in so much, that he would come no (...) to his house, he would
borow no money of him, as he was wont to do before times: yea and conceived
such hatered and malice against him, that he went and accused him before the
bishops. The zeal of a papist.
Now the rych man, not knowing any such displesure, offered many times to talk
with him: and to set him at (...), it would not be, the poor man had such
(...) stomach, that he would not vouchesafe to speak with him: if he met
the rich man in the street, he would (...) out of his way. One time it
happened that he met him so in a narrow street, that he could not avoid,
but come (...) him: yet for all that this poor (...) had such a stomach
against the rich man I say, that he was minded to go forward, and not to
speak with him. The rich man perceiuyng that, catches him by the hand, and
asked him faying: Neighbor, what is come into your heart, to take such
displeasure with me? what have I done against you? tell me, and I will be
redye at all times to make you amends. Final ye, he spoke so gentelye, so
charitablye, so louynglye, and friendlye, that it wroughte so in the poor
man's heart, that by and by he fell down upon his knees: and asked him
forgeuenes: the rich man forgave him, and so took him again to his favor, and
they loved as well as ever they did before. Many one would have said, set him in
the (...), let him have bread of affliction, and water of tribulation: but
this man did not so. And here you see an ensample of the practice of gods word:
in such sort that poor man bearyng great hatered and malice against the
rich man, was brought thorough the (...) and (...) of the rich man from his
error and wickedness, to the knowledge of gods word. I would you would
consider this ensample well, and (...) it.

Lead us not into temptation. Certain it is, that (...) (...) ble (...) are
not much temp ted.
sinners, have but small temptations: for the devil (...) them alone, because
they be his already, he has them in bondage, they be his slaves. But when
there is any good man abroad) that intends to leave (...) and wickedness, and
abhors the same: yt man shall be tempted, the (...) goes about to use all
(...) to destroy that man, and to let him of his forwardnes. Therefore all
those which have such temptations, resort hither for aid and help, and
withstand betymes: for I tell thee, if thou withstandest and fightest against
him betymes, certaynely thou shall find him most (...): but if thou suffrest
him to enter into thy heart, and have a delight in his motions, Tunc actum est,
then thou art undone, then he has (...) the victory over the.

And here it is to be noted, that the devil has no further power than GOD
will allow him, the devil can go no (...) then god (...) him to do: which
thing shall strengthen our (...), in so much that we shall be sure to overcome
him.

(...) Paul that excellent instrument of GOD says: The (...) of (...)
(...) volunt ditescere, (...), (...) that go about to get (...) they shall
fall in many teptations: (...) which words S. Paul does teach us to beware.
For when we go about to set our minds upon (...) world, upon riches, then the
devil will have a (...) at us. (...) let us not let our (...) upon the
(...) of this world, but rather let us labor for our (...): and (...)
let us use prayer: then we may be certain of our (...). Though we have not
riches, yet a man may live without 1. (...). 6.
great riches: Habentes victum and vestitum. etc. When we have meat and
drink, and clothing, let us be content, let us not gape for riches: for I tell
you, it is a dangerous thing to have riches: and they that have riches, must
make a great account for them: yea, and the most part of the rich me^ use their
riches so naughtely, and so wickedly, that they shall not be able to make an
acompt for them. And so you may perceive how the devil uses the good
creatures of god, to (...) own (...). for riches are good creatures of god, but
you see daily how men abuse them, how they set their hearts upon them:
forgetting god and their own salvation. Therefore (as I said before) let not
this affecto^ take place in your hearts, to be rich: labor for thy living,
and pray to god: then he will send thee things necessary: though he send not
great riches, yet thou must be content withal: for it is better to have a
sufficient living, then to have great riches. Therefore Solomon Prouer 30
that wise king desired of god that he would send him neither to much, nor to
little: not to much, least he should fall into proudenesse, and so despise God:
Not to little, least he should fall to stealyng, and so (...) the law of God.

Sed libera nos a malo, But deliver us from evil. This evil, the writers
take it for the devil: for the deuili is the instrument The root of all evil.
of all ill: like as god is the fountain of al goodness, so the devil is the
original root of all wickedness. (...) when we say, Deliver us from (...), we
desire God that he will deliver us from the devil, and all his crafts,
suttelties, and inventions, where with he intends to hurt us. And we of our
own selves know not what might let or stop us from everlasting life: therefore
we desire him that he will (...) us from all ill: that is to say, that he will
send us nothing that might be a let or impediment unto us, or keep us
from everlasting felicitye. As for an (...): There be many which when they
be (...), An example.
they (...) of GOD, to have their health, for they think if they might have
their health, they would do much good, they would live godly and (...).
Now god sends them their health, but they by and by forget all their promises
made unto god before, and (...) unto al wickedness, and horrible (...), So that
it had been a thousand times better, for them to have (...) sick (...), then to
have their health For when (...) were in sickness, and (...), they called
upon god, they feared him: but now they care not for him, they (...) and mock
him. Now therefore least any such thing (...) happen unto us, we desire him to
deliver us (...) evil: that is to say, to send us such things which may be a
furtherance unto us to eternal felicity, and (...) away such things which
might lead us from the same.

There be some which think it is a gay thing to avoid poverty, To live (...)
is dangerous
to be in wealth, and to live pleasauntly: (...) some times we se that such an
easy life gives us occasion to commit all wickedness: and so is an instrument
of our damnation. Now therefore when we say this prayer, we require god, that
he will be our loving father, and give us such things which may be a
furtherance to our (...), and take away those things which may let us from the
same.

Now you have heard the Lords prayer, which is (as I told The lords prayer
is gods storehouse.
you) the abridgement of al other prayers, and it is the store house of god.
For (...) we shall find all things necessary both for our souls and bodies.
Therefore I desire you most hartelye to resort hither to this storehouse of
God, seek here what you lack, and no doubt you shall find things necessary
for your wealth.

In the gospel of Matthew there be added these words: (...) est regnum, and
potentia, and gloria in secula seculorum. for thine is the kingdom, the power,
and the glory world without end. Amen. These words are added, not without
cause: for like as we say, in yt beginning: Our father, signifieng that he will
fulfill our request: so at the end we conclude Note this reason, and be not
(...) at (...) use to end the (...) prayer so.
saying: thine is the power etc. signifieng that he is able to help us in our
distress and to grant our requests. And though these (...) great things, yet
we need not to despair, but consider that he is lord over heaven and earth
that he is able to do for us, and that he will do so, (...) our father, and
being lord and king over all things. Therefore let us often resort hither, and
call upon (...) with this prayer, in our Christ's name: for he loves Christ
and all those which are in Christ, for so he says: Math. 3.
(...) est (...) dilectus in quo mihi been complacitu^ est, This is my
well-beloved son, in whom I have pleasure. Seeing then that god has pleasure in
him, he has pleasure in yt prayer that he has made: and so when we say this
prayer in his name with a faithful penitent heart, it is not possible but be
will hear us and grant us our requests. And truly it is the greatest comfort
in the world, to talk with god, to call upon him, in this prayer, that Christ
himself has taught us: for it takes away the bitterness of all afflictions.
Through prayer we receive the holy ghost, which stre^gthneth and comfort us
at all times, in all trouble and peril.

Quia tuam est regnum, and potentia, and gloria: For thine is kingdom, the
power, and the glory. The kingdom of god is general thoroughout all the world:
Heaven and earth are under his dominion. As for the other kings, they are
kings in deed, but to godward they be but deputies, but officers: he Kings are
but gods (...).
only is the right king, unto him only must and shall all creatures in heaven
and earth obey, and (...) his majesty. Therefore have ever this in your hearts,
what trouble and calamities so ever shall fall upon you for gods words sake: if
you be put in prison, or lose your goods, ever say in your hear tes, Tuum est
regnum, Lord god thou only art ruler and governor, thou only (...) and will
help and deliver us from al trouble, when it pleases (...) thou art the king
to who^ (...) things obey. For (as I said before) all the other kings (...) him,
and thorough him, as scripture (...): per me reges regnant, thorough me kings
rule. (...) say this prayer with Prouer. 8.
good faith and penitent (...), is a (...) laudis, a sacrifice of thanks
giving. We were wont to have (...) The sacri (...) of the (...).
(...), the (...) of the mass, which was the most horrible blasphemy, that
could be devised, for it was against the dignity of Christ, and his passion:
but this sacrifice of (...) every one may make that calls with a faithful
heart, upon god, in the name of Christ. Therefore let us at al times without
intermission offer unto god the sacrifice of thank (...): yt is to say, let us
at al times call upon him, and glorifye (...) in all our livings: wha^ we go to
(...) let us call upon him, when we rise, let us do like wise. Item when we go
to our meat and drink, let us not go unto it like swine and beasts: but let
us remember god and be thankful unto him for all his gifts. But above al things
we must see, that we have a (...) (...). 15
heart, else it is to no purpose: for it is written: No^ (...) in (...)
peccatoris, god will not be praised of a wicked man. Therefore let us repent
from the bottom of our hearts: let us forsake al (...), so that we may say this
prayer to the honor of god, and our commodities. And as I told We may say
this prayer by (...).
you before, we may say this prayer whole, or by parts, according as we shall
see occasion. For when we see gods name (...), we may say: Our father, hallowed
be thy name. When we see the devil rule, we may say, Our father, Thy kingdom
come: when we see the world inclyned to wickedness, we may say, Our father, thy
will be done. Item wha^ we lack necessary things, either for our bodies or
souls, we may say: Our father which art in heaven, (...) us this days our
daily bread. Item when I feel my sins, and they trouble me, and (...) me,
than I may say: Our father which art in heaven, forgive us our trespasses.

Finally when we will be preserved from all temptations, that they shall not have
the victory over us, nor that the devil shall not devour us, we may say: Our
father which art in heaven, lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil: For thine is the kingdom, the power, and glory, for (...) and ever,
world without end.

Amen.
Here ends the sermons upon the Lords (...) made by the right reverend
father in god, (...) ster Doctor (...), before the right virtuous and
honorable Lady Katherine Duchess of (...), at (...), the year of our Lord.
1552.
Exceptae per me Augustinum Bernerum Heluetium.
Certain other Sermons preached by the right reverend father in God, master
(...) Latymer in Lincolneshyre, the year of our Lord. 1553. Collected and
gathered by Augustine Bernherre an Heluetian: and albeit not so fully and
perfectly gathered as they were uttered: yet nevertheless truly, to the singular
commodity and profit of the simple (...), who with seruent (...) and diligent
redyng, desire to be better taught and instructed.

The first Sermon.
SImile factum est regnum (...) homini regi qui (...) nuptias filio suo, The
kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king which married his son: And
sent forth Math. 22.
his servants to call them that. etc.

This is a gospel that contains very much (...) 14.
matter: And there is an other like unto this in ye. 14. of (...), Two
parables mea ning al one thing.
but they be both one in effect, for they (...) both one thing: And therefore I
will take them both in hand together, because they tend to one purpose. Matthew
says: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which married his
son. Luke says: A certain (...) a great supper, but there is no difference
in yt very substance of the matter, for (...) to one purpose. Here is made
mention of a feast maker, therefore we must consider, who was this feast maker:
seco^darily Seven (...) ges to be (...) in this para (...).
who was his son: thirdly we must consider to whom he was married: who were
they that called the (...): fourthly, who (...) the gests. And than we must
know how the gest callers behaved the^ selves: and then how the gestes behaved
themselves toward them that called them. When all these circumstances he
considered, we shall synde (...) good matters covered and hid in this Gospel.

Now that I may so handle these matters that it may turn to the (...) of your
souls, and to the discharge of my office, I will most instantely desire you,
to (...) up your hearts unto God: and desire his divine majesty in the name
Things to be asked at gods hand.
of his only begotten son our savior Jesus Christ, that he will give unto us
his holy ghost: unto me, that I may speak the word of God, and teach you to
understand the same: unto you, that you may hear it fruitefully, to the
edification of your souls: so that you may be edified through it, and your
lives reformed and amended, so that his honor and glory may increase daily
amongost us. And therefore I shall desire you to say with me. Our father. etc.

DERELY beloved in the Lord, the gospel that is read this day is a parable, a
similitude, or comparison. For our savior compared the kingdom of GOD unto a
man, that made a marriage for his son. And here was a marriage. At a marriage
you know there is commonly great feastynges. Now you must know who was this
feast maker, and who was his son, and to whom he was married, and who were
these that should be called, and who were the callers, (...) they behaved them
selves, and how the gestes behaved them selves toward them that called them.

Now this marriage maker, or feast maker, is almighty god. Who was this
marriage maker.
Luke the Evangelist calls him a man, saying: A certain man ordained a great
supper: He called him a man, not that he was (...), or has taken our (...)
upon him, no not so, for you must understand that there be three persons in the
(...), God the father, god the son, and god the holy ghost. And these three
persons (...) the son with manhood: so that neither the father, neither the
holy ghost, took flesh upon them, but only the son: he took (...) flesh
upon him, taking (...) of Only the son became man.
the vyrgin Mary. But Luke called god the father a man, not because he took
(...) upon him, but only compared (...) unto a man, not yt he will affirm him
to be man. Who was he God is call led a (...) but is not so.
now that was married? who was the (...)? Mary that was our savior (...)
Christ, the second person in the destie, the eternal son of god. who should
be his spouse? to (...) was he married? Mary to his church and congregation:
for he Christ is the bridegroom. The church is the (...)
would have all the world, to (...) unto him, and to be married unto him: but
we see by daily experience, that the most (...) refuse this (...). But here is
showed the state of yt church of God: for this marriage, this (...) was begun
at the beginning The mari age has la sted ever sense the world began
of the world, and shall endure to the end of the same: yet for all that, the
most part refused it: for at the very beginning of ye world, ever the most part
refused to com. And so it appears at this our time, how little a number (...)
to this weddyng and feast: though we have many callers, (...) be but few of
those that come. So ye hear that (...) is the (...): the bridegroom is Christ,
his son (...) Savior: the bride is the congregation.

Now what manner of meat was prepared at this (...)? For ye know it is
commonly seen, (...) at a (...) the (...) meat is prepared that can be
gotten. What was the chiefest dysh at this great (...)? what was the (...)?
Mary it was the bridegroom himself: for the father, The bridegroom himself
was the best dish of the feast.
the feast maker, prepared none other (...) of meat for the geastes but the
body and blood of his own natural son. And this is the chiefest dyshe at
this banquet: (...) truly is a meruaylous thing that the father offers his
son to be eaten. Uerily I think that no man has heard the like. And
trewely there was never such kind of feastynges as this is, where the father
will have his son to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk.

We read in a storye, that a certain man had eaten his The history of
Astiages and Harpa gus.
son, but it was done unawares: he knew not that it was his son, else no
doubt he would not have eaten him. The storye is this: There was a king
named Astyages, which had heard by a Prophecye, that one Cyrus should have
the rule and dominion over his realm, after his departure: which thing
troubled the said king very sore, and therefore sought all the ways and means
how to get the said Cyrus out of the way, how to kill him, so that he
should not be king after him. Now he had a noble man in his house named
Harpagus, whom he appointed to destroy the (...) Cyrus: but how soever the
matter went, Cyrus was preserved and kept alive, contrary (...) the kings
mind. Which thing when (...) heard, what An eusample of cruel (...).
(...) he? Mary this. Harpagus that noble man which was put in trust to kyl
Cyrus, had a son (...) the court, whom the king commanded to be taken, his
head, hands, (...) to be cut of, and his body to be prepared, roasted or
sodden, of the best manner as could be (...). After that, he byddeth Harpagus
to come and eat with him, where there was (...), one dyshe coming after an
other: At length the king asked him, Sir, how likes you your fare? Harpagus
thanketh the king with much praisyng the kings banquet. Now the king
perceyuyng (...) to be merrily disposed, (...) one of his servants to bring in
the head, (...), and feet of Harpagus son, which when it was done, the
king showed him what (...) of meat he had eaten, askyng him how it lyketh
him. Harpagus made answer though with an (...) heart, Quod Regi placet, id
(...) quoque placet, Whatsoever pleases the king, that also pleases me. And
here we have an ensample of a flatterer or dissembler: for this Harpagus spoke
against his An (...) of a (...).
own heart and conscience. Surely (...) there be a great many of flatterers in
our time also, which will not be ashamed to speak against their own heart
and (...), like as this Harpagus did, which had no dout a (...) heart, and in
his (...) the act of the king (...) him: yet for all that, with his tongue he
praised the same. So I say, we read not in any story, that at any time any
father had (...) his (...) willingly and wittingly. And this Harpagus, of whom
I rehearsed the story, did it unawares. But the almighty god which prepared
this feast for all the world, for all those that will come A sign of gods love
toward man.
unto it, he (...) his only son to be eaten, and his blood to be dronken:
(...) he loved his (...) well, because he (...) them with so costly a dish.
Again, our savior the bride grome offreth him self at his last supper, which he
had with his disciples, his body to he eaten and his blood to be drunk. And to
the intent that (...) should be done to our great comfort, and than again
to take away all cruelty, (...), (...) dye and (...) is ea (...) and (...) ken
(...).
and horriblenes: he shows unto us how we shall (...) him, in what manner and
form, (...) spiritually, to our great comfort: so that who so ever eats the
mystical bread, and drinks the (...) worthily, according to (...) of Christ,
he receives surely the very body and blood of Christ spiritually, as it shall be
most comfortable unto his soul. He eats with the mouth of his soul, and
digested with the stomach of his soul, the body of Christ. And to be short,
who soever believes in Christ, puts his hope, (...), and confidence The
(...) all eating of Christ (...) the right ea (...).
in him, he eats and (...) him: for the spiritual eating, is the right
catyng to everlasting life, not the (...): all eating, as the (...) understood
it. for that same corporal (...), on which they set their minds, (...) no
commodities at all, it is a spiritual meat that (...) our souls. But I
(...) you, how much is this supper of Christ (...) amongst us: where he
himself (...) unto us his body The (...) is not (...) ded.
and blood. How much I say is it regarded: how many receive it with the curate
or minister: O Lord, how blind and dull are we to such things, which (...) to
our salvation? But I pray you wherefore was it ordained principally? Answer. It
was ordained for our help, to help our memory Why the (...) sup per was or
deined.
withal, to put us in mind of the great goodness of god, in redemyng us from
everlasting death, by the blood of our (...) Christ, yea and to signifye unto
us, that his body and blood is our meat and drink for our souls, to feed
them to everlasting life: if we were now so perfect as we ought to be, we
should not have need of it, but to help our imperfectnes it was ordained of
Christ: for we be so forgetful when we be not pricked for ward, we have soon
forgotten all his benefits. Therefore to the intent that we might better keep
it in memory, and to remedy this our slouthfulnes, our savior (...) be both
(...) and forgetful.
has ordained this his supper for us, whereby we should remember his great
goodness his bitter passion and death, and so strengthen our faith: so that he
(...) this Supper for our sake, to make us to keep in fresh memory his (...)
ble beuefites. But as I said before, it is in a manner nothing regarded amongst
us, we care not for it, we will not come unto it: how many be (...) think ye,
which regard this supper of the lord, as much as a testorne? but very few no
dout of it: And I will prove that they regard it not so much: if there were a
proclamation made in this town, that whosoever would come unto the church at
such an hour, And there go to the communion with the curate, should have a
(...), when such a proclamation were made, I think truly all For a (...) a
piece we should have communicants (...).
the town would come and celebrate the Communion to get a testorne. But they
will not come to receive the body and blood of Christ, the food and
nourishment of their souls: to the augmentation, and strength of their faith?
Do they not more regard now a testorne then Christ? But the canse which
lettes us from the celebratyng of the Lords supper, is this: we have no mind
nor purpose to leave sin, and wickedness: The cause why we (...) no mind to
com to the communion.
which makes us not to come to this supper, because we be not ready nor meet
to receive it. But I require you in gods behalf leave your wickedness, that
ye may receive it worthily according to his institution. For this supper is
ordained, as I told you before, for our sake, to our profits and commodities:
for if we were perfect, we should not (...) this outward sacrament: but our
savior knowing our weakness and forgetfulness, ordained this supper, to the
augmentation of our faith: And to put us in remembrance of his benefits. But
we will not come: there come no mo;e at ones, but such as (...) the holy
loves, from house to house, which Men come to the communion of custom.
follow rather the custom than any thing else. Our savior Christ says in the
gospel of saint John, Ego sum panis viuas, qui de coelo descendi, I am the
living bread, which John. 6.
came down from heaven. Therefore who (...) feeds of Who so ea teth (...)
sles flesh shall (...).
our savior Christ, he shall not (...), death shall not (...) against him,
his soul shall depart out of his body, yet death shall not get the (...) over
him: he shall not be damned: he that comes to that marriage, to that banquet,
death shall be unto him but an entrance, or a door to everlasting life. Panis
quem ego dabo caro mea est, The bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world. As many as will feed upon him, shall
attain to everlasting life: they shall never die, they shall prevail against
death: Death has (...) his (...).
death shall not hurt them, because he has (...) his strength: if we would
consider this, no doubt we would be more desirous to come to the (...) than we
be: we would not be so cold, we would be content to leave our naughtle (...),
and come to the Lords table.

Now ye have heard what shall be the chiefest dishe at this marriage, namely the
body and blood of Christ. But now there be other dishes, which bc sequeles or
hangynges on, wherewith the chief dishe is poudred: that is, (...) of sins.
The (...) of dishes that are (...) this supper.
Item the holy ghost which rules and governs our hertes: Item the merits of
Christ, which are made ours: for when we (...) upon this dishe worthily, than
we shall have (...) of our sins, we shall (...) the holy ghost: (...) all the
merits of Christ are ours, his fulfylling of the (...) is ours, and so we be
(...) before God: and finally attayn to everlasting life. As many therefore as
feed worthily of this (...). shall have all these things with it, and in the
ends euerlastyngelyse. S. Baule says: (...) proprio filio suo Rom 8.
non pepercir, sed pro nobis omnibus tradidit illum, (...) non (...) cum (...)
omnia (...) donabit? He which spared not his own son, but gave him for us all:
how shall he not with him give us all things also? Therefore they that be The
commodities that (...) ne ot co^ (...). (...)
in Christ, are partakers of all his (...) and benefits of (...) life, and of
(...): He that has Christ, has al things that are Christ's: He is our
preservation from damna tion, he is our comfort, be is our help, our remedy.
(...) we feed upon him, than we shall have remission of our sins: the same
remission of (...) is the greatest and most comfortable thing that can be in
the world. O what a comfortable thing is this, when Christ (...): Remittuntur
(...) peccata, Math 8 (...) general prodamati on.
Thy sins ar forgeuen unto the. And this is a standing sentence, it was not
spoken only to that same man, but it is a general proclamation unto al us:
all and every one that (...) in (...), shall have forgiveness of their sins.
And this proclamation is (...) out daily by his ministers (...) preachers:
(...) proclamation is the word of grace, (...) word of (...) and consolation.
For like as sin is the most (...) and the (...) est thing in heaven and in
earth: So the most Nothing is so (...) as (...).
(...) thing is the remedy against sin: which remedy is declared and offered
unto us in this word of (...): and the power to distribute this remedy against
sins, he has given unto (...), which be gods treasorers, distributers of
(...) word of god: for now he speaks by me, he calls you to this wedding by
(...), being but a poor man, yet he has sent me to call you. And though he be
the author of the word: yet he will have men to be called through his ministers
to that word. Therefore let us give (...) unto the minister when he speaks
gods word, yea rather let us credit God when he speaks by his ministers,
and offreth us (...) of our sins by his word. For there is no sin so
great in this world, but it is pardonable as long as we be in (...) world, and
call for mercy: for here is the time of mercy, here we may com to forgeuenes
of our sins. but if we ones die in sin and (...), so that we be (...), let
us not look for remission (...): for the state after this life is
unchangeable: but as long as we bc here, we may (...) for mercy. Therefore let
us not despair, let us amend our (...), and crte unto god for forgeuenes of
our sins: and than no doubt we shall obtain remission, if we call with a
faithful heat upon him, for so he has promised (...) us in his most holy
word.

The holy scripture makes mention of a sin against the There is a sin (...)
holy ghost.
holy ghost, which sin can not be forgiven neither in this world nor in the
world to com: And this makes many (...) unquiet in their hearts and
consciences: for some there be which ever be afraid least they have committed
that same sin against the holy ghost, which is irremissible. Therefore some say,
I cannot tell whether I have sinned against the holy ghost or not: if (...)
have committed that sin, I know I shall be damned. But I tell you what ye shall
do, despair not of the mercy of god, for it is immeasurable. I can not deny
but there is a sin against the We can not (...) against the holy ghost.
holy ghost which is (...), but we can not judge of it (...) hand, we can not
tell which man has (...) yt sin or not, as long as he is (...): but when he
is oues gone, tha^ I can judge whether he sinned against the holy ghost or not.
As now I can judge that Nero, Saul, and Iubas and such like, that died in (...)
and wickedness, did commit this syn against the holy ghost: for they were
wicked and continued in their wickedness still to the (...) end, they made an
end in their (...): but we can not judge whether one of us sin this sin
against the holy ghost or not: for though a man be wicked at this time, yet he
may (...) and leave his wickedness, to morrow, and so not commit that syn against
the holy ghost. Our (...) Christ pronounced against the scribes and phariseis,
that they had committed that sin against the holy ghost: because he knew
their hearts, he knew that they would Christ (...) the hearts of the
phariseis.
still abide in their wickedness, to the very end of their lives. But we can
not pronounce this sentence against any man, for we know not the hearts of
men: he that sinned now, peradventure shall be turned to morrow, and leave his
sins, and so be saved. Further, the promyses of Christ (...) Christ's pro
mises are general.
savior are general, they pertayne to all mankind: he made a general
proclamation, saying: Qui credit in me, habet vitam aeternam, Who so ever
believes in me, has everlasting life. Likewise saint Paul says: Gratia
(...) supta peccatum, The grace and (...) of God excedeth far our sins.
Therefore let us ever think and believe that the grace of God his mercy and
goodness excedeth our sins. Ite consider what Christ says with his own
mouth: Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis. etc. Come to me all ye that labor
Math. 11.
and are laden, and I will ease you. Mark here he says: Come all Christ
calls all (...) go him.
ye: wherefore than should any body despair, or (...) out him self from these
promises of Christ which be general and pertain to the hole world? For he
says, Come all unto me, And then again he says, Refocillabo vos, I will
(...) youyou shall be (...) from the burdens of your sins. Therefore as I
said before, he that is blasphemous and obstinate wicked, and abides in his
wickedness (...) to the very end, he synneth against the holy ghost, as S.
Augustine and all other godly writers do affirm: but he that leaves his
wickedness To conty (...) in syn to the end is to sin against the holy
ghost.
and sins, is content to amend his life, and than beleuyng in Christ, seeks
salvation and everlasting life by him: no doubt that man or (...) who soever
they be, shall be saved: for they feed upon Christ, upon that meat that God
the Father, this feast maker, has prepared for all his gestes.

You have heard now who is the maker of this feast or ban ket: and again you
have heard what meat is prepared for the gestes, what a costly die she the
housefather has ordained at the wedding of his (...). But now ye know that
where there be great dyshes and delicate fare: there be commonly prepared
certain sauses, which shall give men a great (...) and appetite to their
(...), as mustard, viniger, and (...) sauses. So this feast, this costely
dishe, has his sauses: what be they: Mary the cross, affliction, tribulation,
persecution, (...) me at (...) have (...) sauce.
and all manner of (...): for like as sauses make (...) the stomach, to receive
meat, so affliction styrreth up in us a desire to Christ. For when we be in
(...) we are not hun gry, we care not for Christ: but when we be in
tribulation, and cast in prison tha^ we have a desire to him: tha^ we learn to
call upon him: than we hunger and thurst after him, than we are desirous to
feed upon him: as long as we be in health and prosperity, we care not for him:
we be slouthful, we have no stomach at all, and therefore these sauses are
very necessary for us: we have a common saying amongst us, wha^ we see a
fellow sturdy, lofty, and proud, men say, this is a sausye fellow: signifying
him to be a highmynded fellow, which takes (...) upon him then he aught to
do, or his estate (...): which thing no doubt is naught and ill: for every
one ought to be have himself according unto his calling and estate: but he
that will be a christen man, that inte^deth to come He that will (...) to (...)
must be (...).
to heaven, must be a sausye fellow: he must be well poudered with the sause of
affliction, and tribulation, not with proud nes and stoutenes, but with
miseries and calamities: for so it is written, omnes qui ple volunt, (...) in
Christo persecutionem patientur, whosoever will live godly in Christ, he shall
have persecution and miseries, he shall have sause enough to his meat. Again
our savior says, qui vult meus esse discipulus, abnegat semetipsum and tollat
crucem suam and (...) me: He that will be my disciple must deny himself, and
take his cross upon him, and follow me. Is there any man that will seed
upon me, that will eat my (...), and drink my blood? Abnegat semetipsum,
Let him forsake himself. O this is a great matter, this is a bytyng thing:
the deniyng of my own will. As for an ensaumple. I see a fair woman, and
(...) in my heart an ill appetite to commit lecherye with her. I desire to
fulfill my wanton lust with her. Here is my aypetite, my lust, my will: but
what must I do? Marye I must deny my self and follow Christ. What is that? I
must not follow my We must (...) selves.
own desire, but the will and pleasure of Christ. Now what says he? Non
fornicaberis, non adulte raberis, Thou shall not be a hoore (...): Thou shall
not be a wedlock (...) ker. Here I must (...) my self, and my will and give
place unto his will, abhor and hate my own will, yea and further more I must
ernestly call upon him, that he will give me grace to withstand my own lust
and appetite, in all manner of things, which may (...) against (...) will:
as when a man do the me wrong, takes my living from me, or hurts me in my
good name and fame, my will is to avenge my self upon him, to do him a foul
turn again: but what says god? (...) vindictam ego retribuam, Unto We must
leave the revenge to god.
me (says god) belongs vengeance, I will recompense tho same. Now here I
must give over my own will and pleasure and obey his will, this I must do,
if I will feed upon him, if I will come to heaven: but this is a bitter
thing, a sour sause, a sharp sause: This sause makes a stomach: for when I
am (...) or wronged, or am in other tribulation, then I have a great desire
for him, to feed upon him, to be delivered from trouble, and to attain to
(...) and joy.

There is a learned man which has a saying, which The cross (...) us (...).
is most true, he says: Plus crux quam (...) ad Christum, The cross and
persecution bring us (...) to Christ then prosperity and wealth. Therefore
Saint Peter says: (...) sub (...) manum Dei, Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of GOD: Look what GOD lays upon you bear, it wyllyngly and
humblye. But you will say, I pray you tell me what is my (...) Answer. This
that God lays upon you that same is your cross: not that which you of your
own wylfulnesse lay upon your selves. As there was a certain sect which
were called Flagellarii, which scourged The (...) that men lay upon themselves
is (...) Christ's (...).
themselves with whyppes, till the blood ran from their bodies: this was a
cross, but it was not the cross of God, No no, he laid not that cross upon
them, they (...) it of their own head. Therefore look what God lays upon
me that (...) is my cross, which I ought to take in good part, as when I
fall in pouertye, or in miseries, I ought to be content withal: when my
neighbor does me wrong, takes a way my goods, robs me of my good name
and fame, I shall bear it wyllynglye, considering that it is Gods cross,
and that nothing can be (...) us (...).
done against me without his permission. There falls never a sparrow to
the ground without his permission: yea not a hear falls from our head
without his will, Sceyng then that there is nothing done without his will, I
ought to bear this cross which he lays upon me, wyllynglye without any
(...) or grudgynge. But I pray you consider these words of Saint Peter
well: Humiliamini sub potenti manum Dei, Humble your selfs under the mighty
hand of GOD. Here Saint Peter signified unto us that GOD is a mighty GOD,
which can take away the cross from us when it (...) him good Gods hand is
(...).
yea and he can send patience in the mids of all trouble and miseries.
Saint Paul that elect instrumente of God showed a reason wherefore GOD
lays afflictions upon us saying: Corripimut a domino ne cum mundo
condemnemur, We are chastened of the Lord least we should Thecause (...)
be condemned with the world: for you see by daily experience that the most
part of wicked men are luckye Christ lays (...) those that be his.
in this world: they bear the swing, all things goes after their minds,
for GOD lets them have their pleasures here. And therefore there is a common
saying, The more (...), the more lucky: but they that pertayne The (...)
wicked the more lucky.
to God, that shall inherit everlasting life: they must go to the pot, they
must suffer here according to that scripture: Iuditium a domo (...) incipit,
the judgment of god begins at the house of God: therefore it comes of
the goodness of god when we be put to taste the sause of tribulation: for he
does it to a good end, namely that we should not be condemned with this wicked
world: for these sauses are very good for us, for they make us more hu^gry and
lusty tocome to Christ and feed upon him. And truly when it goes well with
us, we forget Christ, our hearts and minds are not upon him: it is be tertaha
(...) a (...).
therefore it is better to have affliction then to be in prosperity. for there is
a common (...), Vexatio dat intellectum, vexation gives understanding. David
that excellent king and Prophet says, Bonum est mihi quod (...) me domine Lord
says he, it is good for me that thou have pulled down my stomach, that thou
have humbled (...). But I pray you, what sause had David? how was he humbled?
Mary this, his own (...) David sauce to his meat
(...) his daughter. After that, Absalon one other of his (...) killed his own
brother. And this was not enough, but his own son rose up against him, and
traitorously cast him out of his kingdom, and (...) his wife in the sight of
all the people. Was not he vered? had he not sausses? Yes yes, yet for all that
he cries not out against God, he murmured not, but says: Bonum est mihi quod
humiliasti me, Lord it is good for me that thou haste humbled me, that thou
haste brought me low: therefore when we be in trouble, let us be of good
comfort, knowing that God doothe it for the best. But for all that, the devil
that old serpent, the enemy of mankind doothe what he can day and night
to bring us The (...) still to make (...) for us.
to this sause, to cast us into persecution, or other myseries, as it appeared
in the Gospel of Matthew, where our Savior castyng him out of a man, seeing
that he could do no more harm, he desired Christ to give him leave to go
into the swyne: and so he cast them all into the sea. Where it appears,
that the devil studieth and seekethe all manner of ways to hurt us, either in
soul, or (...) body: But for all that, let us not despair, but rather
lift up our hearts unto GOD, desyryng his (...) and comfort, and no doubt
when we do so, he will healpe, To consider this, is comfortable.
he will either take away the calamities, or else mitigate them, or at the
least wise send patience into our hearts, that we may bear it wyllyngly.

Now you know at a great feast when there is made a delicate dinner, and the
gueste fare well: at the end of the diner they have (...). certain (...),
custardes sweet, and delicate The (...) at (...).
things; so (...) we come to this diner, to this weddyng, and feed upon
Christ, and take his sauses which he has prepared for us: at the end comes
the sweet meat, what is that? Mary remission of sins and everlasting life,
such joy that no tongue can express, nor heart can think: which God has
prepared for all them that come to this diner, and feed upon his son, and
(...) of his sauses. And this is the end of this banquet. This banquet or marriage
diner was made at the very beginning of the world, God made this marriage in
paradise, and called the hole world unto it, saying: Semen This marriage was
made in pa radise.
multeris conteret caput (...), The seed of the woman shall vanquishe the head
of the serpent: this was the first calling. And this calling stood unto the
faithful in as good stead as it does unto us, which have a more (...) calling.

Afterward, almighty God called again with these words, speaking to Abraham,
Ego ero Deus tuus and seminis Abraham was bidde^ to this ma riage.
tui post te, I will be thy God, and thy seeds of thee. Now what is it to be
our God? Mary to be our defender, our comforter, our delyuerer and helper: who
was Abraham's sede? Mary Christ the son of God, he was Abraham's seed: in him
and thorough him, all the world shall be blessed, all that believe in him, all that come to this dinner and feed upon him. After that, all the prophets their
only intent was to call the people to this weddyng. Now after the time was
expired, which God had appointed, he said: Venite, parata sunt omnia, Come, all
things are ready. But who are these callers? The first was John Baptiste,
which not only called John Baptist pointed to this meat with his (...).
with his mouth, but also showed with his finger, that meat which GOD had
prepared for the whole world. He says: Ecce agnus Dei qui tollit peccata
mundi, Lo the Lamb of GOD that takes away the sins of the world. Item,
Christ him self called, saying: Venite ad me omnes Math. xi.
qui laboratis, Comme to me all ye that travail and labor, and I will
refresshe you. Likewise the Apostles cried and called all the whole world, as
it is written: Exiuit sonus eotum per vniuersam terram, Their sound is gone
thorough out all the world. But I pray you what thanks had they far their
calling? for their labor? Mary this, John Baptiste was headed: Christ was
(...) the Apostles were killed, this was their reward for The (...) that they
have which be the callers of (...) is a (...) les (...).
their labors. So all the preachers shall look for none other reward: for no
(...) they must be suffrers, they must taste of these sauses: their office is,
Arguere mundum de peccato, to rebuke the world of sin, which no doubt is a
thankles occupation. (...) audiant montes (...) domini, That the high hills,
that is, great (...) and lords may hear the judgments of the Lord: they
must spare no body, they must rebuke high and low when they do amiss, they
must stryke (...) with the swoorde of Gods word: which no doubt is a
thanklesse ocupation: yet it must be done, for GOD will have it so.

There be many men which be not so cruel as to persecute or to kyl the
preachers of Gods word: but when they be called to (...) upon Christ, to come
to this banquet, to leave their wicked livings, than they begin to make their
excuses, as it The excu ses that such use to make as are loath to leave their
(...)
appeered here in this gospel: Where the (...) said, I have bought a (...),
and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me excused. An other said: I
have bought five yoke of (...), and I go to prove them, I pray thee have me
excused. The third said, I have married a wife, and therefore I can not comme:
and these were their excuses. You must take heed that you mystake not this
text: for after ye (...) letter, it seems as though no husbandman, no byer or
seller, (...) head ye under this aright.
nor married man, shall enter into the kingdom of God: Therefore ye must take
heed, that ye understand it aright. For to be a husbandmanne, to (...) a byer
or seller, to be a married manne, is a good thing, and allowed of GOD: but the
abuse of such things is reproved husbandmanne, and married man every one in
his calling, may use and do the works of his calling: the husband manne
may go to ploughe: they may bye and sell. Item, men may marye, but they may
not set their hearts upon it. The husbandman may not so apply his
husbandrye, to set aside the hearing of the word of GOD: for when he
doothe so, he synneth damnably: for he more regards his (...), than GOD and
his word: He has all lust and (...) in his husbandrye, which pleasure is
(...). As there be many husbandme^, which will not come Husbandry must not hold
(...) from god.
to (...), they make their excuses that they have other (...), but this
excusing (...) naught: for commonly they go about wicked matters, and yet they
would excuse them self, to make them selfs (...), or at the least way, they
(...) their (...). Which thing it self is a great wickedness: to do wickedly,
and than (...) that same wickedness: to neglect and despise Gods word, and
tha^ to excuse such doings, like as these men do here in this gospel. The
husbandman says, I have bought a ferme, (...) have me excused: the other says,
I have bought five yoke of (...), I pray the (...) me excused: Now wha^ he
comes to the married man: that same fellow says not, have me excused, as the
other say, but he only says, I cannot come. Where it is to be noted, that
Themaried man says he can not come.
the affections of (...) lusts and concupiscence are the strongest above all
the other: for there be some men which set al their hearts upon
voluptuousnes: they regard nothing else, neither God nor his word: And therefore
this married man says: I can not come: because his affections are more (...)
and more vehement tha^ the other men's were: but what shall be (...) reward
which refuse to come? The housefather says: I say unto you, that none of
those men which were The reward of them that refuse to come.
bydden, shall taste of my supper. With these words Christ our savior teaches
us, that all those that love better worldly things than GOD and his word,
shall be shut out from his supper, that is to say, from everlasting joy and
(...): (...) it is a great matter to despise Gods word, or the mynister of
the same: for the office of preaching is the office of salvation, it has
warrantes in Scripture, it is grounded upon Gods word. (...) Paul to the
Romans Saint Paul's (...) on.
makes a gradation of such wise: Omnis quicunque (...) no men domini
saluabitur, quomodo ergo inuocabunt in quem no^ (...), (...) quomodo credent
(...) quem non (...)? That is to say, who soever shall (...) on the name of the
Lord shall be saved: but how shall they call upon him, in whom they believe not?
how shall they believe on him of whom they have not herd? How shall they hear
without a (...)? And how shall they (...) except they be set? At the length be
concludes saying, Fi les ex (...) faith comes by hearing: where ye may
perceive how necessary a thing it is, to hear gods word, and how needful a
thing it is to have preachers, which may teach us the word of god: for by
(...) we must come to faith, thorough faith we must be instified. And
therefore Christ says himself: Qui credit in me, habet vitam aeternam, he
that believes in me has eucrla styng life. When we hear gods word by the
preacher, and believe that same, then we shall be saved: for s. Paul says.
Euangelium est potentia dei ad salutem omm credenti, the gospel is the power of
god unto salvation, to all that believe: the gospel preached is gods power to
the salvation of all beleuers: The com (...) of the (...) of prea ching.
this is a great commendation of this (...) of preaching, therefore we ought
not to despise it, or little regard it: for it is gods instrument whereby he
works faith in our hearts. Our Savior says to Nicodeme: Nisi quis renatus
(...) 3.
fuerit, except a man be borne a new, he can not see the kingdom of god. But
how comes this regeneration? by hearing and beleuyng of the word of god: for
so says s. Peter Renati non ex semine mortali corruptibili, we are borne a
new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of god. Likewise Paul
says in an other place: Visum est deo per (...) predicationis saluos facore
(...), It pleased god to save the beleuers thorough the foolishnes of
preaching. But peradventure you will say. What? shall a preacher teach
foolishnes? No not so, the preacher when he is a right preacher, he preaches
not foolishnes, but he preaches The world (...) word of god to be
foolishnes.
the word of god: but it is taken for foolishnes, the world estemeth it for a
trifyll: but howsoever the world estemeth it, S. Paul says that god will
save his thorough it.

Here I might take occasion to inueigh against those which little regard
the office of preaching which are wont to say, what need we such prechings
every day? Have I not syue wits, I know as well what is good or ill, as he
does that preaches. But I tell thee my friend: be not to hasty, for wha^ thou
have nothing to follow but thy syue wits, thou David (...) not his (...)
vvittes
shalt go to the devil with them: David that holy Prophet said not so, he
trusted not his five wits, but he said. Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum
domine, Lord thy word is a candell unto my feet: here we learn not to despise
the word of god, but highly to esteem it, and reverently to hear it: for yt
holy day is ordained, and appointed to none other thing, but yt we should at
that day, hear the word of god, and exercise our selves in all godliness: but
there be some which think that this day is ordained only for feastyng,
drinking, or gaming, or such foolishnes, but they be much deceived: this day
was The right use of the holy days.
appointed of god, that we should hear his word, and learn his laws, and so
serve him: but I dare say, the devil has no days so much service as upon
sondayes or holy days, which sondaies are appointed to preaching, and to hear
gods most holy word: therefore god says not only in his commau^ dements that
we shall abstain from working, but he says, sanctificabis, thou shall halow:
so that holyday keeping is nothing else, but to abstein from good works, and to
do better works, that is to come together, and celebrate the communion
Holydaies (...).
together, and visit the sick bodies, these are holy dais works: And for
that end god commanded us, to abstain from bodily works, yt we might be more
mete and apt to do those works, which he has appointed unto us, namely to feed
our souls with his word, to remember his benefits, and to give him thanks,
and to call upon him. So that the holy day may be called a marriage day wherein
we are married unto god, which day is very nedeful to be kept. The foolish
common people, thinks it to be a belly (...) day, and so they make All mis
(...) begin (...) on the holy (...).
it a (...) day: there is no wickedness, no rebellion, no (...), but she has
most commonly her beginning upon the holy day. We read a story in the 15.
chapter of the book of yt Numbers, That there was a (...) which gathered
sticks Nume. 15.
upon the Sabbath day, he was a (...) of gods ordinances and laws: like as
they that now a days, go about other business, when they should hear the word
of God, and come to the common prayer, which fellows truly have need of
sauce, to be made more lustier to come and feed upon Christ than they be. Now
Moses and the people consulted with the lord, what they should do, how they
should punish that fellow which had so transgressed the Saboth day: he shall dye
says god. which thing is an ensample for us to take (...), that we transgress
not the law of the Sabbath day: for though God punish us not by and by, as this
man was punished, yet he God vvil pu (...) one day.
is the very self same god, that he was before: and will punish one day either
here, or else in the other world: where the punishment shall be everlasting.
Likewise in the 17. chapter of the prophet Hieremy, god threateneth his
fearful wrath Hie. 17.
and anger unto those which do (...) his sabbath day. Again he promises his
favor, and all prosperity to them that will keep the holy days, saying:
princes and kings shall go thorough thy gates, that is to say: thou shall be in
prosperity in wealth and great estimation amongst thy neighbors. Again, if
ye will not keep my sabbath day, I will kyndell a Plagues (...) such as (...).
fire in your gates, that is to say: I will destroy you, I will bring you to
naught, and burn your cities with fire. These words pertain as well unto us
at this time, as they pertained to them at their time: for god hates the
dishallowyng of the Saboth, as well now as then: for he is and remains still
the old god: he will have us to keep his Saboth, as well now as then: for upon
the Saboth day gods sede plough goes: The saboth day is gods plowing day.
that is to say, yt ministry of his word is executed, for the ministryng of
gods word is gods plough. Now upon sondaies god sends his husbandinen to
come and till, he (...) his callers, to come and call to the wedding, to bydde
the gestes, that is, all the world to come to that supper. Therefore for the
reverence of god consider these things, consider who calls, namely god:
consider again who be the gestes, all ye? Therefore I call you in gods name, com
to this supper, halow yt saboth day: that is, do your holy day work, com to
(...) supper, for this day was (...) of god to that end that his word should
be taught and heard: prefer not your own business therefore before the hearing
of the word of god. Remember the story of that man which gathered sticks upon
the holy day: and was put to death by the consent of god: where god showed
himself not a cruel god: but he would give a warnyng unto the whole world
by that man, that all the world should keep holy his Saboth day.

The almighty euerliuyng god give us grace to live so in this miserable world,
that we may at the end come to the great Sabbath day, where there shall be
everlasting joy and gladness.

Amen.
The second Sermon of Master Latymers. Math. 5.
VIdens autem Jesus turbas ascendit in montem and cum (...). etc. When Jesus
saw the people he went up into a mountain, and when he was set down, his
disciples came unto him, and he opened his mouth, and taught them saying:
Blessed are the poor in spirit.

Derely beloved in our savior Christ, I have to tell you at this present time
of a certain pylgrimage, which may be called the christen man's pylgrimage:
but ye shall not think that I will speak of the popish pilgrimage, which we
were wont to use in times past: in running hither and thither to M. John
Shorn, or to our lady of (...). No no, I will not speak of such (...), but I
will speak of such a pylgri mage, which our savior Christ himself taught us,
being here present with us, with his own mouth. Therefore whosoever will come to
the eternal (...) must go that pilgrimage, else he shall never attain thereunto.
Cum vidisset autem (...). (...)
When he saw the people. It apeared by thend of the 4. of Math. that our
savior had walked thoroughout all Galilee: and had don many miracles: so that
the same of him went tho roughout all the (...): And there gathered a great
number of people together to here him: he seeing the people how hungry they
were, conveyed himself into a (...) place: and his disciples came unto him,
and he taught (...), but not only yt disciples but also the whole people. For
Luke says: docebat audie^te populo, he preached yt people hering it. (...) and
turba admirabitur (...) doctrina illi, and yt people meruailed because of his
doctrine: how could they marvel if they had not heard it. So it appears that
Christ made his sermon not only to his disciples, but also to the whole
people, yet specially he taught his disciples, to that end that they might
teach afterward to others, for he taught them such doctrine which he would
have taught all the whole world, therefore he so diligently taught them for
though he made many sermons, yet these. ii. sermons, the one in Matthew, and the
other in John ought to be regarded most above all others: for they conteyne
(...) ser. mo^s vvher in is contei ned the sum of a christians life.
the sum of a christian man's life. Now our savior seeing them so hungry,
what does he? The Evangelist says: A peruit os suum, he opened his mouth and
taught them: Our savior did not only send out his apostles (...) preach
and teach the people, but also he opened his own mouth, and taught the people
his own self. Which act of our sautor, is to the reproach of our lordly
prelates: which in a manner disdain to preach them selves, in their own
persons, but they think it to be enough to have one or two pertainyng unto
them, which preach in (...) drioces, they them selves being occupied in
worldly business: our Savior did not so, he opened his own mouth, and
taught the people. Certainly this ensample of our Savior ought (...) prela
tes be not (...) than (...).
better to be considered of our prelates than it is: for they be not better
than Christ was. Christ has sent them, and given unto them a Commission to
preach: wherefore disdain they than to open their mouth, and teach the people?
seeing that our savior him self taught: how will they be excused (...) they
shall make account for their doings? What shall be their reward for their
slothfulness? No doubt everlasting damnation hangs over their heads.

Now our savior openyng his mouth, what taught he them? Mary he taught them
a pilgremage, the christen ma^s pilgremage: And this is a good and true
pilgremage that he Christ teaches men to (...) on (...). mage.
taught, for this pilgremage stands not in runnyng hither and thither: No no,
this is a right pilgremage, but there is strange gear in it (...) such gear,
that if I should say it of my own head, you would not believe me, you would say
I lie: for it agrees not with our mother wit, we can not compass this
gear with our natural wit: therefore we must consider who speaks it, and so
captiuate our reason and wit, to the wisdom of God. Now Christ the eternal
son of God, he teaches us this pilgremage: Of which god the father him self
says: Hic est (...) meus dilectus, in quo mihi been complacitum est, ipsum
audite: This is my well beloved son, in whom I am pleased, hear him. Seeing
than that the almightye god commanded us to hear him, We must not lightly
regard (...) doctrine.
we ought not to regard his doctrine little, to esteem and value it for
nothing: but most highly esteem it as the infallible word of god. Now what
says he? Beati (...) spititu quoniam ipsorum est regnum coelorum, Blessed be
the poor in the spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. etc. I entend
to be very short, else I could not have time to go through all things that
partayne to this pilgremage. This is a pilgremage A pilgremage of (...), days
(...), or. (...). miles.
of viii. miles or of. viii. days iournies, al things that partayne unto it
are comprehended in viii. points. Our savior says, Beati pauperis, Blessed
be the poor, this is contrary to our reason: for who would think pouertye
to be a blessedness: who is that would not rather be rich than poor? to be
rich is a blessedness in our eyes, to be poor is an unhappiness in our minds:
but we must subdue our judgments. We esteem it to be a cursednes to be poor:
well, our sautour says Blessed are the poor: Luke has no more but these
words, Matthew adds Spiritu in yt spirit. These viii. To say that po. (...)
is a blessedness, is a paradox.
miles, or dais (...), may be called Paradoxa that is to say, (...),
incredible, and vnbeleuable sayings: for if Christ had not spoken it himself,
who should have believed it? for we see daily before our eyes, what a miserable
thing is poverty therefore our nature is ever given to avoid poverty, and to
come to riches. But Christ says, Beati pauperes, Blessed be the poor in
spirit, for the kingdom of heaven is theirs.

The kingdom of heaven is taken sometimes for the (...) The king dome of
heaven ta ken for the office of preaching.
(...) of preaching, as when he compared the kingdom of heaven to a net that
catched good and bad fyshes, there he means the office of preaching: sometimes
it is taken for eternal (...), which Christ our savior merited for us. When
John Baptist sends his disciples unto Christ to ask him whether he be
Christ or not, he told them what miracles he had The pore be (...) to hear
the word of God.
done, and amongst other things he said, Pauperes (...) the poor hear the
gospel, meaning that the poor be more wylling to hear the gospel: they take
more pain in hea ring gods word then the rich do, for the rich commonly
lest regard the gospel. Look thoroughout al England, and pou shall find it
so. Likewise he says by the Prophet, (...), Euangelizandum pauperibus misit
me, He has sent me is preach the Gospel unto the poor, because the poor
has more pleasure in it: the rich men commonly regard it for nothing:
therefore it is a wonderful thing that such terrible things are written of rich
men, and yet we seek al to be rich, and call them blessed and happy that be so.
But ye herd upon sunday It is met (...) that men be so desirous to be rich
last was, how that these rich fermers made their excuses: they would not
come to the banquet which God had prepared for them, because their richesse did
let them: therefore richesse are called (...) in scripture. As for an
ensample: There be two wais to a town, the one is plain and straight, the other
is full of thorns. Now he that (...) the plain way shall sooner come to his
(...) end, than be that goes the A good similitude and mere to be mar ked.
thorny way: So it is more easyer without riches to come to haven than with
riches: but our nature is so corrupt that we ever desire that thing that may do
us harm. I will not say but men may have riches, and many good men have had
great Mark this you rich men
richesse, yet riches must be had cum tremore, with fear: for it is a
dangerous thing to have them: they be but burdens, they that have them be but
(...) and (...) over the, they must make account for them. And therefore above
all things rich men must have in (...) memory this scripture: (...) si
affluant nolite cor apponere, When riches come upon you, set not your hearts
upon them: use them to such end as God has appointed: with your copy help
the The end why (...) is ge uen to me
(...) of the poor miserable people: and this is our (...) to do. For he that
has riches and helps not the pore withal, but lays them up for him self:
he is a thief before god, There be thieves that get their good des (...)
though he do come rightly and (...) by his goods: for he does not his (...):
he withdraws that from the poor that (...) unto them, for god requires of
the rich to releue and help the poor with his richesse: when he now does
it not, the writers call him a thief. Here ye se what a burden it is to have
riches, therefore let us not be so gredy over them: and when we have them, (...)
us remember that we be but what sort of poor be blessed
gods stuardes and (...) of his treasures.

You must mark here, that our (...) when he says, Blessed (...): he (...) not
the friars poverty, that same wilful poverty: but if you be come to poverty
for confessing of Christ, than thou art blessed. Again, I am a rich man, the
fire comes and takes away my riches. As Job was a rich man, but what happened?
his enemy came and took away altogether: so we may this day be rich, and to
morrow we may be beggars: for the riches be cha^ccable unto us, but not unto
god: for God knows wha^ and to who^ he will give the^ or take them away again.
Now when I come to (...) by chance, so that god sends poverty unto me: tha^
I am blessed wha^ I take poverty well without grndging. And therefore he added
Spirita, in spirit, yt is, to take it in good part with a faithful (...),
knowing that god sends yt same unto (...): so that wha^ we come to (...) by
such chances, or by persecutions, so that I (...) not away my goods
wilfully as the (...)) which was a leaving of riches devised by their own min
des: but else he that does his business according unto his (...), and than god
(...) him with poverty, let him take it with joy and gladness: for these
blessings which Christ promised How poverty is a blelsing and how not.
unto us here in this gospel, shall light upon him, therefore take it so, that
poverty is a blessyng when she is taken with a faithful heart, (...) in deed
it is to no purpose, except it proceed out of faith. Be not egre therefore to
have riches, and when ye have them, that god sends them, set not to much by
them. For Christ says: it is hard for a rich man to come to heaven, speaking
of those which set their herts upon riches: How rich men are (...)
which men in deed be very idolaters: for they put their hope trust and (...)
in them, so that what so ever shall happen, they think they will escape having
money, and so they make money their god, which is a most wicked and abominable
thing in the sight of yt Lord. For god would have us to hang upon him, to trust
in him, be we poor or rich: If we be rich, we should not set our hearts upon
riches: if we be poor we should comfort our selves with this Scripture, Non
est inopia timentibus cum They that fear him shall not lack.

Now the second mile or days journey in this pilgremage The (...) dais (...) or
mile.
is this: Beati qui logent, quoniam ipsi consolabuntur, Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall have comfort. we after our reason esteem the^ happy yt
can make merry in this world; but our savior contrariwise pronounces them
blessed that mourn and weep in this world. We seek all to be in that case
that we might laughe and be merry, for we think that to be a great blessedness:
but our savior pronounces them blessed that (...). And therefore scripture
says, Melius est ire ad domum (...), quam ad (...), It is better to go to the
mournyng house, than to the house of banqueting: for be that goes to sick
folks, it shall be a good (...), it shall make him to consider the fragilitie
and weakness of mankind, and so stir him up to make redye, and not to set
much by this world. S. Paul speaks of two manner of sorowfulnes, the one is
worldly, yt other is ghostly, the world lie sorowfulnes is without faith: as
the wicked (...) they weep they are sorrowful: yet this comfort of which
Christ Whit mourning it is that makes blessed.
here speaks is not promised unto them. (...) wept whau Jacob begiled him,
but his weping was without faith. Truly happy are those that have much
occasion to weep and (...): for Vexatio dat intellectum, vexation and trouble
makes us to know ourselfes, and techeth us to leave sin and wickedness. There
be many which be in great (...), shut out of their houses, or in syckenes, or
other trouble: they shall comfort themselves with this blessyng, which Christ
our savior promised unto them, namely they shall be sure that they shall have
comfort, and (...) of their miseries, for he will not suffer them to be further
tempted then they shall be able to bear: and then in the end they shall have
everlasting comfort. It is a notable answer that Abraham makes to the richman,
when he lay in hellish fire, My son (says he) (...) bona in vita, (...) have
received thy good days in thy lyfes time, now thou shall be punished: But
Lazarus has had miseries, and calamities: and therefore he shall be
comforted We must go from sorrow to joy, and not from one (...) to an other.
now. So we must learn to be content to go from weping to laughyng, from
sorrow (...) felicity: but we (...) first suffer here, we may not go from the
one felicity to the other: therefore s. Hierome says, that he is a delicate
(...) that will not suffer sometimes miseries and calamities. Therefore let us
be content with it, let us bear them with a saithfull heart, elswe shall not
attain to this comfort, for the miseries that the godless have, operantur
(...), they work their own destruction, and cuerlastyng perdition: sor they
can not bear them as they ought to do: they murmr The (...) of (...).
and cry out against god: but the godly when he is in miseries he takes
great profit by it, for miseries drive him to leave sin and wickedness: and
to repent for that which he has (...) against god. Here you may perceive
now that they that will have comfort must go to that pylgrimage, they must
taste miseries, and so at the end they shall have everlasting comfort.

The third mile or days journey is this. Beati mites (...) The third mile or
dais journey.
niam inheritabunt terram, Blessed be the (...) for they shall inherit the
land. This meekenes is such a thing yt whosoever has her, can be quiet in all
things: (...) that has her will not avenge himself. But ye must know there
be two manner (...) manner of (...), the one lauful and the other (...).
of (...). There is a private vengeance, and there is a public vengeance, the
public vengeance is allowed of God: the private is forbidden, for god says
to every (...) man, Mihi vindictam ego (...), Let me have the vengeance, and I
will reward it. When any man does me wrong, I shall or may not avenge me,
nor yet desire in my heart to be avenged upon him, I being a private man and
not a (...). But there is a public vengeance, that is the magistrates, they
must see that wrong doers be punished, and rewarded according to their
misbehaueouis. But I may not avenge my self. For I am blessed when my good is
taken from me wrongfully, and I take it well. For Christ says in (...), they
shall inherit the land, he that for gods sake leaves his land, or his
gooddes: he shall inherit the land: so he shall with leuyng the land
inherit the land: but what shall I do when my good is taken from me?
Answer, go to gods promises, which are (...) accipiet, he shall receive
it again hundredth We must goo to god (...).
fold. The public vengeauuce is committed unto the magistrates, God (...)
unto (...) to punish the transgressoures: and again the (...) or (...) ought
so obey, and to suffer the punishment which the magistrates shall lay upon him:
for so it is written, (...) malum (...) pull. Thou shall take away the ill
from amongst the people. So ye hear how that we may not avenge our selves
when any man does us wrong: yet for all that, this takes not away the liberty
of the use of the law. for a christian man may go to the law, and seek remedy,
yet we must take heed that we go not to avenge our selves upon our neighbor,
with a vengeable heart: nor yet should we not go with a (...) heart, to get
ought (...) our neighbor: else it is lauful to use the law wha^ it is done
with a charitable heart. A (...) man may go to the law but how?
As it is laufull for me being sick to go to the physician without breach of my
faith to godward: but if I should go to the physician in (...) of God, then
this going were a wicked going. So I say, when we will go to the law, we must
beware that it be done charitably, not with a vengeable mind: for whosoever
(...) to be avenged he shall not be blessed of god. Again whosoever suffers
wrong at his neighbors hand, and takes it willyngly, he shall be blessed of
god.

An ensample we have in Joseph: his brethren sold him The (...) ple of (...)
seph to be followed of us.
and handled him most cruelly and tyrannously, what did he? he took it
wyllyngly without any reuengement: what did god? Mary he fulfilled his promise,
inheritabunt terram, they shall inherit the land. Therefore he made him lord
over al Egypt, this did god, and so he will do unto us: but our heart is so
poisoned with the poison of malice, that we think we should be undone, when
we should not avenge our selves, but they that have the spirit of god, and to
whom these blessings pertayne, they (...) charitable, and yet use the law when
necessity shall (...) so, but they will do it with a godly mind.

(...), they shall inherit the land: some (...) the land for eternal life,
but it may be understood of this (...) to: for they that be pacient and
bear and suffer, God will reward them here in this world and yonder to. Now
ye have heard what we shall have when we be meek spirited: let us therefore
set aside all stubburnes, al vengeance hatred and malice, one against another:
so that we may obtain The (...). mile or (...).
that land which Christ promised us. Beati qui (...) and (...) unt (...)
quoniam (...), Blessed be they that hungre and thurst after righteousness, for
they shall be (...). These words be (...) diuersty: it may be (...) so,Blessed
be they that hunger and thurst that is to say, that have so great desire to
righteousness, as a hungry man has to his meat and drink. Some (...) it of
the justice of the soul: for the faithful be ever hungry, they ever think
they be not well, they be (...) behind the hand: and so do not yt hypocrites,
for they have opera supererogationis (...) have (...) have (...) sell.
so much that they are able to sell unto other men to: and bring them to
heaven: But I will (...) these words so. They that hunger, (...) they that
(...) wrong: for when a man suffers wrong and (...), he hungreth and
thirsts to have justice, to come to his right: for it is a common saying,
amongst This sense (...) to (...), and i there fore (...).
the people The law is ended as the (...) is frended. Now he that is so injured
and wronged and has a godly hunger and thurst to righteousness, he shall be
satisfied in this world, and in the world to come he shall have (...) life.
Ensamples we have in scripture. Joseph when he was sold to (...) that great
man, he was a fair young (...): now his (...) Potiphars wife, seeing his
beauty, (...) her love upon him, in so much that he could be no where but she
came after him: but Iosephe (...) God (...) her, and would not commit with
her the filthye act of (...). What follows, she went by and by and made an
out cry and accused him, as though he would have (...) her. So at the length
Joseph was cast into prison, where he hungerd and thurst after righteousness,
after (...),yt is he was desirous (...) gred (...) righteous (...).
to have his right: yet for all yt he took ye matter well and godly, he sought not
for vengeance: we in our own folishnes and mother wits esteem them blessed,
that can (...) the matter so, that the law may go with them, that they may have
theouer (...): they are called blessed which (...) the swinge, which are not
exercised with trouble. I remember I red once a (...) of a (...) bishop.
bishop which came to a rich man's house, where he had good (...), and the
goodman in the house she wed him all his riches and prosperities, his goodly
wife and his fair children: in (...): they lacked nothing at all, he himself
had (...) been sick: the (...) hearing that, thought in his mind no doubt
god is not here: and so commanded his servant to make ready the horses, and
by and by went (...) way. when he came a little far of from the house, he
sends his man back again to fetch a book, which was forgotten behind. when
the servant came the house was sunk. So we see that worldly prosperity makes
us to forget god, and in the end to be (...). (...) that holy man when he
served Laban his un cle and father in law, what wrongs had he? how vniustelye
delte Laban with him? No dout he had great hunger and thirst after
righteousness: therefore God satisfied his appetite, for he blessed him, and
enriched him wonderfullye, against (...) their (...) after (...).
(...) mind. There be few of such servants now a days as (...) was: and
though he had a wicked master, yet he served him (...): I would wish all
servants would follow the ensample of (...). This I speak to make you
patient in tribulation, and to (...) up in you a hunger and thurst after
righteousness: you hear how (...) was blessed in bearyng godly the (...) which
that foolish woman did unto him.

David also (...) what good (...) did he unto king David hu^. (...) nes.
Saul? yet Saul went about to destroy him, think ye not David (...) and
thirsted after rightuousenes? (...) he did, yet he might have (...) himself,
but he would not: for he had this (...) of which Christ our (...) speaks here,
And so consequently (...) the land according unto his promise.

Beati (...) quoniam ipsi (...), The (...) mile or dais iour ney.
Blessed be the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. I will not tarry long
herein, you know which be the works of mercy. I was hungry says Christ,
I was naked. Matthew 25. There is a ghostely mercy: which is, to admonish them
that be in erroures: to bring them to the right way. Item to forgive them
that do me wrong, this is a mercy, and a needful mercy: and therefore
they that wylbee cruel here, so that they will not forgive unto their
neighbors their faults, let them not look (...) must be merciful
for (...) at Gods (...). For we must be merciful, loving, and
comfortable toward our neighbor when we will obtain mercy at gods hands. But
this seems now as though malefactors ought not to be put to death, because god
requires mercy. Sir you must understand that god requires private mercy,
so that private men one shall forgive unto the other: but it is an other matter
with the magistrates, the king and all other magistrates are gods officers,
they must do according as god requires them to do. he says: Auferes (...)
medio populi, nec mise reberis ei, thou shall take away, thou shalt root out
the ill, (them that be malefactors) from amongst the people: and show not
mercy Magistrates may not (...) mercy in judge meant.
unto them. Here were a place to entreat of ministering of justice, if the
audience were thereafter: how justices of peace and other magistrates ought not
to be bolsterers and (...) with wickedness, but punish the malefactors
according to their deserts: Vae qui iustificatis impium, woe be unto you that
iustifye the wicked: to iustifye the wicked, is not to punish the (...): Et
qui iustificat impium and que (...) iustum am Alesson for justices.
(...) abominabiles coram domino, he that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, they are both wicked and abominable before the lord. So
that magistrates ought to punish sin and wyckednes, but private men, one
ought to show mercy unto another: that is, he ought to forgive (...) any man
has done him harm: and so he shall have mercy at gods hand.

(...) mundi cord quoniam ipse videbunt deum, Blessed be the clean of heart:
for they shall see god. By these words we may perceive that we shall not look
to see god, to see our The sixth mile ordais journey.
felicity, when we be impure of heart. We can not come to that inspeakable joy
and felicity which god has prepared for his, except we be clean in our
hearts: therefore David know yng that lesson, says unto god: Cor mundum crea in
me deus. O god make clean my heart within me. But ye will ask how shall our
hearts be purified and cleansed. Answer, Fide purificantur corda, thorough
faith the hearts of Faith puri (...) the heart.
men must be cleansed. They that hear God des word and believe that same
to be true, and live after it, their hearts shall be purified, and so they
shall see GOD.

There be two manner of seeing of GOD: as long as we be here, we must see
him by says, in beleuynge in God is seen here by (...) this (...) face to face
him: (...) we shall see him face to face how (...) is, therefore (...) here,
and see there. And so it appears, that he that will not hear gods word,
and believe the same, that his heart (...) be (...), he shall not see god.

Beati (...) quoniam ipse (...) Dei vocabuntur, Blessed be the peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of The (...).
God. Here is an other journey. There is a law in (...). where god says: Non
erit susurro nec (...) in popu (...). There shall not be a slaunderer or
whisperer amongst you which are my people. But I tell you this law is not
kept: for there be a great number of those which (...) with their tongues,
as though they would (...) into a man's bosom, but behind his back or
before other (...) be (...).
men they betraye him, they lie upon him and doc all they can to bring him
out of estimation: these whisperess be peacebreakers, and not peacemakers: for
the (...) his (...) to pass thorough such fellows, there be many such in
England which tell false tales of others, to promote (...) withal: these be
the (...) of the devil, and no doubt the (...) many children in the world. I
will show you an (...): There was one (...) The history of (...) the (...).
(...), a servant of Saul the king, he was (...) pastorum, the master over
his (...). When David flyeng from Saul, came to the (...) very hungrye (...).
Reg. 22
and werye, and therefore desired some (...), the (...) having none other (...):
but (...) propositionis the holy bread: of that he gave David, and after that
he gave him the sword of Gohath, whom David had killed before. Now this
Doeg being there at that time, what does he? like a (...) or (...) goes to
Saul the king and told him, (...) the (...) had refreshed David in his
journey, and (...) given unto him the (...) of (...): Saul hearing that,
being in a great fury, sent for all the priests and their wyfes and their
children and (...) them all. This Doeg now that (...) was not a peace maker,
Doeg was a peacebreaker.
but a peace breaker: and therefore not a (...) of GOD, but of the devil. I
could (...) you of (...) other (...), of other whisperers, for I have known
some in my time: but all such are the children of the (...), they are not
Gods (...): for Christ our (...) called those Gods children, that are
peacemakers, not them that cut (...) throat. Seeing now that it is so good
a thing to be a peacemaker: (...) all them that be (...) themselves to be
peacemakers: let the (...) show A (...)
(...) to be peacemakers, when they (...) of contentions and (...) between
their tenants: send for them and here their (...), and make him that is faultye
to be (...), and so let them be peacemakers: but there be some gentlemen in
England, which think themselves borne to nothing (...) but to have good cheer
in this world: (...) go a haukynge and huntyng: I would wish they would
(...) them selves rather to be peacemakers, to counsel and healpe A (...)
for all (...).
poor men, and when they hear of any discord to be between neighbors and
neighbors to set them together at (...): this should be rather their
exercise than banquettyng and spending the time in vain: But they will (...),
it is a great pain and labor to meddle in matters, to be a peacemaker. Sir
you must consider that it is a great matter to be a child of God: And
therefore we ought to be content to take pains to be peacemakers, that we may
be the children of god. But in matters of religion we must take heed that we
have such a peace which may stand with god and his word: for it is better to
have no peace at all, then to have it with the loss of gods word. In the time
of the six articles there Peace in po (...) not the right peace.
was a Bishop which ever cried unity, unity: but he would have a (...) unity.
Saint Paul to the (...) says: (...) vnanimes, (...) of one mind: but he
adds Secundum (...) Christum, according to (...) Christ, that is, according
to gods holy word, else it were better war than peace: we ought never regard
unity so much that we would or should forsake gods word for her sake: when we
were in (...) we agreed well, because we were in the kingdom of the devil, we
were in blyndnes. In Turkey we hear not of any discention amongst (...), for
religions sake. The (...) now (...) have no (...), because they be in
blyndenesse. When the rebels were up in Norffolke and Devonshire, they agreed
all, there was no dissencion: but their peace was not Secundum (...) Christum,
according to Jesus Christ. Therefore S. (...) has a (...) saying: Be not de
(...) by the fair (...) of peace,
Speciosum quidem nomen est pacis and pulchra opinio vnitatis. sed (...) eam
solam (...) Ecclesiae pacem esse quae Christi est, It is a goodly word peace,
and a fair thing Unity: but who doutes but this to be the only right peace
of the church, which peace is after Christ, according to his words? Therefore
let us set by unity, let us be given to love and charity: but so that it
may stand with godliness. For peace ought not to be redeemed iactura
veritatis, with We may not lose truth for peace.
loss of the truth: that we would seek peace so much, that we should lose the
truth of Gods word. Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter (...), Blessed
be they that suffer The eight (...) journey.
persecution for righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. This
is the last journey, when we be demanded of our faith, and examined, and
afterward be forced to believe as they will, when we come to that point:
Blessed are we when we suffer rather all extremities than forsake the truth,
yea we shall esteem it to be a great blessedness wha^ we (...) in such trouble.
And not only this, but who (...) suffers any thing for any manner of
righteousness sake: blessed A questmo^ger may be happy.
is he, the questmonger doing uprightly his duty in dischargyng of his
conscience: now he shall have displeasure, happy is he: and he shall have his
reward of God.

Beati cum maledixerint vobis homines and dice. Blessed are ye when men speak
ill of you. (...) merces vestra multa est. etc. Be merry, because your reward
is great in heaven. Now ye have heard which is the way to heaven, what manner
a pylgremage we must go: Namely first by spiritual poverty, by hunger and
thirst after righteousness, An itineral vvherin the way to hea uen is set forth
plain (...).
by mekenes and lenity, by weeping and waylyng, by pity and mercyfulnes. Item
we must have a clean heart: Item we must be peace makers: Item we must suffer
tribulation and affliction. Than shall the end be, Merces vestra (...) multa
in coelis, your reward shall be great in heaven. Merces, this word sounds
as though we should merit somewhat by our own works: for reward and merit
are correspondent, one follows the other: when I have merited, than I ought to
have my reward. But we shall not think so: for ye must understand, that all
our works are imperfect: we can not do them so perfectely as the law
requires, because of our flesh which ever lets us. Wherefore is the
kingdom of god called than a reward? because it is merited by Christ: for as
touching our salvation and eternal Christ has merited for us.
life, it must be merited, but not by our own works, but only by the merits
of our (...) Christ. Therefore believe in him, trust in him: it is he that
merited heaven for us: yet for all that every man shall be rewarded for his
good works in everlasting life: but not with everlasting life. For it is
written, Vita aeterna donum Dei, The everlasting life is a gift of god.
Therefore we should not esteem our works so perfect as though we should or
could merit heaven by them: yet god has such pleasures in such works which
we do with a faithful heart: that he promises to reward the^ in everlasting
life. Now to make an end, I desire you in gods behalf, remember this
pilgremage which I have taught you, set not light by it: for it is our sauiors
own doctrine, he with his own mouth taught us this pilgremage: when we will
now follow him, and do according as he teaches us, than all these blessyngs,
of which mention is made, shall light upon us: and in the end we shall obtain
everlasting life. which grant both you and me, God the father through his
only son our savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The third Sermon of master Latymers. Ephesians. 6. cap.
DE caetero Fratres, confortamini in Domino, and in potentia virtutis eius,
induite vos armaturam Dei, My brethren be strong in the Lord, and thorough
the power of his might, put on all the armor of GOD, that ye may stand
against all the assaults of the devil. For we wrestle not against blood and
flesh, but against rule, against power, against Paul (...). keth (...) of
gods people.
worldly rulers. Saint Paul that elect instrumente of God, takes muster of
gods warriors: and (...) christen people to war, tells them plainly that
they must be Job. 7.
warriors, as it is written in the book of Job: Militia est vita hominis super
terram, The life of a man or woman is nothing else but a warfare, it is nothing
but a continual battailyng and warring. Not very long ago I entreated of a
pilgremage I told you at yt time of yt very godly and gostly pilgremage, and
such a pilgremage, which all saints whilst they were in this world walked: they
went al to yt pilgremage: but it is a (...), an uneasy way to walk: but we
must needs go it, there is no remedy, either we must go that peinful
pilgremage, or else never go to heaven: for we may not go from (...) to (...)
and pleasure, but from sorrow and misery to (...): we We may not look for
joy here and hense to.
may not look to have here good cheer, and yonder euerlalasting life: for we
may not look for joy and ioly cheer at both sides. We have no such promise
of Christ our savior: he promised unto us that we should be sufferers here in
this world, and than in the world to come we shall have life everlasting:
therefore let us be content, for though it be a hard (...), yet there shall be
a good end of it. Like as when a man goes a great journey, and laboreth very
sore, but in the end A similitude.
he comes to good chere, than all his labor is forgotten. So we shall come at
the end to that (...) which no (...) has seen, no ears has heard, nor heart
perceived, which God has prepared for his elect.

Now here in this epistle S. Paul tells us of a certain (...): he takes
mustre, not only of the Ephesia^s, to who^ this epistle is written, but also of
us which be christians: for all that is required of them is required of us. The
first point The (...) of a (...).
that pertains to this warfare is to be strong and bardye: and this is a
commandment, as who say, you that be christians that be baptized in his name,
that look to be saved through Christ, I command you be strong, ye may not be
weaklynges: for ye must fight hard, there is neither man nor woman but they
must fight, they must come to that battle, and we may not be weaklings,
because we have a strong (...): now he that has a strong and mighty enemy,
ought not to be weak and fearful. For if he be, he shall be soon overcome and
vanquished. Therefore saint Paul would have us strong, that we may be able to
fight against that fearful enemy the devil. But for all that saint Paul
would not have us to stand to our own strength, to think to vanquish this
mighty enemy by our own power or might: No not so, for when we We must not
trust in our (...) strength.
put our hope in our own strength, we shall soon (...), he shall have the
victory by and by: we shall put our hope trust and confidence in god, and
trust through Christ our savior to overcome this ennemie. We may not do as
one Ajax did, whom his father sends forth with a company of men to warfare,
geuyng him good and holsom lessens and instructions that he should put his hope
and trust in god at all times, then he should have luck: Ajax (...) and said
unto his father, It is not a great matter to get the victory with the help of
god, yea the fearefullest and weakest man can get the victory when god helps
him: But I will get the victory with my own strength: without the help The
(...) of Ajax.
of god, I am able to fight: such (...) spoke this (...). But we shall not do
so, as he did, (...) in our own strength: for when we do, we shall come to
short, we shall lose the victory, to our eternal destruction. (...). (...)
says: (...) in domino, Be strong in the Lord: we (...) be strong by a borrowed
strength: for we of our own (...) are to weak and feeble: Therefore let us
learn (...) (...) strength (...).
shall (...) our strength, namely from above: for we (...) it not of our own
selves. Now he says: Put on all the (...) of God: you know that wha^ a man
goth to war, and is harnessed all (...), except at (...) place: If his enemy
(...) this bare place, he wounds him as soon as though he had no harness at
all: therefore S. Paul commanded us, that (...) must (...) no (...) of (...) our
we shall have the whole (...), nothing (...): for we may not go with pieces,
having one thing, and lackyng the other. For when we be wounded we shall do but
(...) good after. Wherefore does S. Paul require such strength and such The
cause why (...) Paul (...) us to be (...) and (...).
weapons, and teaches us to fight? Answer: to yt end that we may (...) and
pull down yt devil, yt we may strive against him, lest peradventure he
overcome us and bring us in danger of our souls: for ye know, in battle as
long as a man stands he is well, he has hope to escape: but as soon as he
is down, then he is in ieopardy of his life. So likewise as long as we stand
and fight against the devil, we are well, but wha^ we fall then we are in
danger, lest he get the victory over us therefore he would have us to stand
against the assaults of the devil. Now you must consider what manner an enemy
he is that fights against us: and first consider his power: scripture says
Non est potestas, there is no power in earth, which Job. 41.
may be compared unto his power. Now that strong fellow is gods enemy and
ours, therefore (...). Paul bids us to be strong and armed round about: but
to do on our own harneis, that we may not: but we must do on the armor of god:
It must be gods armor that we must put on.
which he has appointed for us: therefore we must not learn of the devil to
fight, he shall not teach us to battle: for it were like as when we would
fight against the Scotts, and had none other harneis, but as they appointed
unto us. No doubt if we were in that case, they would appoint such weapons
We may not take such weapons as the devil will appoint us.
for us, that they might get the victory, and give us an overthrow. So when we
should fight against the devil, and had none other weapons, but as he
appointed unto us. No doubt he would soon give us an overthrow: for he would
appoint weapons wherewith we could not overcome him and withstand his power.

Further the diligence of the devil is expressed and declavnto 1. Peter. 5.
us by the mouth of S. Peter which says: he goes about like a roryng lion,
seeking whom he may devour: he uses al crafts and deceytes, he compasses
the matter hither The devil (...) matters.
and thither: till at the length he brings his matters to passefor he is no
sluggard, no sleeper nor negligent: but he applies his matte rs and businesses
to the uttermost. Now that he is subtle, it appears in holy scripture. for so
it is written: Serpens Gene. 3.
erat calidior caeteris animahbus, the serpent was wiser then the other beasts
were. Here apeared his wits, suttel The (...) has had (...)
ties and crafts, over that he has had a great and long time to exercise
himself withal, he has had five thousand five hundred and. (...). years,
such a long time he has had to exercise him self withal. Theriore it is not
in vain that saint Paul would have us to be hearty and strong, and fight with
a good courage. This devil was ones an angel in heaven, and for pride he was
cast down: for he went about to exalt him Diuelles were Angels.
self above GOD, therefore he was pulled down, and all his company with him,
all the angels that took his part, and so he fell with a great number: they fell
down from heaven, and here they be in the air: yet they be invisible unto us,
because they be spirits: but for all that they be amongst us, and about us,
to let us of good things, and to move us to naughtynesse: I am not able to
tell how many thousand be here amongst us now in this chamber: and no doubt
some were busy to keep some men away from the hearing of the word of God: for
their nature is either to keep men away from hearing of Gods word, so that they
shall not hear at Note what the devils nature is.
all: or else at the least way, they occupy men's heads with other busynes: so
that they shall here it without profit. Now when he brings the matter to
pass according to his mind: then he reioyseth wonderfully with his company.
So that the writers say, that if (...) could see them, we should (...) the^ to
hoppe and dance upon our heads for gladness, because they Devils re (...) when
they do (...)
have done unto us a mischief. We see them not, they be (...) as I told you
before, but no dout here they be for our exercise: for it were a small thing
to believe well, if there were nothing mouyng to the contrary. Therefore it is so
ordained of God that we should have war, yea and nothing but war, a
standing war, and not only for men, but also (...) men and (...) must fight.
for women: for the women must battle and fight with this horrible enemy as
well as men. And he is stronger than we be, when we be alone, so that we shall
not be able to give him an overthrow. But when Christ is with us, than he
can do nothing at all, because Christ has vanquished his power and might:
therefore his impotencie appeared in the. (...). of Matthew, when our savior came
in the region of the Gergesites, Math. (...). The devils pow (...) is (...) ed.
there came two men unto him possessed of the devil, and they cried and said,
Jesus thou son of David, wherefore art thou come before the time to afflict us:
where it appears that they tremble and are fearful when Christ is present.
therefore they say: Cur venisti ante tempus? Wherefore (...) thou come before
thy time? the deuilles know that they be (...) and that they must go to
hell: yet they that be here have not yet appointed vntothem their places, and
though (...) have the pains with them, yet they have it not so fully and
perfectly as they shall have at the last day. And their greatest The diuil les
have not their full (...) tes before the last day.
joy and comfort is to do us harm: for they know that they be fallen for
(...), so that they shall never attain to that (...) which they have had. And
again they know that we shall come thither, and therefore they envy god and
us: but their (...) appears, for they take it for a (...) to be (...): It is
a great grief unto them, yet they are not able to strive against the
commandment of Christ. Therefore we need not to fear them since Christ is with
us, they are weak We need not to fear the devils.
enemies, when we put on our arms which S. Paul describes here: for all the
deuilles in hell or in earth are not able to fight against one of those that
has these armours: for ye see he dare not disobey Christ, commaundyng him to
go out of the man. Now when he perceived that he could do no more harm unto
the man, than he desired Christ to let him go into the swyne: where appears
partly his (...) that he could not go without Christ's permission: partelye
his mischeuous mind apeareth, for wha^ he sees that he can do us no harm in
our bodies, then he goes about to hurt us in our goods.

But when we have Christ with us, he is not able to hurt What it is to have
Christ with us.
us neither of our souls, bodies, or goods: that is when we becue in Christ.
For to have Christ with us, is nothing else but to believe and trust in him, to
seek aid and help by him, against Math 28
our enemy the devil. Therefore Christ says to al his saithfull, to all those
that believe in him, Ego sum vobiscum (...); ad consu^mationem (...), I am with
you till to the end of the world, to (...) you, to help you, to (...) you, and
to here your prayers when ye call upon me: therefore though we cannot withstand
this enemy by our own power, yet with Christ's help we shall chase him and put
him back, make him ashamed of his enterprise and purpose.

Non est (...) lucta cum carne and sangnine, we have not to fight with blood
and flesh. Here the Anabaptists make very Anabapti stes mis. take this place.
much (...) intendyng to prove by these words of Saint Paul, that no
Christian man may fight or go to warrefare. Neither may there be any
magestrates (say they) which should shed blood, and punish the wicked
for his wyckednes. But these fond fellows are much deceived in their own
wits. for saint Paul's mind is clean contrary unto their saings, S. Paul
teaches here, how al christian people must fight, but not so that one should
fight with another: but he speaks here of a singular fight, we may not fight
one with another: though my neighbor does me wrong, yet I may not fight
with him, and avenge my self upon him: for god says, (...) vindictam and ego
retribuam, let me have the vengeance and I will reward it, and no dout God will
reward the wicked for his wickedness, either by him self, or else by the (...).
Some there be that be punished by the magistrates for their (...): and again
there be some which escape hanging in this world: yet for all that God
punishes them, either with sickness, or else other ways. But ye must know
that there is a private vengeance, and a public: the private vengeance is,
when a man goes about to avenge himself upon his neighbor, which The private
(...) is (...).
thing is inhibited here by these words of S. Paul, Non est nobis lucta cum
(...) and sanguine, we have not to fight with flesh and blood, but there is a
public vengeance that is the magistrates: the magistrates ought to fight and
to punish when he (...) cause, he may and ought to stryke malefactors with the
sword, for S. Paul says: est ministri dei ad vindictam, the magistrate is a
minister of god to punish. The lord (...).
Ite^, in an other place scripture says iustus (...) and (...), the lord is
(...) and he loves justice: therefore yt foolish (...) ar much deceived: for
this place takes not away al (...) of fightings, but only yt private fighting,
but yt magi strate may draw his sword and strike: and certeuly every (...)
Cases (...)
and ruler, every king may defend his realm, chase and put by the inuadours.
Again yt (...) ar bound in (...) to fight wha^soeuer they be required of their
king and lord, and (...) yt man yt so fights being laufully called (...), he
(...) god, he is gods servant: but above al things yt magistrates, the King
must see that his quarrel be good and laufull, before he proceed to shed
christian blood. For they bear gods sword, not to do harm, but good, to
punish and strike the wicked, and defend the good. Therefore as I said before,
the Anabaptists can not prove by that scripture, that there shall be no
magistrates nor bettelynges: or that magistrates may not draw their swords
against those that trespass. But subjects may not of their own private (...)
take yt sword, or rebel against their king: for when they rebel The sub (...)
may not rebel
they serve the devil: for they have no commission of God so to do, but of
theyrowne head they rise against God, that is, against the king, to whom
they (...) obedience, and so worthily be punished. Therefore good christen
people beware of rebellyng against your sovereign lord the King: but when
there be rebels or inuaders, and ye be called of the king to withstand them, go
with a good will and conscience: and be well assured, that it is gods service
in withstanding the rebels or the kings enemies: and no doubt he that
resuseth at such a time to serve the king, or cls is slow in seruyng, that
curse shall lyghten upon him, y^ god theatnethby his holy prophet Jeremy,
saying: Male dictus qui facit opus Iere, 48
(...), and maledictus qui gladium suum abstinet Who so refuses to (...) some
case is a (...) of god.
a sanguine, Cursed be he that doothe the work of the Lord negligently, and
cursed be he that kept his sword from bloodshedyng. And no doubt that man that
dies so in sightyng against the kings enemy, he dies in gods service, in
gods quarrel. But yet I would not have men to call them selves, or come
without calling: I would have them to (...) till they be (...): for when they
be called, they be authoused, they have a vocation of God to go. But against
rule, against power, against worldly rulers: with these names S. Paul
describes the devil, signifyeng unto us his might and power when god (...)
and (...) him. And than he is subtle, therefore he says that we must fight
against the spiritual craftiness, which craftines (...) all the craftynesse:
he is (...) and ready to all mischiese, his (...) is wonderful, his (...) is
unspeakable. The devil (...)


In (...), in the element, we read in scripture that the souls are called
Volucres caeli, the souls of the heaven, that Psalm. (...).
is in the parts of the air, here amongst us. So the devil is here amongst
us in the midst part of the air, ready (...) to move us against god:
whenever he can espy his time, he The devil loses no time.
spares not, he loses no time. As for an (...), when the (...) perceive (...)
to be given to swearing and cursing: (...) ever minister matiers unto him, to
(...) him in his cursing, and to prick him forward: (...) they perceive one to
be ge uen to proudenes, they ever move his heart to go forward in yt same: when
they see or (...) any man grue^ to carding or vicing, or to lcchery, or to
other manner of wickedness: he sleeps not, he is ever ready at hand: for he has
a thousand wais to hurt us, and so bring us to mischief: in so much yt we are
not able to stand against him, when we have not gods (...) where with we may
strike him. Therefore s. Paul says, that we must fight against rulers, he
describes unto us the great power that the devil has: for what is mightier
then rulers To what end saint Paul gives such names to the devil.
and potentates be? therefore to the intent that we might perceive his mighty
power he named him by that name, to that end to make us carnest to put on the
armours, and take the weapons which god has appointed for us: else we shall
soon have an overthrow: if we will take such weapons as the devil shall
apoint us, as he has done in times past. For what The weapons that the devil
us use. have us use.
a trust and confidence have we had in holy water, and holy bread: Item in
ringing of holy belles, and such foolertes: but it was good sport for the
devil: he could laughe and be metye at our foolishnes: yea, and order the
matter so, to keep us in the same error. For we read in stories, that at
sometimes the devil went away from some men, because of the holy wa ter, as
though that holy water had such strength and power The sutteltie of the devil.
that he could not abide it. O crafty devil: he went away, not for sear of the
holy water, but because he would mayntaine men in error and foolishnes. And no
doubt it was the devils teaching, the using of this holy water. It was not
long ago, sense I being with one of my neighbors that was sick, there came in
an old woman: And when she saw the man sore A good me (...) for a sick man.
sick, she asked whether there were no holy water to be gotten? see here the
foolishnes of the people, which amiddes in the light of gods most holy word,
will follow such fantasies and delusions of the devil: ye know when there was
a storm or a fearful wether, tha^ we ring yt holy belsthey were they that must
make all things well: they must drive The rin ging of ho (...) belles.
away the devil. But I tell you, if the holy belles would serve against the
devil (or that he might be put away thoroughe their sound: no doubt we would
soon banish him out of all England. For I think if all the belles in England
should be rongen together at a certain hour, I think there would be almost
no place, but some belles might be heard there. And so the devil should have
no abiding place in Eng land, if ringing of belles would serve: but it is not
that that will serve against the devil: yet we have believed such fooleries in
times past, but it was but mockyng: it was the teaching The devil taught us
(...) ho ly belles.
of the devil. And no dout we were in a miserable case when we learned of the
devil to fight against the devil. And how much are we bound to God, that he
has deliueres us from these gross ignorances, and has taught us how we
should fight and prevail against this enemy. Yet it is a (...) thing to se
that there be some amongst us, which would We desire (...) more then the word
of god An history.
feign have the old foolries again: they are awery of the word of God, they can
not away with it: they would rather have have their crossynges, and setting up
of candles, and such foolries then the word of God. I was ones called to one
of my (...): it was at that time when I had taken degree at Cambridge, and was
made master of art, I was called (I say) to one of my kynsfolke, which was very
sick, and died immediately after my coming. Now there was an old cousyn of
mine, which after the man was dead gave me a wax candle in my hand, and
commanded me to make certain crosses over him that was dead: for she thought
the devil should run away by and by. Now I took the candell, but I could not
cross him as she would have me to do, for I had never seen it before. Now she
perceiuyng that I could not do it, It was pi (...) La (...) had gone so long
to sehole.
with a great anger took the candell out of my hand, saying: It is pity
that thy father spends so much money upon thee, and so the took the candle,
and crossed and blessed him, so that he was sure enough. No doubt she thought
that the devil could have no power against him. This and such like things were
nothing but illusions of yt devil: yet for all that we put our trust so in them,
yt we thought we could not be saved without such things. But now let us give
god most hearty thanks, that he has delivered us from such snares and
illusions of the devil: and let us endruor our sclues most earnestly to hear
gods most holy word and to live after it. Now to the armors, here is the armor
of gods (...) for man and woman.

When a man shall go to battle, commonly he has a great girdle with an
aporne of maile going upon his knees, than he has a breast plate: than for the
nether part be has high shoen: and than he must have a bucklar to keep of
his enemies strokes: than he must have a salette wherewith his head may be
saved: And finally he must have a swoorde to fight withal, and to hurt his
ennemy. These are the weapons The parts of armor and (...).
that commonly men use when they go to war: of such (...) S. Paul would have
us to be prepared. Therefore whosoever ever will go to this spiritual war, and fight
against yt devil, he must have such wepo^s, truth, justice, ready to here gods
word faith, salvation in gods word. They yt be armed in such wise Job was
(...) armed
yt devil can nothing do against them. As it appeared in the holy man Hiob,
whom the devil could not tempt further than he had leave of God. Whereby we
gather, that wha^ we stand to gods armor, we shall be able to quench the
assaults of this old serpent the devil. Now the first point of this armor is
truth and verity: from which truth the devil is fallen, he and all his
com-pany. For it is written, in veritate non stetit, he abode not in the truth.
He was in the truth, but he fell from it, he remained not in it: for with lieng
and (...) With lying (...) devil deceived man.
he deceived our gra^dmother Eve wha^ he desired hec to eat of yt forbidden
fruit: affirmyng and most surely promising unto her ((...) hec husband Adam)
that they should be gods after they had eaten of the apple, (...) was a falls
lie. Therefore it is written of him, Mendax est, and (...) rei pater, He is a
liar, and a father of yt same. O that all liars would consider what an horrible
thing it is in yt face of god to tell false tales, they have The devil is
father (...) liars.
cause to be weary of their estate: for the beuil is their father, and they be
his children. Truly it is an yil favored thing to be the child of the devil:
for the devil (...) an ill reward to his children, everlasting perdition is
their inheritance, whi ehe they shall have of their father, Cum mendacium (...)
ex (...) loquitur, when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his Many sore
sentences (...).
own, for he himself is nothing else but falshod. Othere be ma ny sore sentences
in scripture against liars, and falls tale tellers. (...) says, perdes omnes
quiloquu^tur mendatiu^, thou (...) destroy al them that speak lies. Therefore
S. Paul exhorts us to this truth, to leave lies and falshode. he says
Deposito (...) veritatem loquimini (...); cum proximo (...). 4.
suo, Set aside all lies, and speak the truth every one with his neighbor.
I pray god we may learn this lesson of S. Paul, and fold we it, and practice
it: for no doubt we use full of lies. Consider and examine all estates, and ye
shall find all their doings furnished with lies: Go first to men of
occupations, consider their lives and conuersations, there is in a manner
nothing with the^ but lying. Go to men of authority, go to lawiers, you shall
synde stuff enough: For it is seen now a days that children learn pretelye
of their parents to lie: for the parents are not ashamed to lie in presence
All estates are full of lyeng.
of their children. The (...) man or merchaunte man teachech his prentise to
lie, and to utter his wares with lying and forswearing. In summa, there is
almost nothing (...) us but lies, and therefore parents and masters are in great
danger of eternal (...), for they care not how they bring up they and youth in
godliness or other ways: they care not for it. Therefore Note this (...) ye
(...) there is.
I erhort you in gods behalf, consider the matter, ye parents: (...) not your
children (...) lie or teil (...): when ye here one of your (...) to (...) a
lie, (...) him up and give him (...). (...). good (...), and tell him yt it is
naught: and when he makes an other lie. give him (...). (...). stripes, and I
am sure when you serve him so, he will leave (...) it is a common saying: Vex
(...), (...) gives understanding. (...) make children leave lying
But we see now a dais yt parents (...) wha^ their (...) ca^ make a pretty lie:
they say, he will be a pretty witty fellow he ca^ make a pretty lie: so much is ye
word of god regarded amongst us. So likewise prentises can do nothing but
lie: and the (...) master (...) man.
better he can lie, the more is ve regarded of his (...), and the more
acceptable, and therefore there was never such false bode as there is now: for
the youth is so brought up in lies and falsehod: For we se daily what falshod
is abroad, how every man deceives his neighbor: There will no writing serve
now adays, every man works craftily with his neighbor. In the old time there
were some folks not ashamed to preach in the open pulpit unto the people, how
long a man should lie in purgatory. Now to defend their lies, they said it
was done to a good purpose, to make the people afraid to beware of sin and
wyckednes. But what says God by the prophcte, Nunquid eget dominus mendatio,
vt God (...) not our lies.
pro illo loquamini mendacium? Has the Lord need of lies, that ye will go
and make lies in his name: You may perceive now how necessaris a thing it is
to be in the truth, to be upright in our dealyngs. For S. Paul requires truth
not only in judgments, that judges shall judge according to cquitie and
conscicuce, but also he requires that we be true God requires all to be (...)
in the (...). con. uersations.
in all our conuersations and doyngs, words and deeds. And so Christ him self
required the same of us in the. v. of Math. Sit sermo vester est est, non non,
let your sayings be yea yea, no no: he says two times yea yea, to signify
unto us, that Math. 5.
it shall be with us so, that when we say yea with our tongue, why Christ said
yea yea, nay nay.
than it shall be in the heart yea too. Again when we say No with our tongue,
that the heart be so to: therefore he says two times yea yea, no no: to
signify that the heart and mouth shall go together. And therefore it
appears that we be in a pitiful case, far from that that god would have us
to be. For there be some that be so used to lies, that they can do nothing else.
And as the common saying is, A lie is the better when A proverb to true.
it comes in their mouth. Well, I will show you an ensample, which shall be
enough to fear us from lyeng. In the primitive (...) al liers (...) this
story.
church, when there was but few which believed: and amongst them there was a
great meny of poor people: therefore they that were rich used to sell their
goods, and brought the money to the apostles, to that end that the poor might
be relieved. There was some that did such things sunply and uprightly with a
good heart. Now there was a certain (...) as a car. nal (...)
man called Anamas, and his wife called Saphira, they were christians, but they
sought nothing but worldly things, as some of us do now adays: they thought
it should be a world Would to god this (...) not prouedtrue in a great number
of us.
ly kingdom: as there be many gospellers now adays, which seek nothing by
the gospel, but their own gaynes and preferments. Now this man with his wife,
seeing other sell their goods, thought they would get a good name too: they
went and sold their lands, yet they were asrayd to bring all the money to
the Apostles, mistrustyng left this religion should not endure long: therefore
they thought it wisdom to keep some what in store, when necessity should
require. Well, Keep some what for a fonle day
they go and bring a part of the money to Peter: and the other part they kept
for themselves, (...) to Peter that it was the whole money. Now Peter having
knowledge by the holy ghost of this falsehode, said unto him when he ca^me with
the money: Cur Satan impleuit cor tuum vt mentireris spiritui sancto, How
chanced it that the devil has filled thy heart, that thou should lie unto
the holy ghost? was it not thy own good? And thou come and say it is
all, when it was but a part. Non hominibus, thou have not lied unto men, but
unto god. What follows? (...) hearing that A (...) example for liars to (...)
head (...).
by and by fell down and died out of hand: so that S. Peter killed him with
his words. After that his wife came and told the same tale, and received like
reward for her lys. Now I pray you who has such a flynty and stony heart that
will not be afraid to make lies? But what means it that god punishes not
lies so openly now as he did than? Answer, That god punishes not lies now,
he does not because he has a delight in lies, more at this time the^ he had at
the same time, for he is an immutable unchangeable god. He taryeth The cause
why (...) nis (...) not liars (...) as he did in Anadias.
and punishes not by and by, because he would have us to repent and leave
our wickedness, lies and falsehode: if we will not repent, then he will come
one day and make an end with us, and reward us according unto our deserving.
And this is commonly our nature, that when we have made one lie, we must make
twenty other to defend that one.

This is now the (...) armor that we should have, namelye truth. S.
Augustyne writes very terriblye of lyinges, and against those that use
lying. There be some that make a dcfe^ce between a gesting lie and an earnest
lie: A gesting lie maked. v; to for. sake god.
But I tell you, it is good to abstain from them both, for god is the
truth, whenne we forsake the truth we for sake God. Now the second weapon is
to be Just, to give every man that which we owe unto him: to the king that
whithe pertameth unto him, to our landelordes what we owe A great (...) keth
that nothing is so evil pe^t as that the person or curate (...)
unto them, to our curate or person, what pertains unto him: and though the
curate be unlearned and not able to do his duetye, yet we may not withdraw
front him of private authority that thing which is appointed unto him by
common authority. No not so, we ought to let him have his duetye, but when
he is naught or unapt to be in the place of a curate, than we may complain to
the ordinary and desire We may not requit (...) vvrong.
a better for him. So likewise beetwene married folks, there shall be justice,
that is to say, they shall do their duties, the man shall love his wife,
shall honor her, shall not be rigorous, but admonish her lovingly: Again
the wise shall be obedient loving and kind toward her husband, not prouokyng
him to anger, with ill and naughtye words. Further Justice by. death (...).
(...) es to d. their duty: one to an other.
the parents ought to do justice toward their children, to bring them up in
godliness and vcrtue, to correct them when they do naught: likewise the
children ought to be obedient unto their parents, and he willing to do
according unto their commandment. Item the masters ought to do Justice
unto their servants, to let them have their meat and drink, and their
wages: again the servant ought to be (...) in their masters business, to do
them truly, not to be eye servants. Likewise the subjects ought to be
obedient to their king and magistrate: again the king ought to do justice, to
see that justice have place: Finally one neigh boure ought to have Justice
with another: that is, to give him, what pertayneth unto him: not to deceive
him in any thing, but to love him, and to make much of him: when we do so,
thenare we sure we have the second part of this armor of GOD: (...), we must
be shoed, we must have shoen, that is to say, we (...) be ready to hear gods
holy word, we must have good affections to hear The third arm ouris (...)
shoes that is a (...) dines to hear the word of god.
gods word, and we must be redye to make provision for the furtheraunce of the
preaching of gods holy word, as far forth as we be able to do. Now all
these that have such lusts and desires to gods word. Item all those that are
content to maynetayne the office of preaching, to find scholars to schole, all
these have their battailyng shoen, which Saint Paul required of them.

Now when we be shoed, we must have a bucklar, that is faith, and this must be
a right faith, a faith according unto The buck ler of (...)
gods word: for the Turks have their faith, so like wise the Jews have
their faith. Item the false Christians have their faith, but they have not the
right faith, not that faith of which Saint Paul speaks here, but they
have (...) men dace, a false faith, a deceiuable faith, for it is not grounded
in gods word: therefore the right says ca^ not be gotten except by gods
word. And the word works not, has no Who they be that have this buckler.
commodities, except it be taken with faith. Now we may try our selves
whether we have this faith or not, if we lie in sin and wickedness, care not
for gods word and his holy commandments, but live only according to our
lusts and appetites, tha^ we haue^ ot this faith: wha^ we be slouthful, wha^
we be whoremo^gers, swearers or vumerciful unto the poor, the^ we have not
this faith, as long as we be in such (...) sins, but if we hear gods word,
believe and be (...) to live after it, leave our sins and (...), tha^ we have
that faith of which S. Paul speaks here, then we shall be able to quench the
fyery arrows of the devil. So yehaue heard what the armor of god is,
namelye truth, Justice, readiness to hear gods word, and faith: but this
faith must not be only in our mouth, in our tongue, but it must be in our
hands: that is to say, we must not only talk of the gospel, but also we
must follow it in our conuersations and (...).

Now than we must have a helmet, a salet, that is salvation, The hell met of
(...).
whatsoever we do we must consider, whether it may further or let us of our
salvation, when it may let thee of thy salvation leave it, when it may further
thee, the^ do it, so throughout (...) our lives we must have a respect whether
our doings may stand with our salvation or not.

When we are now ready and armed round about, so that our enemy can not hurt
us, than we must have a sword in our hands to (...) withal, and to overcome
our ghostly ene my. what manner of sword is this? Mary it is gods word, it is
a spiritual sword, which all people ought to have. Here ye here that all men
and women ought to have that sword, that is the word of god, wherewith they
may fight against the devil. Now I pray you, how could the lay people have
We may not lack this sword
that sword, how could they fight with the devil, when al things were in
Latin, so that they could not understand it? Therefore how needful it is for
every man to have gods words, it appears here: for only with the word of God
we must fight against the devil, which devil entendeth daily to do us
mischief: how could now the unlearned fight against him, when all things were in
latin, so that they might not come to the understanding of gods word.
Therefore let us Only gods word is our weapon against the devil.
give god most hearty thanks that we have gods word, and let us thankfully use
the same: for only with gods word, we shall avoid and chase the devil and with
nothing else. Our Savior when he was tempted, what were his weapons wherewith
he fought, nothing else but gods word.

When the devil tempted him, he ever says: Scriptum est it is written: when
the devil would have him to cast him self down from the temple, he said
unto him: Scriptum est Christ over came the with this (...).
non (...) dominum Deum tuum, It is written: Thou shalt not tempt thy lord
god, that is to say, we may not put god to do that thing miraculously when it
may be done other ways. Again, upon the mountain when the devil would have
him to worship him, he said Scriptum est, It is written, thou shall honor thy
god only. So likewise we must have gods word to fight with the devil: and
to withstand his temptations and assaults: as when the devil moves me to
commit adultery I must fight against him with the word of god: Scriptum est, it
is written, thou shall not (...) adultery: Thou devil thou shall not be able
to bring me unto it, to do against my lord God. So likewise when the devil
moves me to make lies, I must confou^d him with gods Say the truth and shame
the (...)
word. S. Paul says: Veritate loquimini (...); cum proximo suo, speak the
truth every one with his neighbor: as there is a common saying amongst us,
Say the (...) and shame the devil, so every one, man and woman must fight
against the dyuel. But we (...), we have a greater and higher degree, we are
magistrates, we have the spiritual sword of god, in a higher degree then the
common people: we must rebuke other men, and spare no man: our office is to
teach every man the way to heaven. And whosoever will not follow, but lives
still in sin and (...): him ought we to stryke and not to spare: like as John
Baptist did when he said, to the great and proud king (...), non licet tibi,
Sir it becomes not thee to do so. So we preachers must use gods (...)
preacher has (...) to strike (...) sword of gods word
word to yt correction of other (...) sins: we may not be flatterers or
clawbackes; other people yt have not this vocation may exhort every one his
neighbor, to leave sins: but we have the sword, we are auctorised to stryke
them with gods word.

Now the last part of this armor is prayer, and I warrant you, it is not left
out: for it is the christen man's special weapon, wherewith to stryke the devil,
and vanquishe his assautes: and if we be weak and feel our selves not able to
withstand our enemy, we must fall to prayer, which is a sure remedy, to (...)
god to help for his own sake, and for Christ's sake, for his promise sake: for
he were not god if he should not keep his promises therefore Christ commands
us to pray alwais when we have need, and no dout there is neuera time but we
have (...), either for our selves, or else for our neighbors: therefore to
pray we have need and we shall overcome the devil with faithful prayer. For
prayer is the principal weapon, wherewith we must fight against the devil. I
spoke Prayer is the (...)
of faithful prayer: for in times paste we took bibling babbling for (...), wha^
it was nothing less: and therefore (...). Paul addoth (...) in spirit. We must
pray in spirit with a penitent (...): for there is no man that has an ill
conscience that does pray in spirit: he yt is a whoremo^ger or a swearer, a
carder or (...). a dronkard or such like, that (...), his prayer has no
(...) as long as he is in purpose of sin, he can not pray (...) can not pray
the^ he is unarmed, he has not these wea pons of which s. Paul speaks here:
but he yt has a penitent heart, is content to leave his sins and wickedness,
that same is he whose prayers shall be heard. And when we pray we may The mind
must pray if we shall be heard.
not do it waueringly or rashly wout consideration, our mouth speaking, and the
heart being occupied with other matters, we may not do so: we must pray with
great earnest and ferue^tnes. At the last (...) he has set out the properties
of prayers, the^ he says for all saints. Here ye may consider that when we know
not scripture how blind we be, and have been in times past. For we thought only
those to be saints and holy, that be gone out (...) this world, but it is not
so: al they that believe in our savior Christ, that call upon his name, and
look to be saved by him, Al (...) are saints.
those same be gods saints. Al faithful Christ's people that believe in him, are
saints and holy.

Now when he has done and set out all his mind, at the last he comes and
desires them to pray for him: but for Saint Paul did not hu^t for benefices.
what? Not to get a fat benefice or a bishoprike. No no, saint Paul was not a
hunter of benefices: He says, pray that I may have utterance and boldness to
speak. And this was requisite to his office: for though a preacher be well
learned, but yet lacks that boldenes, is faint hearted, truly he shall do
but little good for all his learning: when he fears men more then god, he is
nothing to be regarded. Therefore this is the thing that S. Paul so much
desires, to have boldenes to speak: for when a prechers mouth is stopped so
that he dare A faint (...) ted soldier is not mete (...) be a preachers
not rebuke sin and wickedness, no doubt he is not meet for this office. Now
like as saint Paul required the Ephesi ans to pray for him that he may have
utterance, for this was most necessary for his office: So let every one pray
unto god and desire other to pray for him, that he may do the works of his
vocation. As for an ensaumple when he is a married man, let him pray unto God
that he may love his wife, cherishe her, honor her, and bear with her
insirmities. All estates have (...) to (...).
So likewise let all faithful servants call upon God, that may do the duetye
of their vocation. So likewise let magistrates be (...) in prayer: For no
doubt they have need, for they have a great charge committed unto them of
God, therefore they have the more need of the help of god: yea let every good
subject pray unto God for the magistrates, that they may do their duties
according unto gods will and commandment. And no doubt this is a good
prayer, when one faithful man prays for the other: such prayer shall not be in
vain, God will hear it, and grant such faithful Prayer is no (...).
prayers. There be many men in the world which think that prayer is a
will work, so that they may do it, or omit it: but it is not so, they be
much deceived. For it is as necessary for me when I am in tribulation to call
upon God, and I ought to do it as well under the pain of damnation, as well
as I am bound to keep any of his commandementes. By the virtue of this
commandment, Thou shall not steal, I may not take away other men's goods. So
by this commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, I may not defile an
other man's wife. So by the virtue of this commandment, lnuoca me in die
tribulationis, Call upon me in the time of trouble, I ought and am bound
under It is damnable not to pray vato God in trouble.
the pain of damnation to resort unto god, to call upon him, to seek aid and
help by him, at his hands. For this as well gods commandment as the other is:
Therefore I desire you most earnestly, set not light by prayer: remember that
it is the commandment of god. And again it is the only stay, Vltimam
refugium, the only help to come to god, and desire his help in Christ's
name. for by prayer Peter being in pri son was delivered. Like wise Moses by
the (...) of his prayer went through the red sea, he and all his people. So
was Ezechias the king delivered from his sickness, by his All this god granted
for his (...) sake.
prayer. Item Elias the prophet stopped the rain a long (...), and than by
prayers he brought rain again: It I should go through all the stories, which
show us the efficacy of prayers, I should never have done: for no dout
faithful prayer fails never: it has ever remedied all matters. For it
brought to pass that when god would destroy the Israelites, he could not
because of Moses prayers: Moses let god of his purpose. And no dout god
loves to be let: for god loves not to punish or destroy the people, and
therefore by a prophet God complained that there was found not a good man, qui
(...) se tanquam murus, which might set himself like as a strong wall
before the people: yt is to say, which were so ernest in prayer, that God could
not punish the people. Now ye have heard how that prayer is a (...). We shall
in every distress pray unto God, saying: Lord God thou art merciful, thou
know my weakness, which have promised to help: therefore for thy sons sake,
for thy mercies sake, for thy goodness sake, for thy (...) sake, help me and
deliver me out of my distress, forgive me my sins. Surely whosoever prays
so instantly, he shall be We must pray at all times.
heard: but oporret semper orare, we must pray at al times, without
intermission, when we go to bed, when we rise in the morning, when we go about
our busynes, or when we are one horse back, ever pray: for a short prayer is
able to Luke. 18.
bring a great thing to pass, as it appeared in the publican, A short (...)
is of great (...)
which said only, Propitius esto mihi peccatori, Lord be (...) unto me a
sinner. Therefore Christ says: Vigilate and orate ne intretis in (...), watch
and pray, lest ye enter into temptation, that is, lest you be overcome (...) it.

Now remember what I have said unto you, consider what (...) enemy we have,
what power he has, what experience and practice. Again how weak he is when
Christ is with us: Remember the armor, truth, justice, love to the heryng of
gods word, faith, salvation: ever consider whether your doings be to the let
of your salvation or not. Remember the sword, though ye have it not in so
high a degree as Pre (...) may strike Emperors and (...).
we have it, which may strike kings and Emperors: when they (...) the word of
god, as it appeared in Elia (...) stroke the king Achab. I rem, John Baptist
stroke that stardye king Herod: If they had been fainte hearted they should
not have done so. But specially I would have you to remember prayer, when ye be
in any anguishe and trouble, and can not tell how to relieve your selves, run
to God. Now they that shall and wytll regard that armor of god taught us by
the apostle S. Paul, the devil no doubt shall not prevail against them.
Therefore if we would (...) on this armor we should come to such a practice
of it, that (...) be (...) at us, ye and (...) he comes he shall soon be
cast of and avoided. The almighty god which rules heaven and earth with his
infinite power give us such strength to vanquish the devil, and all his might.

Amen.
The fourth Sermon of Master Doctor Latymer. Philip. 3.
(...) be folowers together of me, and look on the^, which walk even so, as
ye (...) us for an Philip 3.
ensample: for many walk, of who^ I have told you often: and now tell you
weping, that they are the enemies of the (...) of Christ.

This is the Epistle which is red this day in the church, and contains many
good things. And this day two year, I entreated of the gospel of this day, at
Stamford. And such matters A sermon made at Stamford.
as I had in hand were gathered of a diligent person, and put in prynte. The
Gospel was this: Give unto Caesar, that thing that pertains unto Caesar, and
unto god that thing, that pertains unto god: I will rehearse in few words
that which I said at the same time.

The Pharisees and Scribes asked Christ our savior whether they should give
tribute unto Caesar or not: for it irked them that they should pay tribute, they
thought it to be a great servitude: but they asked Christ this question of a
mis cheuous mind, intendyng to take him in his words: but he disapointed the^
pretily, asking whose image the money bare The (...) are (...) pointed.
they answered, the Emperors: then our savior says, (...) therefore unto the
emperor that that pertayneth unto him, and unto god that which pertains unto
god. They spoke nothing of god, but only of the tribute, but our Savior in
his answer tells them and all the world their duties: yet he does it with
dark and covered words: they confessed that the image was the emperors, and
so consequently subjects unto him: then our savior commanded them to pay
according unto the order, as themperor had agreed with the^, that This (...) is
(...) to us (...) as to the (...)
was their duty to do. Our savior he referred them to their laws, signifieng
that they ought to obey the laws in (...) common wealth, and so ought we to do
too. for our savior in his answer teaches not only them but us also: for like
as it was with the Jews, so is it with us, here in England. Our sovereign
lord the king, when he lacks any thing to the defense of his (...), it is
presented in the parliament, there is required such things as be necessary for
the kings affairs. Now look whatsoever is granted unto his majesty by the
parliament, the whole realm is bound in conscience to pay, it, every man as it
is required of him: and that is our due un to the king, namely to (...) and do
our duties in all things toward our soueraign lord the king: as far forth as
it is not The prince must be o beyed in things not against god
against god, we must obey him and do his requests. But now ye will say, this is
a great bondage, and a heavy yoke and ser uitude. Consider therefore who
speaks these words, who is he that commanded us to be obedient? Mary our
savior him self. Now he says Meum iugum leave est, my yoke is light, how
chanced it then that he will lay upon me such a heavy (...) it is a great
burden for me to forgo my goods, as when there is a subsidy, so that the king
required 1. (...) of every pound. Now I am worth 40. pound and so I pay 40.
shillings, to which money yt king has as good right as to any (...) which his
(...) has. And this I This realm is full of (...) ues.
speak to this end, for I fear this realm be full of thieves: for he is a thief
yt withdraws any thing (...) any man, whosoever he be. Now I put the case it
is allowed by the parliament by common authority that the king shall have i.
shilling of every pound, and there be certain men appointed in every shire
which be valuers: when I now either corrupt the valuer, or swear against my
(...) yt I am not worth an C. li. when I am worth two hundred; Here I am a
thief before god, and shall be hanged for it in hell. Now how many thieves think
(...) Gods mat ters (...) not be tri fled v vithal
(...) there in England, which will not be valued above x. li. when they be
worth a C. (...), but this is a pitiful thing, and god will punish them one day:
for gods matters are not to be tristed withal. Now ye will say this is a
heavy yoke, and intollera ble to bear. (...) I (...) tell ye what ye shall
(...)? Consider (...) one with (...) what Christ has done for us. (...) what
great and (...) he has delivered us, (...) ye consider that, this burden
which the king (...) upon, us will be light enough unto us: for Christ has
delivered (...) Two things conside (...) we shall be well coutent.
from the burden of our sins: when we consider, that, first who is he, that
commands it unto us: secondarily what he has done for us that bids us to
obey, no doubt we shall be well content withal. But there be a great many of us
which consider not that, but rather deceive the king, or forswere themselves,
or else rebel against the king: which things no doubt displease god most
highly and (...). An other thing is, that should move us to bear this burden
willingly, which is, his promise. For who soever will be content to pay his
duty truly and vyrightly, as he ought to do, that man shall have nevertheless
in fulfilling the commandment He that pai (...) his due tie shall have never
the less.
of god. for so says god: if thou shall harken diligently unto the voice of
the Lord, thou shall be blessed in the (...), and blessed in the fields etc. So
that if we do according as he (...) us to do, if we give unto the king yt which
pertains Deuteronomy. 28
unto the king, No dout we shall be blessed, we shall have (...), for gods
blessing will light upon us. But there be a great many amongst us, which do
not believe those things to be true, they believe not the promises of god: and
so they make god a liar: for Qui non credit deo facit deum mendacem, He that
believes not god, makes god a liar. Now if this will not move us to do our
duties, namely that Christ We shall (...) our goods (...) to the king
has delivered us from the great burden of our sins, let us be moved at
least ways with his promises: namely that we shall increase our goods, in
doing our duties unto the king.

This little I thought good to say, and so to put you in remembrance of such
things as I have said at that time, for if this were well considered, we would
be wyllinge to do our duties, and so please god withal: for god loves a
cherefull God loves a cherefull (...).
obeyer, one that with a good will is ready to do such things as he appoints
him.

Now let us turn to the Epistle. Brethren be folowers, together of me, and
look on them that walk, even so, as ye have us for an ensample. These are
marvelous words of S. Paul, which seem out wardlie to be arrogantly spoken:
if any man should say so at this time, we would think him to be a very
arrogant fellow. but ye must see that ye right understand S. Paul: for he
spoke these words not of an (...) seem (...) gant but (...) not so.
arrogant mind: first ye must consider with whom he had to do, namely with
false apostles which did corrupt gods most holy word, the gospel which
he had preached before. And so the same false Prophets did much harm: for
a great number of people did credit them, and followed their doctrine: which
things grieved saint Paul very sore: there fore he admonished them, as who
say, ye have preachers amongst you: I would not have you to follow them:
follow rather me, and them that walk like as I do. This was not arrogantly
spoken, but rather lovingly, to keep them from error. he says the same to the
(...). 11. Cap. saying, Be ye the folowers of me: but there he adds, as I am
the follower of Christ: so put the same words hither, set them together and
then all is well. For I tell you it is a dangerous thing to It is a (...)
gerous thing to (...)
follow men, and we are not bound to follow them further the^ they follow
Christ: we ought not to live after any Saint, nor after S. Paul or Peter, nor
after Mary ye mother of Christ to folowthem I say universally we are not bound
so to do, for they did many things amysse. Therefore let us follow them as they
follow Christ: for our savior Christ gives us a general rule and warnyng
saying: Whatsoever they teach you do it, but after their works do ye not, and
he adds sittyng in Moses cheer, that is to say when they teach the truth so
that we ought to (...) them that teach the truth: but Learn how long men
(...) be (...) ed.
when they do naught we should not follow them: therefore he says in an other
place, (...) vestra iustitia, Except your righteousness be more than the Scribes
and Pharise is ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. This he speaks
of the clergy men, giving us warnyng not to do as they did: we must have such a
righteousness as may stand before god: we are not appointed to follow (...): as
when We are (...) be saints apes.
I here this saint has prayed so many psalms, so many hours in a day, I
am not bound in (...) to follow him, to he his ape, and to do as he did, my
vocation being (...) unto it.

There is a place in the 2. Macha. 12. Cha. where we read 2 Machbeus. 12.
how that Judas (...) us that (...) sends certain money to Jerusalem, to make
a sacrifice for the dead. Now Judas did this: but it follows not, that we are
bound in conscience to do the like, as the papists which by and by conclude
upon it. Judas did this, and be was a godly man, ergo Judas (...) is (...) to
be (...) ed.
we should do it too: we should follow his (...) le and sacrifice for the dead.
Nego argumentum, it is a naughtye argument, to conclude upon that thing which
he did (...), ha uyng not gods word: he did it, ergo it was well done. For we
are not bound to follow them in their doings. For if Marye the mother of
Christ should have done some what disagreeyng from gods word, we should not
follow her, whi che in deed has had her faults, as saint Augustyne plamlye
affirms in the 3. treatise upon John: where she moved Christ to do a miracle
when their wine was lacking at the marriage: when our savior called her Mulier,
woman, what have I to do with thee? as who say, to do miracles is my fathers
work, and he knows the time when it is best to be done: what have you to
do with (...) where Chrysostom and Augustyne plainly (...), that Mary was
somewhat arrogant. Maryvvas (...) arrogant.
So likewise it appeared in the Evangelist Matthew, where she interruptyng his
Sermon, desired to speak with him, and a fellow told him when he was teaching
the people, saying: Thy mother is here and would speak with thee he answered
and said, who is my mother? or sister, or brother? and stretched out his hand,
saying: whosoever does the will of my father which is in heaven, he is my
mother, sister and brother. So likewise when he was but twelve (...) of age,
his mother and father seeking him, he said, (...) know ye not that I must be
in yt business of my father? Now in all these places as the writers say, passa
est (...), she has showed her frail nature: shall we go now and follow
(...). 4.
her? No no, we may not do so. S. Paul teaches us how we shall follow them,
and in what things, Bonum est emulari in bono semper, It is good always to be
seruent, and to follow in good things: then it is not such a good argument,
such a man does it, ergo it is a good thing? No not so: we must (...) so and do
so al things, as it may stand with our (...), whereunto god has called us: for
when we leave our vocation To (...) our (...) on is dam nable.
whereunto god has appointed us, no dout we do naught and damnably: As for an
ensample. Our savior fasted 40. dais and 40. nights without any manner of
sustinance: Ergo we shall do so too, no, because we are not able to do so too,
we should kill our selves: likewise Moses that holy prophet of god killed an
Egiptian which was a wicked and naughtye man: ergo I shall go and kill yonder
wicked man to? No, I may not do so, for it is against my calling, I am no
magistrate, therefore I may not do it: as for Moses he had a special inspiration
of god. Phenees that godly man killed (...) and (...), which were occupied
together in yt act of (...): Phenees yt zealous man came and killed them both
at ones Number. (...).
(...) his doing plcased god very well. Now ye may make such an argument,
Phenees did so, and pleased god in his doings, ergo we may do so too: when we
see any man dishonor god, we may go and kill him by and by. This is not a good
argument: for as I said before, we must take heed to our calling, to our
office. This Phenees had a special (...) to do so, we may not follow his
ensample. Abraham was a good and holy man, he was redye to kill his son and
(...) him with fire: which doings pleased god wonders well: afterward there
were many which would follow the That only is well done that god will leth us
to do.
ensaumple of Abraham, and burnte their children, but they did excedyng ill, and
god was angry with them for so doing: therefore we must follow their ensample so
far forth as may stand with our vocation.

Further (...) and Mary they were married folk, but they exercised not the act
of generation, if we would now follow the ensaumple of Marye and Josephe, and
inhibite unto married folks the act of generation: this were naught and
against the order of GOD: for Mary and Joseph had a special calling, and gift
of god to abstain: but if we having no such calling or such gifts as they
have had should follow their ensample, we shouldgo to the devil at yt length,
for not doing according unto our calling. So it appears partly that we are
not (...) to follow yt (...) or doings of yt saints. Jacob, David, Salomo^other
good, and holy men have had many wives, ergo we may have many to? Not so, they
had a special license and prerogatiuc, which We must (...) in our (...) the
sain (...) did in (...).
we have not. Therefore take this for a sure rule, we have not to follow the
saints in their vocation, but we must follow god in our vocation, for like as
they followed god in their vocation and calling, so we must follow god in our
vocation: but when we will go about to follow god in their calling, and forsake
our own calling, then no dout we shall do naught. This I have said to that
end that ye might understand the words of S. Paul, where he says, be
folowers of me: there fore I showed you how far forth we ought to follow the
ensample of the saints.

For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weping, that
they are the enemies of the cross of Christ. S. Paul speaks of the false
prophets, he says they walk. By this word walk, is signified our
conuersati on and living. for when we will (...) any man to live wickedly, we
may express it with these words, he walks wickedly. Now if there were many
in S. Paul's time, whi che did walk wickedly, think ye is the matter any
thing amended now at our time? I think nothing at all: for we Apo. 2
read in the 20. (...). of Apoca. that Satan shall be lose in the last days,
that is to say, god will suffer him to exercise his crafts, his (...) wicked
mind, which he bears against Satan is lose (...)
god: and truly when a man considers the state of the whole world in every
country, it appears no less but yt the devil is leuse: for what rebellions,
what cruelties, what covetousness, what hatered and malice is amongst men? In
so much that a man would think the whole world to be full of devils. therefore
when there were many at S. Paul's time, it must needs follow that there be more
now: for now is the defection and sweruyng from the truth.

Of which I have told you often, and now tell you weping. s. Paul was a good man
a hearty and an earnest man in gods cause Saint Paul was a we per.
he was a weeper, he went a pilgrimage whereof I told you the last time: it was
a grief to him to see the dishonor of god amo^ gest them, which he had
instructed in the word of god: he was (...) to see the people blinded and
seduced with false doctrine. but such things grieve not us: though god be
dishonored we care not for it: but when we have loss of our goods, and (...)
certain domages, then we can weep from the (...) of our hearts, and be most
sorrowful: but when we hear that god is dishonored, that lechery is committed,
or other horrible sins done, that greeueth us not, then we weep not: We
vvepe not as S. Paul did.
and so it appears most manifestly that we have not the heart of S. Paul,
we are not so minded.

Now peradventure some body might say that S. Paul had standred these men in
writing so sharply against them, and in calling them the enemies of the cross
of Christ: but 2. Tim. 2
it is not so, he slaundereth them not. In the Epistle to Timo the he named
some by their names Philetum, and Hyneneu^. You must consider that Saint Paul
did well in reprouyng them openly: for a man may sometimes tell an other man's
faults: for not every tellyng is slaunderyng. When a man tells an other man's
faults with a good mind, and to a good purpose, this tellyng is well: but that
is naught and very slaundering when I rehearse before other men the faults of
What sla undering is.
my neighbor with a malicious stomach: I hate him, and there fore I make him
to be known, I paynte him out in his colors, and sometimes I say more by him
then I am able to prove, this is slaunderyng: but when a man tells an other
man's faults with a good mind to his reformation, that is not standeryng. As
we read a story of S. Bernhard, whether it be true other not, it is no matter,
take it for an ensaumple, and learn thereby what is (...), and what is not.
Saint Berneharde was a goodly vprighte young man and well favored, he came at
a time with his company to an ynne, where he tarried all night. And because he
was a fair man, A fable of S. Bernhard and his hosts
the woman in the house cast her eyes upon him: desiring in her heart to have
carnal company with him, and therefore after supper she appointed a chamber for:
him alone, to that end that she might come unto him afterward, and so she
diddet for when every body was at rest she came unto his bed intending to
lie with him: Saint Berneharde perceiving that, cried out with a loud
voice, Fures, Fures, thieves, thieves: his fellows hearing him (...), came unto
him, askyng what the matter was: he told them that there was a thief there:
now they thought he had dreamed, went to bed again: As soon as they
were gone, by and by the woman came again, then he cried again. So in the
morning saint Berneharde would not tarry long in that house, and as they
were in the way, he told to his fellows how that the woman had come unto
him, desyring them to take heed an other time of that woman, for she was a
naughty woman, she would have stolen from him the holy ghost, the remission of
his sins, and all goodness: for if he should have followed her, she should
have robbed him of all these things: of such a fashion we may tell other men's
faults.

For (...) Berneharde told it to that end to gene the warnyng to take heed of
yt woman. Now this was not slandering and so likewise S. Paul here slaundereth
them not, but set them out in their colors, to admonish us to beware of them
and so we ought to do, when we know a man that is wicked and will not leave his
wickedness after due admonitious: No doubt it is a good thing to give unto other
men warnyng of such a man, that they may take heed of him: As for an
ensample. Thieves sworue to be true.
There be a company of thieves sworn together to be true one to theother, and
not to disclose one another. Now I am amongst them: and after some mischief
done I am taken and condemned by the law to be hanged. Shall I not disclose now
my company and give unto the magistrates warnyng of them? yes I would think
that man that is in such a case, does well to disclose his company, for it
pertains to a good end, and is a charitable deed, else his company may do
much harm before they be known. No doubt that man A good wish.
should do well, and I think he ought to do it. And I would GOD that all
thieves in England were so persuaded in their hearts, that when one were
taken that he should disclose his fellows too: No doubt we should have better
rest, thieves would not so much trouble the common welthe as they do.

Weepynge. It grieved Saint Paul very sore that Christian souls should so
be seduced thorough false religion, I would wyshe that there were such a
feruente zeal now in us, as was in him then: but it is not so, we have no care
for the souls of Christian people. And that appears most manyfestly by
those vnpreachyng prelates. For if they had such an earnest mind to the
(...) of Christ, as Saint Paul had, no doubt they would Un preaching pre
lates have (...) zeal. All the pa pistes in (...) are enemies to Christ.
not be so lordelye, so slothful in doing of their oueties: but they lack
such an earnest as saint Paul had, such an earnest zeal they lack: They
are the enemy of the cross of Christ. A man may be an enemy of the cross of
Christ two manner of ways. All the papists in England and specially the
spiritual men, be the enemies of the cross of Christ two manner of ways.
First when he is a right papiste given to monkerye, I warraunt you he is in
this opinion, that with his own works he does merit remission of his sins,
and satisfies the law thorough and by his own works, and so thinks
himself to be saved euerlastynglye. This is the opinion of all papystes. And
this doctrine was taught in times paste in schools and in the pulpettes. Now
all these that be in such an opinion, they be the enemies of the cross of
Christ, of his passion and bloudshedyng: for they think in themselves Christ
needs not to dye, and so they despise his bitter passion: they do not
consider our birth, sin, and the corruption of our nature nor yet do they
know the quantitys of our actual sins, how many times we fall in sins,
or how much our own power is diminished, nor what power and might the
devil has: they consider not such things, but think themselves able with
their own works to enter into the kingdom of God. And therefore I tell you,
this is the peryllous doctrine that can be devised. For all faythefull and
true Christians believe only in his death, they long to be saved thoroughe
his passion, and bloudeshedyng: this is all their comfort: they know and most
steadfastly believe, that Christ fulfilled the law. And that his fulfyllynge is
(...), so that they attribute unto Christ the gettyng and meriting of
everlasting life. And so it follows that they which attribute the remission of
sins, the getting of everlasting life, unto themselves or their works, they
deny Christ, they blaspheme and (...) him: For, for what other cause did
Christ come, but only to take away our sins by his passion, and so deliver
us from the power of the devil? But these merits mongers have so many good
works, that they be able to sell (...) mongers.
them for money, and so to bring other men to heaven to by their good works:
which no doubt is the greatest contempt of the passion of Christ that can be
devised. For Christ only and no man (...) merited remission, justification,
and eternal felicity for as many as will believe the same: they that will not
believe it, shall not have it: for it is no more but believe and have. For Christ
shed as much blood for Judas as he did for Peter. Peter believed it, and
therefore he was saved. (...) and (...) fore (...) not be sa ued.
Judas would not believe, and therefore he was condemned, the fault being in him
only, in no body else. But to say or to believe that we should be saved by the
law, this is a great dishonoring of Christ's passion: for the law served to an
other purpose, it brings us to the knowledge of our sins, and so to Christ:
for when we be come through the law to the knowledge of our syns, when we
perceive our filthiness then we be ready to come to Christ and fetch remission of
our sins at his hands. But the Papists fetch the remission of their sins,
not in the passion of Christ, but in their own doings: they think to come to
heaven by their own works, which is naught. We must do good works, we must
endeavor our selves to live according to the commandementes of God: yet for all
that we must not trust in our doings. For though we do the uttermost, yet is
it al imperfect, wha^ ye examine them by the rigor of the law, which law
serves We must work but not trust in our works.
to bring us to the knowledge of our sins, and so to Christ, and by Christ we
shall com to the quietness of our conscience. But to trust in our good works,
is nothing but a robbing of Christ, of his glory and majesty. Therefore it is
not more necessary to do good works, than it is to beware how to esteem
them. Therefore take heed good christen people, deny not Christ, put not your
hope in your doings: for (...) ye shall repent.

An other denyinge of Christ is this masmonging: for all those that be
massemongers be deniers of Christ, which believe (...) deny Christ.
or trust in the sacrifice of the mass, and seek remission of their sins
therein: for this opinion has done very much harm, and brought innumerable
souls to the pytte of hell: for they believed the mass to be a sacrifice for
the dead and living: and this opinion has gotten all these abbeyes and
chauntries, almost the half part of all England: and they A man vvil spare no
(...) his soul.
should have gotten more if they had not been restrained by certain laws. For
what would folks not do to case them selves from the burden of their sins?
But it was a false easment, a deceitful thing: Therefore how much ar we bound
unto god which has delivered us from this bondage, from this heuye yoke of
popery, which would have thurst us to everlasting damnation. For now we know
the very way how we shall be delivered, we know that Christ is offered once
for us: And that this one offering remedieth all the sins of the whole world,
for he was Agnus occisus ab origin Apoc. 13
(...). He was the lamb which was killed from the beginning of the world,
That is to say: all they that believed in him sense Ada^ was created they were
saved by him. They that believed in Abrahames seed, it was as good unto them,
and stood them in as good effect, as it does unto us now at this day. So
that his oblation is of such efficacye that it purifieth and takes away all
the sins of the whole world. They now that will be content to leave their
synful life, (...) with sin, and then believe in our savior Christ they shall
be partakers of everlasting (...). Here ye may perceive that Christ has
many (...) in the whole world, he has many that slander him, that diminish
Christ has (...) ny ene mies.
his glory: namelye all the papists that trust in their own merits or
seek remission of their sins by the sacrifice of the mass: all these now
are enemies to the cross of Christ. In summa al those that seek remission of
their sins other ways then in the passion of Christ, they be (...) to God,
and shall be damned world without (...), unless they repent. But here I must
sat some thing unto you, and I speak it to the satisfienge of some of you:
For I think there be many which will reason very sore, they think it to be no
matter though the curate be erroneous and naught in his doctrine, they care not
for yt: for they will say, I will here him, and do according as he commands
unto me to do: when he teaches false doctrine and leads me the wrong way,
he shall make answer for me before god: his false doctrine shall do me no harm
though I follow the same. This is a naughty reason and contrary to Christ's our
saviors Not the blind guide a love, but he and his (...) together.
doctrine, for so he says: if the blind lead the blind, they shall fall
both into the pytte. Mark here, he says not the leader shall fall into the
pytte, but they shall fall both, yt leader and he that is led, the blind curate
and his blind parishners and so it was at S. Paul's time, not only the
leaders, the false teachers, went to the devil, but also they that followed
their false doctrine. And therefore S. Paul is so earnest in admonishyng them
to be ware and take heed to themselves, yea with weepyng eyes he desires them
to refuse the false prophets. So likewise God himself geneth us warning
Ezech. 3
in the 3. Chapter of the prophet Ezechiel saying: if I say unto thee
concerning the ungodly man, that (without dout) he must dye, and thou geuest
not him warning, nor speak un to him that he may turn from his evil way,
and so to live: then shall the (...) ungodly man die in his own
unrighteous: but his blood will I require of thy hands. Again in the 33.
Chap. he says. When I send a sword upon a land, if the people of the land
take a man of their country, Ezec 33.
and set him to be their watcheman: the same man when he sees the sword come
upon the land, shall blow the trompet and warn the people: if a man now
hear the noise of the trompet, and will not be warned, and the sword come and
take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head: for he heard the
sound of the trompet and would not take heed, therefore his blood be upon him:
but if he will receive warnyng Only he that recei ueth war ning shall be salfe.
he shall save his life. Again, if the watcheman seeeth the sword come and
show it not with the trompette, so that the people is not warned: if the sword
come (...) and take any manne from amongst them, the same shall be taken away
in his own sin: but his blood will I require of the watchmans hands. In
these places of Scripture it appears most manifestly, that not only the
naughty curate shall go to the devil, but also all those that follow his
naughtye doctrine. The wicked shall dye in his wickedness: for though God do
require the blood of the parishners at the curates hands, yet for all that
they shall be damned in the It is daun gerous to have an (...) cu rate.
mean season. But I pray you be not offended with me, when I tell you one
thing many times, for I do it to that end that ye might perceive what
danger it is to have an ill curate: this makes me to put you many times in
remembrance of it.

I will tell you now a pretty storye of a (...) to refresh you withal: A
limitoure of the graye friars in the time of An history of a (...) limitor.
his limitation preached many times, and had but one Sermon at all times:
Which Sermon was of the ten commandments. And because this friar had
preached this sermon so often: one that heard it before told the friars
servant that his master was called, friar John ten commandment: wherefore
the servant showed the friar his master thereof, and aduysed him to preach
of some other matters: for it grieved the servant to here his master deryded.
Now the friar made answer, saying: Belyke then thou canste the x.
commandments well, seeing thou have heard them so many a time: yes said the
servant, I warraunt you, let me hear them says the master: then he
began, pride (...), lecherye, and so numbered the deadly sins, for the ten
commandments. And so there be many at this time, which be werye of the old
gospel: they would said Some be weary be fore the have lea ned.
hear some new things: they think themselves so perfect in the old, when
they be no more skillful then this servant was in his ten commandments.
Therefore I say be not offended with me, whenne I tell you one thing two or
three times. And specially mark this well, that the parisheners are not
excused before GOD by the wickedness and blyndenesse of the priest. For GOD
says not, I will require the blood of the people at the curates hand, and
the people shall be without blame: No not so, but the wicked shall perish
because of his wickedness, so that the blind people and the blind curate
shall go to hell together. I would wish that all England were persuaded so:
for the most part of the people think A good vvish for England.
themselves to be excused by their curates. But it is not so: for if there be
any man wicked because his curate teaches him not, his blood shall be required
at the curates hands: yet for all that the parishner shall go to the devil
withal: that shall be his end. Therefore beware of that opinion, think not to
be excused by your curate. for when ye do, ye do not well: and so you shall
repent in the end. S. Paul therefore is so diligent to give us warnyng of the
false prophets, (...) we should be deceived by them. In an other place S.
Paul com pareth their doctrine unto a sycknes, which is is called a canker,
which sickness when she once begins at a place of the False doc trine com
pared to a (...).
body, except it be withstanden, will run over the whole body, and so at
the length kill: so it is with this false doctrine. Now I must answer unto you
to an objection, or doubt, that peradventure some of you may have: you will
think when An (...) ction or doubt.
ye hear what is the nature of false doctrine, ye will think I say: Alas what
is done with our grau^dfathers: no dout they are lost euerlastyngly if this
doctrine be true: for after your saying they have had the false doctrine:
therefore they be (...) ned, for the nature of false doctrine is to condemn.
Such doutes some will make, yea and there be some which in no wise will
receive yt gospel, and yt only for this opinions sake: for they think that
when they should receive the gospel, it were in as much as to think their
forefathers be damned. Now to this objection or doutefulnes I will make you
answer. An aun swear to that obie ction.
It is with the false doctrine like as it is with fire: the nature of sire is
to burn and consume all that which is laid in the sire, that may be burned.
So the nature of false doctrine is to condemn, to bring to everlasting
damnation, (...) fire (...) not althat is (...) in to it.
that is the nature of the false doctrine. But yet for all that though the
nature of the fire be to burn and consume all things, yet there has been
many things in the fire which have not been burned, nor consumed, as the
bushe which appeared unto Moses, he burned in the fire, and yet he was not
consumed. (...) was the cause? Mary gods power. We read also in the 3. Chap. of
Daniell, how that Nabuchadonozcr, Danie. 3.
the king caused a golden image to be made: And so called all his lords and
his people to come and worship his Idol which he had set up, threatening
further that whosoever would not fall down and worship the said ydole, should
be cast in a hot oven. Now there were three young men, Sydrach, Mesach, and
Abdenago, which refused to worship the said ydole, saienge, O Nabuchadonozer,
we ought not to consent unto thee in this matter for why? our god whom we
serve is able to keep us from the hot burning oven, and can right well
deliver us out of thy hands: and though he will not, yet shalt thou know
that we will not serve thy gods, nor do any reverence to that image which thou
have set up. Then was Nabuchadonozer exceeding full of indignation against them,
and commanded by and by that the oven should be made se uen times hoter than
it was wont to be, and spoke unto the strongest men that were in his host,
to bind Sydrach, Mesach, and Abdenago, and cast them in the burning oven. So
these men were bound in their coats, hosen, shoes, with theirother garments,
and cast in to an hot burning oven, for the kings commandment was so
straight, and the oven was exceeding hot, and these three men Sydrach, Mesach,
and Abdenago fell down in the hot burning oven, being fast bound. Then
Nabuchadonozer the king merueyled and stood up in all have and spoke unto his
council, saying, did ye not cast these three men into the fire? they answered,
(...): yea O king: he answered and said, lo for all that, I do God suf frednot
he fire to do his nature
see four men going lose in the myddest of the fire, and nothing corrupt, and
the fourth is like the son of GOD to look (...).

Here in this story you se that though the nature of the fire is to consume,
yet these three men were not consumed with the same. for not a hear of their
head perished, but rather the fire brake out and consunied them that put them
in the oven: so the fire of his nature would have consumed them, yet through
the power of god the strength of the fire was (...) quished and the men were
preserved from it. Even so is it with the (...), with the false doctrine, the
nature of itis to consume, to corrupt and bring to everlasting sorrow: yet let
God has many vvayes to save.
us hope that our forefathers were not damned: for god has many ways to
preserve them from perishing, ye a in thelast hour of death god can work with
his holy ghost, and teach them to know Christ his son for their savior,
though they were taught other ways before: yet god can preserve them from the
poison of the false doctrine. I will show you a notable story done in king
Achabs ryme, written in the (...). book (...). Reg. 18
of the kings 18. Chap. At the time when Achab that wicked king and his wife
Iezabel, more wickeder then her husband, when they had the rule, they
abolished the word of god clean, and set up false doctrine, killed the true
prophets of god: in so much that Elias says unto god with cryeng and great
lamentations, saying: Lord the children of Israel have forsaken thy couenaunte,
broken down thine altars, and (...) thy prophets with the sword: And I only
am left, and they seek my life to take it away. Here it appears, that the
pulpets at that time were occupied with false teachers, with false religion,
like as it was in the time of our forefathers: in so much that Elias cries out
and faith plainly, that there were left no more but he oncly. But what says
god? I God had his number ber in Eli as time.
have left me seven thousand which have not bowed their knees unto Baal: when
Elias, thought that there was left more but he only, then god showed him a
great many which were left, and not infected with the poison of the false
doctrine. Therefore like as god could preserve a great number of the Israelites
at the same time, so he could preserve our forefathers from the poison of
poperye which was taught at that time: for the Lord knows which arc his.
Item, Christ himself says, Quos mihi dedit Pater, No man John. 6.
shall take these from me which my father has given unto me, that is to say
which are ordained to everlasting life.

Non repellet dominus (...) suam, and haereditatem suam non relinquet, the
Lord will not cast away his people, (...). 94.
and his inheritance he will not forsake: therefore let us hope that though
the doctrine at that time was (...) and poisoned, yet for all that God has
had his: he has (...) seven thousand, that is to say, a great number amongst
them, which (...) no harms by the false (...), for he wonderfully preserved
them: like as he did in the great dearthe, when all things were so dear,
whenne the rich Cod (...) preserve without (...) means.
frankelinges would not sell their corn in the markets, then at that time, the
poor was wonderfullye preserved of god: for after man's reason they could not
live, yet god preserved them: in so much that their chylden were as fat and as
well lykyng, as if they had been gentilmens children. So like as god could
preserve the poor with his children in that great derthe, so he could preserve
our forcfathers from everlasting perdition: though they lacked the food of
their souls, yet he could feed them inwardly with the holy ghost.

But now ye will say: seeing then that God can save (...) (...) other objection
and bring them to everlasting life, without the outward hearing of the
word of God, then we have no need to hear the word of GOD, we need not to
have preachers amongst us. For like as he has preserved them, so he will pre
serve us to, with out the hearing of gods word. This An answer to the same
is a folishe reason: I will answer you this. I will make you this argument:
God can and is able to preserve things from fire, so that they shall not burn
or consume: and therefore I will go and set my house a fire, and it shall be
preserved. Or this: god prescrued these three men from fire so that they took
no harm, ergo I will go and cast my (...) into the fire and I shall take no
harm: Is this now a good reason? No no, for these thrce men had their
vocation to go in the fyrc, they were cast in by violence: so if god will
have thee to go into the fire by violence for his words sake: (...) go with a
good will, and no doubt either he will prescrue thee as he did them, or else he
will take thee out of this miserable lyse to everlasting felicity: but to
cast my self into the fyere with out any (...) I mase not: for it is
written: Non tentabis dominum (...) tuum, Thou (...) not tempte Math. 4.
the Lord thy God.

So likewise in our time GOD has (...) light into the world, he has opened
the gates of heaven unto (...) by his words, which word he opened unto us by
We may notdcspise the mean
his officers, by his preachers: shall we now (...) the preachers shall we
refuse to hear gods word, to learn the way to heaven? and require him to save
us without his word? No We may notdespise the mean
no, for when we do so, we tempte god, and shall be damned world without end.

This much I thought good to say against the suggestion of the devil, when he
puts thee in mind saying: (thy fore fathers are damned) that thou might
learn not to dispeire of their salvation: and yet not be to careful, for they
have their part: we must not make an account for their doings: every one must
make answer for himself. for when they be damned they can not be brought
again with our sorowfulnes: let us rather endeavor our selves to hear gods
word diligently, and learn the way of salvation, so that when we shall be
called, we may be sureof it.

Now these false preachers of which saint Paul speaks Our care fulness can
not bring our fa there is out of hell.
here, are enemies unto the cross of Christ. what shall be their end? Mary
perdition, destruction, and everlasting damnati on, Whose god is their belly.
The false preachers preach only pleasant things, and so get great rewards,
and are able to live wealthely in this world and to make good chere. I The end
of the false preachers Preachers will go (...).
fear me there be many of these belly goods in yt world, which preach
pleasant things to get riches, to go gay and trick up themselves: they care
for no more, they study and do what they can to buckle the gospel and the world
together, to set god and the devil at one table, they be gospellers no longer
but till they get riches: when they have that that they seek for, they care
for no more: than the gospel is gone quite out of their hearts, and their
glory is to their shame: it is a short glory and a long shame, that they
shall have: for in the other world, Erunt ad satietatem visionis omni carni,
all the world shall laughe upon them to their shame, which are worldly
minded. Is there not more that be worldly minded then that be godly minded? I
think S. Paul spoke these words by the clergy men, that will take upon
them the spiritual office of preaching, and yet meddle in worldly A note for
our clergy.
matters to, contrary to their calling: The cleargye of our time has
procured unto themselves a liberty to purchase lands. think ye not that such
doings sauered somewhat of worldly things? But I will desyer them to take heed. for S. Paul says here, that all they that be worldly minded, ar
enemies of the cross of Christ: for they make their bellies to be their gods.
Therefore they shall receive their punishment The revvard of such preachers.
for their wicked doings. what shall that be? marie ever lasting pain of
hellishe fire world without end, without any deliverance from the same, this
is their reward.

But what shall become of Saint Paul and all true preachers? he says: But our
conversation is in heaven. What was Saint Paul in heaven when he spoke these
words? The revvard of true preachers.
No, he was here on earth: but when we walk the pilgremage of which I told
you the last day, Gods pilgremage: than our conversation is in heaven, that is
conformable unto gods heavenly will: and god sees them and will reward them.
when we will do the works of our vocation, and wrestle with sin and
wickedness, and live after gods will What it is to have our conversation in
heaven
and pleasure: who soever does so, that man or woman has his conversation in
heaven. From whence we long for the savior, even the lord Jesus Christ. S.
Paul looked for him to come from heaven. what is he not here all ready? Christ
is here with us already to our comfort, by his spirit and power to be our
helper, and to work with his sacraments, to defend us from danger and peril,
so he is with us in earth: but he is not here bodily. For he ascended into
heaven, and sits Christ is not here bodily.
at the right hand of god the almighty: from thens shall he come to judge the
quick and the dead: all good men and women long for him. And no doubt he will
come, and very shortly: and will take account of every one of us: therefore as
all the writers monyshe us: let us never forget this day which we call the
domes day. Saint Hierome says, that he ever thought he heard the
trompette. Now they that have in consideration this day, and make themselves
ready: it is a joyful thing unto them: but they that be customable sinners,
will not leave their wickedness, such as bre swearers, or adulterers, or
idolaters, and do credit popery: The day of dome shall beterrible to (...).
unto them this day shall be a fearful day: it shall be a heavy coming
unto them. Saint Paul tells what good chere they shall have, namely
everlasting damnation, being the ennemie of Christ, their glory shall turn
to their eternal shame. So you see that all the world may be divided in two
parts: namely into the faithful and unfaithful. Now S. Paul says, that he
looks for this Savior, which shall change our (...) bodies according to yt
workyng: whereby he is able also to subdue all things unto him (...), We have a
(...) body, mortal, subject to all (...) and miseries: it is a gross body,
but for all that it Ourgrosse (...) be changed.
shall rise again, and shall be changed. It is mortal now, it shall be
immortal then: it is (...) now, it shall be (...) than: it is gross now, it
shall be turned to agilitie than: it is corrupt now, it shall be incorrupt then.
It is (...) now, it shall (...) glorious than, like unto his body. Now when it
shall be so with our bodies: ye may be sure it shall be so with our souls too:
for that felicity that we shall have, that God has laid up for us, passes al
men's thoughts: what joy they shall have that be content to leave the (...)
(...) of heaven pass all (...) thoughts.
sins, and live godly. And these things Christ our savior shall bring to
pass by his infinite power.

Now to make an end, for Gods sake mark these lessons well: for this is a
very good piece of scripture, wherein Paul shows both ways: I think it were
better for us to live so, that we may attain to this felicity, which is
prepared for us in heaven, rather than to follow our carnal desires and lusts.
For when we leave our wicked life, and credit the word of god, and have a
delight in it: No dout it shall bring us in the end to this salvation, of which
saint Paul speaks here.

But how shall it go with the other which will not hear gods word, nor leave
their wickedness: Marie Vermis eorum Mark. 9
non morietur, Their woorme shall not dye. By these words of Christ, is
expressed the great pain and sorrow that the wicked shall have: therefore says
scripture, Mors peccatorum pessima, The death of the sinners is the worst Psalm.
34.
thing that can happen unto the^. What means he by that? The vvic (...)
shall be punished here and hense to.
He signifies unto us, that the wicked be not enough punished here: it shall
(...) worse with them after their death. So that it shall be a change, they
that have pleasure here, and live according to their desires, they shall come
to afflictions in the other world. Again, they that have afflictions here,
they shall come yonder to the perpetual sabbath: where there is no manner of
miseries, but a perpetual landyng and praisyng of GOD. To whom with the (...)
and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory, now and ever world without end.

Amen.
The fyfth Sermon of master Doctor Latymers. Matthew. ix. Luc 8. Marc. 5.
WHile he spoke unto them this, Behold there came a certain ruler, and
worshipped him, saying: my daughter is even now diseased, but come and lay thy
hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so
did his disciples: and behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood
twelfe years, came behind him etc. This is a notable story, and much comfort we
shall find in it: if we will consider and way it, with all the
circumstaunces. The Evangelist Marc says, the rulars name was Iairus, he was
an officer: sum think that he was a reader of scripture, as there were at
that time: or perchance he was such an officer as we call churchwarde^s, which
is a (...) office in the great The church vvarden's may do much.
cities: Churchwarde^s can bring much matters to pass: such a great officer he
was. For though yt Jews had a law, that they should make no sacrifices no
where but at Jerusalem, where the temple was and all the ceremonies: yet for all
yt they had in every town their churches or synagoges: like as we have
churches here in England, commonly every town has a church. And this word
Church, sometimes it signifies the congregation: the people that is gathered
together: somtymes it signifies the place where the people come together, The
thing that contains for that which is con te yned.
continens pro contento. Now our savior coming to Capernau where that great
man dwelled, which was such a town as Bristowe or Conentreis. Iairus comes
unto him in all have, and falls down before him: Et precabatur multum, and
makes great suit unto him, that he would come to his house and heal his
daughter, which was sick. No doubt he had heard what manner a man our savior
was: and wherefore he was come into this world: namely to save (...) both in
souls and bodies: and he had heard also the general proclamation, written in
the. xi. chap. of Math. Math (...)
where our savior says: Come unto me all ye that labor (...) had heard
Christ's proclama tion.
and are laden, and I will ease you. This proclamation this Iairus had heard,
and believed it. And therefore he comes to Christ: He did not as a great many
of us do, which when we be in trouble, or sickness, or lose any thing: we run
hither and thither to wyssardes, or (...), whom we call wise men: when there
is no man so foolish and blind as they (...) the (...) leads them according
unto his will and pleasure: and yet we run after them sekyng aid and comfort
at their hands. But this good man did not so: he knew that god had forbidden
to run to wyssards. But what doothe he? Mary be comes to Christ, our (...),
with a Iairus (...) neth not (...)
good strong and unfeigned faith. For (as I told you before) he had heard
before of Christ, of his proclamation, which moved him now in his distress
to come unto him. And no doubt he had a good substanciall faith, as it appeared
by his behauiors: yet he had not so good a faith as the Centurion Centurio^
had a grea ter faith then Iairus.
had, which sent a message unto him, saying: Lord, say but one word, and my
servant shall be whole. This was a wonders great faith: in somuche that Christ
says: Non reperi (...) fidem in Israel, I have not found such a faith in all
Israel. But though this Iairus had not so good a faith as the Centurion Math. 8.
had: yet he has had such one which leads him to Christ. He comes to
Christ, he believes that Christ is able to help him, and according unto his
belefe, it happens unto him. For his daughter was healed, as ye shall hear
afterward: And so upon him is fulfilled the Scripture. Credide (...) quod
(...) sum, I have believed and therefore I have spoken. For look what manne so
ever Iairus had a good faith.
has a good faith, he will not hold his peace, he will speak, he will call
for healpe at his hands: For if this Iairus had not had a good faith: he
would not have humbled himself so much, to fall down before such a poor
man as our savior was. Some would have had respect to their honors: They would
have thought it skorne to fall down before such a poor man as our savior
was: or else he would have been afraid of the people that were present, to
honor him so highly, and to confess him to be a helper. And no doubt, that
Iairus was in great danger of his (...): for Christ was not beloved amongst
the Iowes, therefore it was a great matter for this Iairus to honor Christ so
openly before all the multitude. And no doubt if he had not (...) so good,
strong, and earnest faith, he would not have done as he did, but he had a good
strong faith: therefore he was not afraid of any thing in the world.

Now ye shall learn of this Iairus, first by his ensample to go to Christ, in
all distresses to seek help by him: And also Iairus isto be follow ed in two
things.
ye shall mark and observe his great and fatherlye love, that he has
toward his daughter: for he makes great suit to Christ for her, which
signifies that he has a great and earnest love toward her. The same
fatherly affection and love of the parents toward their children, is the good
gift of God: And god has planted the same in their hertes: And this specially,
for two respects. First, for the childrens sake: for it is an irksome thing
to bring up children: and not only that, but also it is a chargeable thing to
keep them, and to wait upon them: and preserve them from all peril: if god
had not planted such love in the parents hearts, in (...) it were impossible
to do so much for them: but God has planted such love in their hearts,
which love takes The commodity of natural affection.
away all irksomnes of all labor and pain. for what is a child when it is
left alone? what can it do? How is it able to live? An other cause is, wherefore
god has planted such love in the parents hearts toward their children: that
we might learn by it, what affections he bears toward us. for though the
love of parents toward their children be very great: yet the love of god
toward us is greater: yea his love We are the (...) children of god.
toward us, passes far all fatherly love, which they have toward their
children. And though Christ only be the very natural son of god: yet with
his death and passion he has merited that we be the chosen children of god.
For god for our sake has bestowed his only natural son, unto the death, to
the end that we should be made thorough him, his chosen children. Now therefore
all that (...) in Christ, and trust through his passion to be saved: all they
are the children of god: And god loves them more than any natural father
loves his child. For the love of God (...) us is more ernest, and more (...)
toward us, than is the fatherly love toward his natural child: which thing
shall comfort us in all our distress: in what peril or danger soever we be,
we shall believe that god is our father. And therefore we shall come unto him in
the name of Christ his natural son our (...): therefore we (...) not to
despair in any manner of things: but rather what soever we have in hand, let
us run to him, which bears such a fatherly affection toward us, more a
great deal than our natural fathers and mothers can Our paren (...) no love us
so (...) as god does.
(...). As for our carnal or temporal fathers and mothers, sometimes they be
unnatural, so that they will not healpe their children in their distress:
sometimes again they would feign help, but they are not able to help them. But
our heavenly Father, he is loving and kind towurdes us, so that he will help.
And then again he is mighty, he is almighty, he can and may help: so that
there lacks neither good will in him, neither power. Therefore let us not
dispeyre, but rather come unto him in all tribulation, and no doubt we shall be
eased by him. For certain it is, that the almyghtye God has greater affection
toward us, than our natural fathers and mothers can have. And this appears
by that that he has given his natural son (the highest treasure that ever he
had in (...) or in earth) for us, even unto the death in his bitter passion.
Further in the prophets every where he sets out his great love which he has
toward us, saying: (...). 49
Nunquid potest (...). etc. Can a woman forgette her own child which (...)
has born into this world? yea and though she do forget the same: yet will not
I forget the. It is a rare thing when the devil so much preuatleth in
parents, that a mother should neglect or forget her own child: yet says God,
though it were so that she would forget her child, yet will not I forget thee,
wha^ thou beleuest in my (...) Christ. For the (...) can not prevail against
me, though he preuail against women, so that sometimes they forget their own
children, or kill the^, yet shall he not prevail against me: for I am (...) than
he is. Further his love which he be a reth toward us, is expressed in yt. 7.
cap. of Mat. where Christ says: Is there any man amongst you, which if his
son ask bread, will he offer him a stone? or if he asks (...), will be offer
him a serpent? If ye than being evil, can give your children good gifts, how
much more shall your father which is in heaven give good things if ye ask them
of him? As who say: though you be evil, yet when your children would have any
thing that might hurt the^: yet you being fathers and mothers do gene them good
things, which shall not hurt them. Now Math. 7.
says he: seeing ye, whose nature is ill, corrupt, and poisoned (...) saints
in heaven were evil wh they (...) in th islife
with wickedness (for there is no saint in heaven, neither S. Peter or Paul, but
when they were here, their nature was corrupt and given to wickedness, and so
they might be called ill) can give good gifts unto your children, how much more
will God which is the fountain of all goodness, give you good things when ye
desire them of him? Here ye may learn now that the love of God toward
mankind passes all natural love: and that he is ready to give unto every one
that comes to him for help, yea the very holy ghost (...) will give us
when we will desire it.

Now to the matter: This Iairus is a good and loving father toward his child:
be comes and desires help of Christ: yt his daughter may be heled: A conetous
man would have passed on, he would not have taken so much pain as to com to
Christ and desire his help. Therefore by this (...) we may lern to have a good
faith toward god, and a right natural love toward our children. But it is a
comfortable thing to consider this fatherly affection of god toward va: if we
would well consider yt same, The consideration of gods (...) wor keth obedience
to his (...).
it would stir up a childly love in our hearts toward him, so yt we would be
content to be ordered by (...), and ruled acording to his pleasure: like as a
good and godly child is content to be ruled by his father and mother, and will
in no wife do against them: so we should be obedset unto god, like as yt child
is unto his parents. But ye will say, I pray you tell us what is the will of
(...)? Answer. The general will of God is expressed in the (...)
commandments: there we shall find what we shall do and what we shall leave
undone. But there is a special will of god, which is every man's calling: for
it is the will and pleasure of god yt every one shall do according unto his call
ling, whereunto god has appointed him: as the magistrates The speci all will
of god.
their calling is to (...) that all things be well, that Justice be (...),
that the wicked be punished, and the good be re warded. Item, that the good and
godly laws be mayntayned and executed: and most specially that the word of
god be taught, that the people be not ignoruant in that: and this is the will
of god: when the magistrates do so when they endeavor themselves that gods honor
and glory be set abroad, and wyckednes be abolished, then they do according
unto their calling. So likewise the calling of the subjects is to be
obediente unto the magistrates: not to rebel against them: for when they do,
they strive against GOD himself, and shall be punished of him. Item the married
man ought to do his duetye toward his wife, that is the will of GOD, to
love his wife, to provide for her etc. Likewise the woman (...) to do her
duetye toward her husband in obeying him in all things that be not against
god. For she may not obey her (...) in wicked thin ges, which be against god:
but else there is no exception, but obey she must. For so it is written, so says
god unto her: In sorrow shalt thou bring (...) thy children, and thy (...)
shall pertayne unto thy husband, and he shall have the rule of the Gene. 3.
Now when the woman does so, then she does according unto her calling.

Further, masters ought to do their duties toward their servants, and
householde: to instruct them in gods word: to let them have their meat and
drink. Likewise, servants ought to obey their masters, with all hu^blenes,
to serve them vprightlye, and diligently: according as god wills them to do.
Now this is the special will of god, namely that every oneshal do according
unto his calling, as god wills him to do. Now to fulfill this will of god, we
should be moved Gods fatherly (...)
by the great love and fatherly affections, which god (...) toward us: this
love should move us to obey him: like as the good child obeys his father and
mother.

Now comes an other matter: for as our savior was should move us to do his
will.
going to the house, where this young maid lay sick: there comes a good
faithful woman, (...) thorough the people: for our savior was tossed and
tormoyled in the multitude: for ye must understand, that this Iairus was a
great man, a man of great estimation: therefore the people hea ring that his
daughter was sick, or dead, came unto him to go with the corse.

Here I must take occasion to speak somewhat: there be Over hasty burie^g of
men scarce dead,
many, now a dais, very hasty to bury their friends: yea somtymes before they
be well dead. I heard say (...), that a young woman was sick, and fell in a
sound: her friends which were with her, by and by made her redye to be
buried: and when they went with the corse, and were coming into the church
yard, the corse stirred: and the vicar commanded the^ yt bare her, to set her
down, and so finally the woman recovered. I tell this tale, to the end to
(...) you warnyng, not to be to hasty with sick folks. I have red in S.
Augustine, that there was once a man which lay (...). days (...), neither
secyng, nor hearing, nor yet receiuyng any sustinaunce, except some lycour,
which they poured in his throat with a (...) man ly. eth 7. dais (...)
quill. Now that same man after seven days spoke again. And the first word yt
he spoke was this: what is the clock? he thought he had lain but a litlewhyle.
Now if his (...) had been so hasty with him, he should have been buried before
that time. Therefore I admonish you, be not to hasty with dead corses: as long
as they be warm, keep them in the bed: for when a man is dead in deed, he
will soon be cold.

When our savior was going amongst this great multitude to Iairus house:
there comes a woman thorough the people, desirous to touch his garment. The
Evangelist Mark. 5.
Mark sets out this story more plainly, the^ Matthew does, he (...): There
was a certain woman which had been disea sed of an issue. 12 years, and had
suffered many things, of many physicians: and (...) spent all that she had, and
felt no amendment at all: but rather was worse and worse. When she had heard
of Jesus, she came in the prease of the people: behind him, and touched his
garment: for she said, if I on ly may touch yt (...) of his clothes, I shall be
whole. (...) woman was sick of a shameful disease, and had been (...) (...)
an (...) thing to go to phisike.
of it. 12. years. Passa (...) multa, she had suffered much sorrow (...) it. For
no dout whosoever has ado with phisitio^s, he (...) be a sufferer: it is an
yrkesome thing to go to phisike: A man must receive many bitter medicines and
(...). There fore Mark says: She suffered much, they had put her to great pain:
and she had besto wed all her (...) upon them, and was never the better, but
rather the worse. Belyke she had been a woman of great riches, of great
(...), else she should not have (...) able to wage physicians so long. This place
of scripture reproves not phisicions, as though phisike were a superstuous
thing, and not necessary because this woman was not healed: As when ye would
reason of this manner: What? shall I go to phisike? No that I will not: for I
read in scripture, that a woman spente all her good upon physicians, and yet
was never the better. But this text makes no more against phisike, then this
text does against labor, where Peter says: Per totam noctem laborauimus, and
nihil coepimus, we have labored the whole night, and have gotten nothing. Now
a rash fellow will say what: has S. Peter labored al night, and cought
nothing? then I will not labor at all: For I shall get nothing with my labor:
but this is a folishe reasonyng. For though the woman spent all upon
physicians, and yet was not healed: And though Peter labored all night, and
catched nothing, yet for all that we are allowed to use phisike, and commanded
to labor. For so says scripture: Hon ora medicum prop ter (...), Honor the
physician for needs sake. Item, We (...) labor and may (...)
a deo est omnis medel a, from God is all cure: and the highest has created yt
medicyne. If we knew the virtue of every (...), we might be our own (...):
but we know them net, therefore God has ordained, that some should give
theymselues to the knowledge of such things, and then teach others.

We read in the 4. Regum. 20. when (...) the king 4. Rc. 20
was sick, god (...) Esaias the Prophet unto him, say (...): dispone domui tuae
quia morieris, Put thy house in an order, for thou shall dye: but here note
by the way, that god required the king to set his things in an order, to make
his testament, so we shall follow this ensample. When we perceive that god
(...) call us out of this life, we shall order all things so, that there be
no (...) after our departure, We must (...) gs in an orderbe fore we dye.
that men may know what every body shall have.

For that which was said (...) Czechia, is said to every one of us: for god
loves not (...) nor contentions: he is a god of unity and concord: therefore
to avoid all contentions, we ought to set our things in good order. Now
although God sends Esaias thither to tell him that he shall dye, yet it was not
such a straight sentence, that it should be done out of hand, by and by: but
rather god would move him by this message that Esaias brought, to make suit for
longer life. Like as he sends Jonas to (...), with a straight commandment:
By threatnyng god myndeth to bring us to (...) tance.
whereby god would move them to make suit and moan to him, and so to leave
their sins, and wicked life. Now Ezechiashearyng such a message of the
Prophet, what did he? Mary he fell to prayer, rehearsyng how beneficial god
had bens unto him, saying: I be seche the now, O lord, remember how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight: and Hezechia (...) very sore: and so god sends the
prophet unto him again, promisyng him, that he should live yet. 15. years
more. Now did he nothing else after (...) had this (...) of (...), he used
phisike, he took a lump of sygges, and laid it upon the sore: like as we in
sickness time, lay Ezechias used phasike.
plasters upon it. So ye see by the ensaple of Hezekia, that it is laufull to
use phisike. But now at our time, phisike is a remedy prepared only for rich
folks, not for poor: for the poor man is not able to wage the physician. GOD
in deed has made phisike, for rich and poor: but physicians now a days
seek only their own profits, how to get money, not how they might do
good unto their poor neighbor. Whereby it appears, that they be for the
most part (...) charity: And so consequently not the children of god and no
(...) but the heavy judgment of god hangs over their heads: for they are
commonly all welthy and ready to purchase lands, but to help their poor
neighbor that they can not do: but god will find the^ out one day I doubt
not. We must be ware when we go to phisike, that we trust not We may not
trust to much to phisike
to much in physicians, and forget God in the mean season. Like as king Asa
did, which had a disease in his (...): and is much reproved because he sought
not the Lord: he trusted 2. Par. 16
not in god but rather in physicians: for Scripture says: In his sickness he
sought not the Lord, but physicians.

I knew ones a great rich man, and a covetous (...), he had purchased about
an hundred pound: that (...) man came ones to London, where he fell sick, as
stout as he was: And in his sycknes when he was exhorted to bear it well, and
submit himself unto god: He cried out with horrible The eoue tous (...) will not
(...): to (...) hismoney upon phisike.
swearyngs, Shall I dye, shall I (...) physicians, physicians, call physicians.
As well as he loved his good (which was his god) yet he could find in his
(...) to spend it upon physicians: but in the end he died like a beast
without any (...). This man now abused the physicians: for we may use
phisike, but we must not trust in phisike, as Asa the king did, and that wicked
man, of whom I told you: we may use gods provisions and (...), which he
has left for us: yet for all that we may not trust in them.

Now to the purpose: This woman had spent all her good Christ did that
phisicions could not do.
and was never the better: Well, that the physicians could not do, Christ our
savior did it, and on this wise: There was a great multitude of people about
Christ, they preased upon him: Now the woman comes amongst the prease of the
people to him, desirynge to touch only the hemme of his garment: for the
believed that Christ was such a healthful man, that she should be sound as soon
as she might touch him: which came to pass so as she believed. For as soon as
she had touched him, her issue was stopped, and her sickness gone quite and
clean. She was a (...) woman, she was not so bold as to speak to our
sautor: but she comes The (...) man stale her (...).
behind his back, and steals as it were, her health. But what does our
(...) he would not suffer her to be hid, but says to his disciples, quis me
(...) who has touched my clothes: his disciples made answer, saying: thou
see the people thrust thee, and (...) thou, who touched me: And he looked
round about for to se her yt had done this thing. But the woman fearyng and
tremblyng, knowing what was done within her, came and fell down before him,
and told him (...) the truth. No dout this woman was ashamed to (...)
sickness, before the whole multitude: But what then, Christ would have it so. I
perceive says Christ that virtue is gone out of me: he says not my cloak, or
my vestement has done a work: but he says, Scio virtutem ex me exiuisse, I
know, virtue is gone out of me. Therefore we shall notbee The (...) went not
out of the (...) but out of Christ.
so foolish to thynk that our (...) had made the (...) man whole: but rather
her good faith and trust which she had in our savior. We must not do as the
folish (...) papists do, which impute great holmes unto the (...) of our
samour. So ye see that this woman was made whole by Christ thorough him, by his
(...). And so is verifyed this which scripture says, that which is impossible
unto man, is possible unto god. (...) had dispeired of that woman, it passed
their cunnyng to help her: but our (...) he declared his divine power, and
healed her out of hand, she doing nothing but touching the hemme of his
vestement. So god can help when men cannot. An ensample we have in scripture,
when the people of (...) going out of (...), came That whi (...) is (...) man
is (...) god.
unto the red (...), they had great hills of both (...). (...) the king of
Egypt followed with all his (...) at their backs: yt red sea was before them, so
that there was nothing after ma^s reason, but to (...): what does (...) he
divided by his infinite power, the red sea, and delivered them out of al
danger. So it appeared, that god is able to (...) his people that believe in
him, (...). Likewise in the (...) they had no corn nor any thing to eat,
there was no ordina ry way to (...), what does god: He takes an extraordinarys
way: he sends Manna from heaven, so we see that he is able to help us
supernaturally: but yet we must take heed, We must not tempt (...)
and not tempte God: we (...) use all such means as he (...) appointed to
(...) this life, else we should (...) god, which is forbidden. So likewise we
read, that when (...) was in the wyldernes, and Saul had compassed him
(...) about: so that he after man's judgment could not (...): what does god:
Mary he sends the (...) into (...) land of Saul, which when Saul heard of,
he went back 1. Reg. 23
and left Dauyd. So by that means god delivered his faithful servant David,
out of the hands of this cruel manne Saul.

By these ensamples we may learn to put our (...) and hope in God, in all
manner of troubles, like as this woman did hers: she believed in our (...), and
therefore she was healed. All England, yea all the world may take this woman
This vvo man may be a schole mi (...) to all the world
for a (...), to learn by her to trust in Christ: and to seek help at his
hands.

Again, by this woman you may learn, that god sometimes brings some low,
and humbles them to that end to promote them, and to bring them alofte: As in
this weman: she was (...) 12. years, and vered with such an yrke some sickness,
but at the length she was healed and not only that, but also (...): for Christ
called her his daughter, which was the greatest promotion that could be. So
likewise Joseph was in great (...), sold into Egypt, and afterward cast into
prison: where he lay a great while: he was greatly humbled, but what was the
end of it: Mary he was a ruler Examples of men (...) to (...) exalted.
over all Egypt: this was a great promotion. So likewise (...) was humbled,
made an outlawe, an out (...), durst not show himself: but in the end he was
made king (...) all Jury, being at the (...) but a shephard, and afterward an
(...), but (...) the end he was made king. So this woman though she was low
and loath to confess her (...) disease, yet she was well promoted, after she
had (...) it, she was made his daughter, which was a great (...). But mark that
(...) says not to her, my (...) has healed thee: but he says, thy faith has
helped thee. (...) if we had this We would make much of (...) if we had (...)
(...), we would make a great matter of it: which thing were but foolery: let us
use (...), which has a promise: for god promised (...) when we pray unto him,
we shall be heard: when we pray (...) afaithful heart, as this woman (...), which
believed (...) Christ would help her: And for this (...) sake, she was so highly
commended of Christ, and all the people were (...) by her ensample. But
specially Jairus, that great man, whose daughter lay sick, he had cause to
strengthen his faith by (...) ensample of this woman: which woman believed the
word of god, and therefore she came unto Christ. So let us do too, let us stay
our selves upon gods word. Christ says: Venite ad me omnes, Come ye all to me:
let us follow this word, and let The says that has gods (...) is a (...)
faith.
us come unto him: (...) this faith (...) has gods word is a true faith: but
(...) faith which has not gods word, is a lieng faith, a false faith. As (...)
and Jews, they have a faith, but their faith is not grounded in gods word: and
therefore it is a lyeng faith, because it has not the word of god. Therefore
like as the (...) is nothing, brings no profit, without the word of god: so
the word of god brings no commodities except faith be there, (...) it be
believed: else it is to no purpose Neither does faith auailvvith out the (...),
nor the word with out faith.
But this woman believed the word of god, she believed that Christ was (...) to
heal the sick, of souls and bodies: therefore according unto her belief, it
happened unto her: and no doubt she is a saint in heaven: for we read not that
she fell afterward from Christ. So we learn by this woman to have a good faith
in Christ, we must not (...) and thither to seek (...) hem. No, we must believe
in him, in all our distresses come unto him, (...) help and comfort by him.
Now our savior after (...) he had healed this woman, he goes to this great
(...) house, which had called him to make sound (...) daughter: when he com
meth nere unto (...) house, there comes one of (...) servants (...): thy
daughter is dead she is gone: trouble (...) no (...), (...) for all help is
passed. Lo, this had (...) to bring (...) out of his faith: hearing (...)
daughter was dead already it (...) great (...) unto him. Buthere ye may learn,
(...) when ye go by (...) way and (...) to do a good deed, do (...) follow the
ensample of Christ, for he was going to Jairus (...), and in the way he did
this good deed, in healyng that diseased We must (...) none occasion to dogood
woman: geuyng unto us an ensample that we (...) no occasion, but whenever we
have (...) to do good, we shall do it. And here we learn an other thing in
our savior, namely that there is no respect of persons with him, he regards
not the outward show of men whether they be poor or rich, but as Saint
Peter says, In all people, he that fears God and works righteousness, be is
accepted unto him. For (...) refused no man neither rich nor poor. But we see
they that be poor ar commonly ill handled in this world, no man regards
them, every man despises them. Again we read every where that the rich and
great men are ill spoken of in Scripture, potentes The rich men are evil
spoken of in the (...) tures.
potenter (...) patientur thy mighty men shall mightily suffer pains in hell:
yet this scripture disalo weth or reproucth not great men and mighty rulers,
but it speaks against those which abuse their power where with god has
endued them, oppress other poor men, do the^ wrong and miuries. For commonly
it is seen, that they that be rich are loftye and stout, and abuse their
riches or their power: Christ has no re spect to the persons
for no doubt riches may be used to good purposes. But our savior he has no
respect to persons, whether (...) be poor or rich: for here we see how he
helps syrst the poor woman and now is going to help the richeman too, to
raise up his daughter which was dead and ready to be buried. Further we learn
here by this Jairus to be constannt and steadfast in our faith, not to be moved
with (...) wind: for there was many things which might have moved this Jairus to
mistrust our savior, and to tun from him. First bys servant that came and
told him, thy daughter is gone, which was a great No thing should dis courage
us.
discomfort: for as long as she was yet alive he had a good hope, but when he
heard that she was gone, it discouraged him very sore. Secondarily the
preparation which was made for her to be buried, for all the people were come
now to go with the corse which was a great discomfort unto him also. Thirdlye
the words of our sautour most above all things discomforted him, when our
savior says, she is not dead but she sleeps: by these words Jairus might
have conceined an ill opinion in him, saying: What: be thinks that she
slepeth: no if it were so, I could raise her up my self. Of such wise this
Jairus was tempted. Now when they came nere unto the house, there was a great
number of people which laughed our savior to scorn, when he said that she
slept: where we may lern to be content, though we be despised and not set by in
this world: seeing that our savior himself was of such wise despised. I doubt
not but I have been laugh cd to scorn when I have preached, that the way to
get riches is, to give away to the poor this that we have. They have called
me old dotyng fool: but what then, we must be content to be despised with
Christ here in this world, that we may be glorified with him in yonder world.

Here is made mention of (...), no dout they have their The use of minstrels
and belles
good use to make folk merry, and to drive away fantasies, at that time they
used minstrels to their burials, as we use here bells. Now our savior seeing
the people that was come to go with the corse, and the pypers and minstrels
ready, he conforted Jairum, which no dout was in great anguish: there fore Christ
says unto him: Noli timere, tantum creed, fcare not, but only beeleue:
continue only in thy faith toward me, and all things shall be well. Now like
as he says to Jairus, so he says to us too, in what peril or tribulation
soever we be, we should not saint, we should not fear, but believe, he will
regard our faith as much as he regarded the faith of Jairus. And we shall
attain to such an end as he did: for ye must consider that the almighty god
does sometimes put of the fulfilling of his promises, and helps not by and
by: The cause why god grants not our (...) by and by.
but wherefore does he (...) Mary for his own glories sake, for if we should
have by and by that thing which we desire, then peradventure we should
attribute it unto our own selves, and not unto god: therefore it comes not by
and by, that we may afterward when we have it, be the more thankeful for his
help. Therefore let us continue in prayer, and in faith, and no doubt he will
help when it is the very tymc. Expecta dominum says David, tarry for the
Lord, (...) and non tardabit, he will come and not tarry: and when he com meth,
he will set all things in good order. Now he says to the people, Quid
ploratis, what weep (...) You musse Christ (...) demneth nor all vveping.
understand that our (...) condemns not all manner of weepyng, but only
that whyeh is without hope: of which (...) Paul speaks: tanquam qui spem
non habent, as they that have no hope: but charitably weeping is allowed (...),
for S, Paul says, Flete cum flentibus. weeye with them that weep, be
sorrowful with them that be sorrowful: yet do it measurably as it becomes
(...). In the time of popery, before the gospel came amongst va, we went to
buriales, with weeping and wailing, as though there were no god: but sense the
gospel came unto (...), I have heard say yt m some places they go with the
corses girnyng and (...), as though they went to a bearevaiting: which thing no
ddute is naught. for like as to much weeping is (...) mean (...) best in all
these (...).
naught, so to be (...) without (...) is naught to: we should keep a meure in all
things. We read in holy scripture that the holy Patriarch Abraham, mourned for
his wise Sa ra. So like wise did Joseph, for his father Jacob: therefore to
weep charitably and measurably is not ill, but good, and allowed in gods word.
So likewise in the new testament wha^ that holy man S. Stephen was stoned to
death, the tert says yt the church, fecerunt planctum magnum, they made a
great lame^ation and weping over him. Here I might have occasion to speak
against those women which so soon (...) their husbands that be departed,
which thing I can not very well Married persons (...) their makes.
allow: for it is a token of an imperfect love. It was a law among the
Romans, that no woman should mary again before twelve months were expired,
which no dout was an honest law: but to avoid (...) let the christian (...)
man use her liberty.

Now when our savior was come to the house, he suffered no man to go in with
him, but Peter James and John, and the father and mother of the child: all the
other he thrust out, and took the maid by the hand, saying tabita cumi, that
is to say, (...), I say unto the (...). And her spirit came again, and she
arose strayghte ways: what shall we learn (...) mary we shall learn here that
our savior did ouercom death, that he is the lord (...) death, yt he has the
victory over him. Secundarily we learn here, yt our savior is very god (...)
but God alone.
because he commands death. For I tell you death is such an arrogante and
stubburne fellow, that he will obey no body but only God. Now he obeyed our
savior, whereby (...) appears that he (...) lord over death. He said,
Maid I say unto thee, arise: and by and by she was perfectly (...): for she
cate, to (...) yt she was right whole. here our (...) show ed himself to be
very god, and so the lord over death, fulfilling the saying of S. Paul, (...)
mors tua, (...) mors, O (...), I shall be thy death: this is now a comfortable
thing that wc know that Christ has (...) death, and not for himself but for
us, for our sake, So that when we believe in Christ, death shall not hurt us:
for he has lost his strength and power: in so much that it is no more a death,
but rather a sleep, to all The resur (...) shall be both of good and badde.
them that be faithful and fear god. From which sleep they shall rise to
(...) life. Also the wicked truly shall rise, but they shall rise to their
(...): so that it were better for them ncuer to rise.

There be two kind of people which will not sleep: the first be the children
which weep and grieve when they shall go to bed, for because they know not
the commodityes that be in the sleep, they know not that the sleep refreshes a
Two (...) tea af people loath to sleep.
man's body, and make th him to forget all the labors which he has had
before: this the children knowc not, therefore they go with an ill will to
bed. The other be (...), which be given to great drinking, they care not
though they be all night at it, and commonly the sleep does (...) harm,
for be makes them heavy forheades. So like wise there be two kind of men that
fears death, which death in very deed ought not to be feared: for he is the
bcste physician that ever was, he (...) at a clappe from all miseries and
diseases: therefore he ought not to be (...): but as I told you two kind of men
there be that fear him, the children, that is to say they that are childish to
god wards, that are ignorant in scripture, that know not what great (...) we
shall receive at gods hands after this life, but they are all wholly set and
bent upon this world: and these are the children that will not go to (...),
that is to say, that (...) death that are (...) to go out of this world.
The (...) be drunkardes, yt be (...) sinners, yt will not (...) their lives, yt
are drunk or drouned in sins and (...); yt regard sin nothing; they are not
weary of it. Like as it is (...), (...) in (...) venit (...) he comes in the
midst of his sin, then he cares no more for it, he (...) it, he is not
sorry for it: what remedy A remedy for these (...) of people
now: Mary this, they that be in case as children be, that is to say: they that
be ignoraunte, let them get knowledge, let them endeavor themselves to
understand gods holy word, wherein is set out his will, what he would have
us to do. Now when they have heard gods word and believed that same: no
doubt all the fear of death will be vanished and gone quite a way. For they
shall find in gods word, that death has lost his strength, that he can not
hurt any more. Likewise they that be dronkardes, that is to say, that be (...)
sinners, let them repent here where the time of grace is, let them amend
their lives, be sorye for that they, have done: and take heed hence forward,
and believe in Christ, to be saved by and thoroughe his passion. For I tell
you drunkardes, you customable sinners, as long as you lie in sin and
wickedness, and have a delight in them: so long you are not in the favor of
GOD, you (...) before his face: for we must wrestle with sin, we must hate
sin, not agree unto it: when ye do so, then ye ought not to be afraid of
death: for the death of Christ our savior Christ has kill. led our death.
has killed our death, so that he can not hurt us. Not withstandyng death
has bitter (...): but what then? as soon as he has done his office, we are at
liberty, and have escaped all peril.

I will ask here a great clearkly question, where was the (...) question.
soul now after it went out of this young maid? it was not in heaven nor in
hell, nam in inferno non est redemptio, there is no redemption in hell, where
was it then? in purgatory? so the papists have reasoned, it was not in hell
nor in heanen, ergo it was in purgatory: which no doubt is a vain folish
argument. Now I will make a clearkely answer unto my (...): and such an answer
that if yt bishop of Rome woldhaue A clearkly answer.
gone no further, we should have been well enough: there would not have been such
errors and fooleries in religion, as there has been. Now my answer is this, I
ca^ not telbut where it plesed god it should be, there it was. Is this not a good
answer to such a clerakly (...)? I think it be, other answer no body gettes at
me: because scripture tells me not where she was.

Now ye have heard that our savior is the lord over death and so consequently
very god: because he raised up this young woman which was dead. But peradventure
ye will say, it is no great matter that he raised up a maiden which was dead:
for we read of Elisa the prophet, that he raised up a young man from death.
Answer, truth it is, he raised him up, but not by his own power, not in his
own name, but by the power of god: he did it not by himself. but Christ our
savior, he raised up Lazarus, and this young maid by his own divine power: the
wing himself to be very god, and the son of the father eternal: therefore he
says, Ego sum resurrectio Christ raised up the dead by his own power.
and vita, I am the resurrection and the life: This was his doctrins: Now to
prove that doctrine to be true, he did miracles by (...) own divine power, she
wyng himself to be very god: so did not the prophets, they were gods
servants, gods ministers: but they were not gods themselves, neither did they
any thing in their own name.

Now to make an end, let us remember what we have herd, let us take heed that
we be not customable sinners: but rather let us strive with sin, for I tell
you, there be but few of those that spend all their time in the (...) of the
flesh, that speed well at the end: therefore let us take he (...), yt
murderer upon the cross he sped well: but what then, let us not presume to
tarry in wyckednes still, to the last point of our life: let us leave
wickedness, and strive with our fleshly affections: than we shall attain in the
(...) to that fellcity, which god has prepared for all them that love him: to
whom with ye son, and holy ghost, be all honor and glory.

Amen.
The vi. Sermon preached by Master Doctor Latymer. Romans 13.
(...) nothing to any man but this, that ye love one another: for he that
loves another fulfilleth the law. For this command (...) thou shall not
commit (...), thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shalt not (...)
false witness, thou shall not lust, and so forth: if there be any other
commandment it is al (...) in this saying. (...). A (...) can (...) be al
(...)


As for the first part of this (...), we have spoken of it before. for S.
(...) entreats of love, and I told you how that love is a thing which we
owe one to another, and we are never quttte of this debt, we can never
discharge our selves of it: for as long as we live we are in that debt. I will
not (...) no we to entreat of it: for I told you sense I came into this
country certain special properties of this love. Therefore I will only
desire you to consider, that this (...) is the lyuerye of Christ, they that
have this livery be his Love is (...).
servants. Again, they that have it not, be the servants of yt devil: for
Christ says, by that they shall know yt ye be my disciples, (...). 13.
if ye love one another: they that bear ill will (...) and malice to their
neighbors be the dyuelles servants. And what (...) ever such men (...), that
hate their (...): pleases not god, god (...) it, they and all their doyngs
(...) before him. For if we would go about to sacrifice and (...). COI. 13
offer unto god a great part of our substance, (...) we lack love it is all to
no purpose, he (...) al our doyngs: therefore our savior gives us warnyng
that we shall know that our (...) please not god when we are out of charity
with our neighbor, have grieved or injured him: these be his worcester des: Therefore
if thou (...) thy gift at the altar, and there Math. 5.
remembrest that thy brother has ought against these, leave there thy offering,
before the altar, and go thy way first and (...) reconciled to thy brother,
and (...) come and offer thy gift. for certain it is, that when we be without
love and charity, we please not god at (...), (...) in (...) or any (...), of
things: therefore I desire you call to remembrance what I said at the same
time when I (...) of love: for I tell you god will not be mocked: it is not
enough to pretend a love and charity, with our mouth, and to (...) fair, We
must (...) with (...) whole heart.
and in our hearts to hate our neighbor: this is naught, we should not only
speak well by our neighbor, but also we should love him in deed, we should
help him in his need, we should (...) him with all our hearts, when he has
done any thing against (...): for if he needs help, and I help (...) not,
being able, the^ my love is not perfect: for the right (...) shows herself,
by the outward works. like as S. James Love (...) be (...) ed by (...).
says: Show (...) thy faith by thy works. So I say unto you, show your love
by your works. Now to the other (...). This also we know the season how yt it
is (...) that we should now awake out of sleep: for now is our salvation nerer,
tha^ lacob. (...).
when we believed. The night is passed the day is come nigh, let us therefore cast
away the deeds of darkness: and (...) us put on the armor of light, let us
walk honestly as it were in the day light, not in eating and drinking, neither
in (...) bering and wantonness, neither in (...) and enuyeng, but put ye on the
lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the (...)
of it.

Here S. Paul requires a great thing of us, namely yt we should awake from
sleep: he argues of the (...) of the time. but that sleep of which he speaks
is specially Two (...) of (...) den.
a spiritual (...), the sleep of the soul: yet we may learn by this text yt
to much sluggishnes of the body is naught and wic ked, to sped yt good time
which god has given us to do good in, to spend it I say in sleping: for we
ought to keep a measure as well in slepying as in eating and drinkyng: and we
plese God as well in slepyng our natural sleep as in eating and drinking: but
we must see that we keep a measure, that (...) (...) must be kept in all
things.
give our selves not (...) much sluggishnes. For like as we may not abuse meat
and drink, so we may not abuse sleping, to turn our natural sleep into (...).
But S. Paul speaks here specially of the sleep of the soul, that is of
(...) and wickedness, which are called in scripture sleep or darkness: from
which sleep S. Paul would have us to rise. For our saluati on is come nerer,
how (...) it yt S. Paul says yt our salvation is come nerer? do we not believe
now as the (...) and (...) did? and how is then our salvation come nerer? Two
(...) from (...) begin (...) to the end.
you must understand yt there be two times (...) yt beginni^g yt first time was
from the beginning of the world, til Christ, till to his coming. The other
time is sense he came: for whenne he came he wroughte the work of our (...),
and taught us the way to heaven, suffered that pain for us which we should have
(...) in hell world without (...), and rose again from the death, (...) his
(...) unto his (...), and so ascended into heaven, where he sits at the
right hand of god his Father: where he with his intercession appli eth unto
us, which believe in him, his passion, and al his merits: so that all that
believe in him shall be quite from their sins. For his passion is profitable
only unto them that (...): notwithstanding that his death might be
sufficient for all the whole world: yet for all that no man shall enjoy that
(...) benefit, but only they that believe in him, that put their hope, trust,
and (...) in him. Now therefore S. Paul Christ's death (...) that be (...) not.
says, Our salvation is come nerer: because Christ is com already, and makes
intercession for us. All they that were before his coming, as the patriarchs
and (...). and al other faithful, they believed that he should come, but so do
not (...): we believe that he is come already, and (...) fulfilled all things.
The Jews which are at our time believe that he shall come, but they tarry in
vain: their (...) is a deceitful faith, because it is against gods word: for
Christ is not to be looked for to come again and suffer. (...) not so, but he
will come (...) to judge both the quick and the dead. Our savior Christ was
reveled (...) before he came.
Christ was reveled long before he came to suffer. First in paradise, when God
spoke of the woman's sede, says: Conteret caput serpentis, The sede of the
woman shall break the serpents head. And this was a gospel, a glad tidyngs:
for the serpent had deceued Adam and Eve, brought them from their felicity, to
which they were (...): so that Adam and Eve could not healpe them selves, nor
amend the matter. The gospel was preached inparadise


Now than comes God with his gospel, and promises that there shall one be
born of a woman, which shall quashe the (...) head: and this was a gospel. And
no dout as many as did believe these words, and did put their hope in the sede
of the woman, and believed to be delivered from their sins through that sede:
As many I say, as believed so, were saved, as Seth, Enoch, and other good and
godly me^, which were at that time: but there was not a great number of those:
For the most part ever was the worst. Further, this gospel The most part are e
uer the (...).
was reveled unto Abraham, when God did promise him, saying: In semine tuo
benedicentur omnes gentes, In thy (...) all nations shall be blessed: so that
it appeared, that without Christ, we are under the curse of God. And again by
Christ we have the benediction of God. Likewise this gospel was opened unto
David, and all the holy prophets: They spoke of this gospel, and taught the
people to look for their savior: but their sayings and (...) was some what
dark and obscure. Now when he came and dwelte amongst The (...) say ing were
dark and obscure.
us, and showed us the way to heaven: with his own mouth he taught us this
gospel, and suffered his painful passion for us: this was a more cleerer
revelation, than the prophets had. Therefore Christ our savior says to his
disciples: Luc. 10.
Happy are the eyes which see these things that ye see: for I Math 13.
tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to se those things which
ye see, and have not seen them: And to hear those things which ye (...),
(...) have not heard them. But wherefore were they called blessed? that they
saw him? To see Christ m keth bles sed.
than if the blessedness stands in the outward seeing. than Adam and Eve, and
all the prophets were not blessed, but cursed: if the blessedness stands in
the bodily sight, than the brute (...) were blessed which saw him: the ass
whereupon he rode was blessed, yea his very ennemie Annas and Cayphas, and
Pylate, and other that consented unto his death were blessed. But it is not
so, ye must understand that our savior in that manner of speaking puts
only a difference between the (...). For at that time when he was here in
earth, he was more clerer reveled tha^ before, wha^ he was only promised to
come. When he did miracles, cast out deuyls, healed the sick, it was a more
(...) revelation: than when God said, Semen mulieris conteret caput serpentis,
The sede of the woman shall break the head of the serpent. When John Baptist
pointed and showed him with his finger, it could better be understand then the
prophecies which were spoken of him: Therefore this blessedness whereof Christ
speaks, and saint Paul (when he says) That our salvation The diffe rence of
the tym e wherein Christ was diue? sly reveled
is come nerer, must be understand of the diversity of the time: for Christ was
clerer reveled in the end of the world than before. But as touching the
blessedness which we have by Christ: it was alike at al times, for it stood
Adam in as good stead to believe the first promise which god made unto him, and
he was as well saved by it, in believing (...) Christ should come, as we be,
which believe that he is come, and has suffered for us. So likewise the
prophets are saved in beeleuyng that he should come, and suffer, and deliver
mankind by his most painful death. But now sense he is come in deed and has
overcome the devil and redeemed our sins, suffered the pains, not for his
own sake, but for our sakes: for he him self had no sin at all, he suffered
to deliver us from Christ had no syn, but took out syn and gave us his (...)
ousnes.
cuerlasting damnation, he took our sins and gave us his righteousness. Now
sense that al these things are done and fulfilled, therefore says Paul:
Propius est salus (...), quam tunc cum credebatur, Our salvation is come nerer
now, the^ when we believed: taking occasion of the time, to move us to rise from
our sleep, as who say, Christ is come now, he has fulfilled al things, of
which things yt prophets have spoken now therefore arise from your sins. The
same sleep of which S. Paul speaks here, is the sleep of syn, a spiritual
sleep, not a It is a spiri (...) that (...) Paul spea keth of.
natural sleep of the body: as for the natural sleep it is lawful for us to
sleep and to take our rest, when we do it measurably, not to much setting
aside our business: whereunto (...) has called us, and do nothing but play the
sluggardes: when we do so, then we do naught and sin against god. Therefore we
must awake from the (...) sleep, we must set aside slouthfulnes with all other
vices and sins. But I pray you what is syn? I think there be many which can
commit sin, and do wickedly: but I think there be but few of those (...) sin
is.
which know what is sin. Therefore I will tell you what is sin: all that yt is done
against the laws of god, contrary to his will and pleasure, that is sin and
wickedness. Now there be two Two manner of (...) es, general and special.
manner of laws. There be general laws pertaining to every man and woman, and
there be special laws: the general laws are comprehended in the ten
commandementes, which ten commandments are comprehended in the laws of
love. Thou shall love god with all thy heart. etc. And thy neighbor as thy
self, these be general laws.

Now then there be special laws which teach us how every man and woman shall
live in their calling, whereunto god has called them. These (...) teach how
magistrates shall do their duty, execute justice, punish the wicked, defend
the good, to see that the commonwealth be well ordered, and governed, that the
people live godly every man in his calling. So likewise married folk have their
special calling and laws. There is appointed in scripture how the man shall
nourish his wife, rule her with all lenity, and (...): the woman likewise shall
obey her husband, be loving and kind toward him. So masters ought to do
according unto their calling, that is to rule their house well and godly, to
see that their (...) be well occupied, and to let them have their meat and
drink and wages. So servants have their laws: (...) is to obey their
masters, to do (...) all business No obedi ence against god
whatsoever their masters command unto them, so far as it is not against god.
For when a master will command unto his servant to do such things which
are against god, then the servant ought not to obey to do those things.

Now whosoever transgresses these laws, either the general laws, or the
special laws, he sins: and that which is done contrary to these laws, is
sin. When ye will know now whether ye have sinned or not, see and consider
Learn to find (...) enough.
these laws, and then go into thy heart, and consider thy living, how thou
have spent al thy days: when thou do so, no doubt thou shall find
innumerable sins done against these laws: for the law of god is a glass
wherein a man may see his spots and filthiness: therefore when we see them, let
The law is aloking glass.
us abhor them and leave them: let us be sorry for that which is passed, and
let us take a good purpose to leave all sins, from hence forward. And this is
it yt S. Paul says, let us arise from the sleep of sin and wickedness, for
our salvation is come (...): our savior he is clearly opened unto us, he has
suffered for us already, and fulfilled the law to the utter (...): and so by his
fulfylling taken away the curse of the law.

But there be two (...) of sins, there is a dradlye sin, Two manner of (...)
and a venial (...): that is sins that be pardonable and sins that be not
pardonable. Now how shall we know which be venial sins, or which be
not: for it is good to know them: and so to keep us from them. when ye will
know which be deadly sins or not: you must (...) understand that there be two
manner of men, when I say men, I understand women too, that is all mankind, and
so does scripture too, understanding the women too, by this word men: for else
we should not find in scripture, that we should baptize women, for the
scripture says: Baptizate eos, baptize them, he speaks in the masculine
gender (...). Item (...) quis renatus fuerit ex (...) and aqua, Except a man be
borne again thorough spirit and water: here is made no mention of women, yet
they be understood in it to: for the salvation and everlasting life,
pertains as well unto faithful women as it does unto faithful men: for he
suffered as well for the women, as he did for the men. God would have them
both to be saved, the men and the women. So ye see The word man signi fieth
both man and woman.
that this word men signifies or conteyneth both the (...), (the men and the
women) at sometimes, not always: But I say there be two manner of men, some
there be ye be not justified, not regenerate, nor yet in the state of
salvation, that is to say, not gods servants: they lack the renouation or
regeneration, they be not come yet to Christ. Now these persons that be not
come yet to Christ, or if they were come to Christ, be fallen again from
(...): and so lost their iustifi Who they be that sin deadly.
cation (as there be many of us, which when we fall willingly in to sin against
conscience, we lose the favor of god, our salvation, and finally the holy
ghost) al they now that be out Notvvithstanding this (...) on, al sinis of it
own nature is deadlye: and when it is (...), there is no sin vnperdona ble,
to the^ that be (...) the gospel.
of the favor of god and are not sorye for it, sin (...) them not, they
purpose to go forward in it, all those that intend not to leave their sins
are out of the favor of god: and so all their works whatsoever they do, be
deadly stunes: for as long as they be in purpose to sin, they sin deadly in
all their doings. Therefore when we will speak of the (...) of sins, we must
speak of those that be faytheful, that be regenerated and made new, and
clean from their sins thorough Christ, Now this I say: I have venial sins
and deadlye sins, which be venial sins? Every syn yt is committed against
god not wittingly, not willyngly, not consenting unto it, those be venial
sins: As for an ensample, I see a fair woman I am moved in my heart to sin
with her, to commit the act of lechery with her, such though (...) rise out of
my heart: but I consent not unto them, I with stand these ill motions, I follow
the ensample of that godly young man Joseph: I consider in what estate I am,
namely a temple of god, and that I should lose the holy ghost: on such wise I
withstand my ill lusts and appetites: yet this (...) in my heart is sin,
this ill lust which rises up: but it is a venial sin, it is not a mortal
sin, because I consent not unto it, I withstand it: and such venial sins
the just man (...). 24
commits daily. For scripture says, septies cadit iustus, the rightuouse
man falls 7. times, that, is often times: for his works are not (...)
perfect as they ought to be. (...) I pray you, who is he that loves his
neighbor so perfectly and vehemently as he ought to do? Now this imperfection
is sin but it is a venial sin, not a mortal: therefore he that feels
his imperfections seeleth the ill motions in his heart, No more shall any
sinthat we do if we repent it, and believe the promise of god (...) in Christ.
but follows them not, consents not unto wickedness to do them: these be
venial sins, which shall not be impuied unto us to our damnation. So all the
ill thoughts that rise up in our hearts are venial as long as we consent not
unto them, to fulfill them with the deed: I put the case, Iosephe had not
resisted the temptations of his masters wife, but had followed her, and
fulfilled the act of (...) with her, had wayed the matter after a worldly
(...): thinking, I have my mistress favor already, and so by that mean I
shall have my masters favor to, no body knowing of it.

Now when he had done so, this act had been a deadly sin. for any act that
is done against the law of god willynglye And so is a thought to though (...)
fol (...) not.
and wittingly is a dedly sin. And that man or woman that commits (...) an
act loses the holy ghost and the remission of sins, and so becomes the
child of the devil, being before the child of god. For a regenerate man, a
woman that believes, ought to have dominion over sin, but He is the servant
of (...) that (...) to dvvellin sin.
as soon as (...) has rule over him he is gone: for she leads him to
delectation of it, and from delectacion to consen ting, and so from consenting
to the act it self. Now he that is led so with sin, he is in the state of
damnation, and synneth damnably: And so ye may perceive which (...) they that
sin deadly, and what is the deadly sin, namely that he sinueth deadly that
wittingly falls in sin: therefore it is a pe (...) thing to be in such an
(...), to be in the state of damnation and everlasting perdition: let us follow
therefore this good warnyng which S. Paul gives us here, let us rise from the
sleep of sin, let us take a hearty purpose to leave all wickedness. But may we
do (...) May we rise from sin? yes yt we may: for god has provided a remedy
for us, what is that? Mary penance, we must have the staff of penance,
Measure (...) that (...) before, by this (...).
and rise up withal: and this penance is such a salve that it heals all
sores: if a man have done all the worlds sin, yet when be takes this staff
of penance in his hand, that is to say when he is sorry for it, and intends to
leave them, no God (...) but one salve for all sores.
doubt he may recover: and god is that same physician which uses but one manner
of salve to all manner of sores.

We read in the gospel of Luke; that when Pilate had done Luc. xiii.
a notable murder, and had mingled the blood of certain (...) with their
own sacrifices, Now some came and told Christ what Pilate had done. Our
samour makes them answer, saying: I tell you except ye repent, ye shall al
likewise All must (...).
so perish. As who say, whatsoever Pilate has done, see you that ye do
penance, and amend your naughty lyuynges or else ye shall all be destroyed.
This was a good quippy that he gives unto the Jews, which were ready to
speak of other men's faults, but of their own faults they made no mention:
as it is our nature, to be more redier to reprove other Our na ture is to see
other men's (...), but not our own.
men's faults then our own: but our savior he commands them to look home,
to see to themselves. and this (...) is ye chiefest thing in all ye scripture,
John Baptist when he began to preach his sermon was (...) agite, do penance, so
likewise Christ says, (...) agite and credit Euangelio, do penance and
(...) the gospel. But wherein stands What repentance is.
the right penance, and what is penance? Answer, penance is a turning from
sin unto god, a waking up from this sleep of which S. Paul speaks here.
But (...) consists this penance; The right penance consists in three
points, The first is (...), that is, I must acknowledge my self that I have
transgressed gods most holy (...) and command (...), I must confess my self
to be faultye and gyltye, I (...) consists of. iii. parts.
must be sorye for it, (...) my self and my wickedness. When I am now in
that case, then I shall see nothing but hell and everlasting damnation before
me, as long as I look upon my self and upon the law of god. For the law of
God when it is preached brings us to the knowledge The law of God is a
(...) glass.
of our sins: For it is like as a glass which shows us the spots in
our faces, that is the sins in our hearts. But we may not tarry here only in
the law and our selves: For if we do, we shall come to desperation. Therefore
yt first point is to acknowledge our sins, and to be sorry for the same: but
as I said before, we must not tarry here: for Judas Faith must be joined with
our repenta^te
was come so far, he had this point: he was no doubt a sorrowful man as any
can be in the world. But it was to no purpose, he was lost for all his
sorowfulnes: therefore we must have an other point. what is that: Mary says,
belief: we must believe Christ, we must know that our savior is come into this
world to save sinners: therefore he is called Jesus, because he shall save his
people from their sins: As (...). i.
the angel of God himself witnesses. And this faith must The devil does
believe that Christ (...) into this world.
not be only a general faith, but it must be a special faith: for the devil
himself has a general faith, he believes that Christ is come into this
world, and has made a reconciliation between God and manthe knows that there
shall be remission of our sins, but (...) believes not that he shall have
part of it, that his wickedness shall be forgeuen unto him, this he believes
not: he has but a general (...): but I say, that every of one of us must have
a special faith: I must believe for my self, that his blood was shed for Every
(...) that will be be saved, must have a special faith.
me. I must believe that when Christ says: Come to me all is that labor and
are laden, and I will ease you. Here I must believe that Christ calls me unto
him, that I should come and receive everlasting life at his hands: With such a
special faith I do apply his passion unto me. In that prayer that our Savior
made when he was going to his death, (...) says: I pray not for them alone,
says (...), but for them (...) which shall believe in me through their preching,
that they (...) may be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee: and that
they also may be one in us. So that Christ prays for us as well as for his
apostles, if we (...) in him: and so Christ's prayer and our belief brings
the salve unto our souls. Christpra: ed for us.
Therefore I ought to believe, and so thorough faith apply Christ's merits
unto me: for God requires a special faith of every one of us, as well as he
did of (...), when the prophet Nathan came unto him, and (...): Abstulit
(...) tuum, The Lord has taken away thy wickedness, which words of the
prophet David he believed: and so according unto his belief it happened unto him.
For Dauyd had not such a contrition or penance as Judas had: for Judas in deed
had a contricion, he was sorye for his sins, but without faith. David was
sorye for his sins, but he joined (...) and Judas did both repent
(...) unto it: he believed steadfastly without all douting that god would be
merciful unto him: (...) dominus, the lord has taken away thy sins, and god
required of him that he should believe these words. Now like as he required of Da
(...) to believe his words: so also he requires of us to, that we should
beeleue him. for like as David was remedied thorough his faith in GOD: so
shall we be remedied to, if we believe as he did: and god will be as glad of us
when we repent and leave our sins, as (...) was of David, and will also
(...) should be partakers of the merits of Christ. So ye The f (...) point of
penance.
have heard now these two points which pertayne to the right penance: the
first is contrition, when we acknowledge The second (...) of penance.
our sins, be (...) for them, they (...) us very sore. The second point is
faith, when we believe that god will be merciful unto us, and thorough his son
forgive us our wicked nes, and not (...) the same to our eternal destruction.
But yet there is an other point left behind, which is this: yt I must have an
earnest (...) to leave sin, and to avoid al wicked nes as far forth as I am
able to do: I must wrestle with sin: I mustnot suffer yt devil to have the
victory over me though he be very subtle and crafty, yet I must withstand him:
I must (...) his (...), and suggestions, I must not suffer sin to bear
rule over me: for no doubt if we will sight and strive, (...) may have the
victory over this serpent: for Christ our savior he has promised unto us his
help and comfort: therefore s. James says, Resistite diabolo and fugiet a
vobis, withstand the devil, and he shall fly fro you. For at his We may
overcome the devil.
first coming he is very weak, so yt we (...) able if we will take heed and
(...), to overcome him: but if we suffer him to enter ones to possess our
hearts, then he is very (...): so that he with great labor can (...) he brought
out again. For he enters first by ill thoughts: then when he has cast us in
ill thoughts, if we withstand not by and by, then follows de lectation: if we
suffer that, then comes consentyng, and so from consentyng to the very act:
and afterward from one mischief unto another: therefore it is a common saying,
Resist (...) devil at the first.
principiis obsta, resist the beginninges: for when we suffer him once to
enter, no dout it is a perylous thing, we are the^ in ieoperdye of everlasting
death.

So ye have heard now wherein stands right penance: first we must know and
acknowledge our sins, be sorry for them, and lament them in our hearts. Then
the second point is faith: we must believe that Christ will be merciful unto us,
and forgive us our sinues, not impute them unto us. Thirdelye we must have an
earnest purpose to leave all sins and wickedness, and no more commit the same.
And the^ ever be (...) in thy heart, yt they that have a good will and an
earnest mind to leave sin, that god will strengthen them, he will help them.
But and if we by and by at the first clappe give place unto the devil, and
follow his mischeuous suggestions: then we may be sure, that we highlye
displease god our heavenly father, when we forsake him so soon. Therefore S.
Paul says: Ne regnet igitur peccatum in vestro Romans 6.
mortali corpore, let not sin bear rule in your (...) bodies: be not led
with sin: but fight against it. when we do so, it is impossible but we shall
have help at gods hand.

As touching confession, I tell you that they that can be content with the
general absolution which every minister of gods word gives in his sermons,
when he pronou^ceth, that all that be sorye for their sins, and believe in
Christ, seek help and remedy by him, and afterward intend to amend their
lives, and (...) sin and (...); al these that be so minded shall have
remission of their sins. Now (I say) they that can be content with this
general absolutio^, it is well: but they that are not (...) with it, they may go
to some godly learned minister which is able to instructs and The use of (...)
confession.
comfort them with the word of god, to minister that same unto them to their
contentation and quieting of their consciences. As for satisfaction or
absolution for our (...), there is none but in Christ, we can not make amends
for our sins, but only by beleuyng in him which suffered for us. For he The
(...) satisfaction for (...).
has made the mendes for all our sins, by his paynefull passion and
bloudshedyng: And berein stands our absoluti on or remission of our sins,
namely when we believe in him, and look to be saved thorough his death: none
other (...) tion are we able to make. But I tell you that if any manne has
stolen or parloyned away somewhat from his neighbor, that man or woman ought to
make restitution and amends. And this restitution is so necessary that we shall
not look for forgeuenes of our sins at Christ's hand: (...) this restitution
be made first, else the satisfaction of Christ will not serve us: for god will
have us to restore or make amends unto our neighbor, whom we have hurt,
deceived, or have in any manner of ways taken from him wrongfully, his goods
whatsoever it be.

By this now that I have said ye may perceive what (...) This must be under
stand conditionally that is, if we (...)
of slepyng is this of which S. Paul speaks (...), name lie the sleep of
sin. (...) we (...) and spend our time in wickedness than we sleep that deadly
sleep, which brings eternal damnation with him: and again, ye have heard
how you shall rise up from that sleep, how ye shall fight and (...) stle with
sin, not suffer her to be the (...) over you: (...) therefore begin even now
while god gives us so good and convenient a time, let us tarry no longer, let
us awake from this deadly sleep of sin: it may well be called a deadly sleep:
for this sleep of sin brings eternal death and everlasting (...) nes and
sorrows: Let us therefore rise to a godly life and continue in the same til to
thend. These things S. Paul (...) generally to al men, and against al manner of
(...): but (...) he comes to (...). And first he shows what (...) shall not
do, then afterward he tells us what we shall do. Not in eating and drinking,
neither in chambering and wa^tonnes: Romans 13.
neither in (...) and cnuying. I marvel that the English A fault in th english
(...).
is so translated in eating and drinking: the latin Exampler has, Non in
commessationibus, that is to say, not in to much eating and drinkyng: for no
dout god allows eating and drinking, so that it be dene measurably and
thankfully. In the beginning of the world, before god punished the world with
the (...), when he destroyed al (...) and beasts, save only Noah that good
father. In the beginning (I say) mankind eat nothing, but herbs, and (...),
and salettes, and such gear as they could (...): but Man's diet before the
(...).
after the floude god gave unto mankind liberty to eat all manner of clean
beasts, all things that had life, be it fyshe or (...). And this was done
for this cause, that the earth was not so frambde nor brought not forth so
wholesome herbs after the (...), as she did before the flood: there fore God
allowed unto man all manner of meat be it fyshe The (...) why man had
liberty to feed on flesh.
or flesh: yet it must be done measurablye: But seeing I have occasion to
speak of eating, I will entreat somewhat of it, and tell you what liberties we
have by gods word. Truly we be allowed by gods word to eat all manner of
meat be it fyshe or (...), that be eatable. But ye must un derstand that there
be certain hedges, over which we ought not to leap, but rather keep our
selves within those same hedges. Now the first hedge is this, (...) cum
sanguine Hedges that we may not leap (...).
ne comederitis, ye shall not eat the flesh with the blood, that is to say,
we shall not eat raw flesh: for if we should be allowed to eat raw flesh,
it should engender in us a certain cruelnes: so that at the length one should
eat another, and so all the writers expound this place: so that God
forbids here, that mankind or man's flesh may not be eaten. We read in
the books of the kings, and so likewise in Josephus, that certain women had
eaten their own children, at the time when Jerusalem was besieged: which
thing no doubt dyspleased GOD, and they did naughtelye in so doing. For
mankind (...) not (...) eaten: therefore the first hedge is, that we must
abstain from (...): and so like wise from man's (...), one may not eat
another. Neither yet we may shed blood of private authority, a man may not
kill another: but the magistrate he The (...)
has the sword committed unto him from god, he may shed blood when he sees
cause why, he may take away the wicked from amongst the people and punish him
according un to his doing or (...). Now will ye say, I perceive when I (...),
not (...) flesh or (...), the^ I may eat al manner of flesh, (...), howsoever I
can get it. But I tell thee my (...) Another (...)
not so, you may not eat your neighbors (...), or steal his fishes (...) of
his (...) and (...) the, ye may not do (...): for there is a hedge made for
(...). god says, Non facies furtu^, thou shall Erod. 20
do (...) theft. Here I am hedged in, so that I may not eat my neighbors
meat, but it must be my own (...), I must have gotten it uprightly, or else by
bying, or cls by inheritance, or (...) that it be given unto me: I may not
(...) it from my neigh bour: when I lepe over this hedge then I sin damnably.

Now then ye will say, so it be my own, then I may eat of it as much as I
will. No not so, there is an other (...): I may not commit gluttony with my
own meat, for so it so written, (...) a crapula and ebrietare, take heed of
gluttony and (...). Here is a hedge, we may not eat to A thirdhedge for eating.
much: for (...) we do, we displease god highly. So ye se yt we may not eat of
our own meat as much as we would, but rather we must keep a measure, for it
is a great syn to abuse or waste the gifts of god, and to play the glutton
with it.

When one man co^sumeth as much would serve 3. or 4. yt is an (...) thing before
god: for God gives us his creatures not to abuse them, but to use them to our
necessity and need: let every one therefore have a measure, and let no man abuse
the gifts of god. One man sometimes eats more tha^ All men's (...) is (...)
alike
another, we are not all alyke: but for all that we ought all to keep us within
this hedge, that is to take no more then suffices our nature: for (...) that
abuse the gifts of god, no dout they greatly (...) god by so doing. For it is
an ill fauou red thing when a man eats or drinks to much at a time.
Sometimes in deed it happens that a man drynketh to much, but every good and
godly man will take heed to himself, when he once has taken to much he
will beware afterward. A good man will refrain from (...).
We read in scripture of Noah that good man, which was the first that planted
vyneyardes after the sloud: he was ones dronken, before he knew the strength
and the nature of wine: and so lay in his tente uncovered: now one of his
sons whose name was Cham, sceyng his father lying naked went and told his
(...) of it, and so made a mocking Genes. (...).
stock of his father. Therefore Noah when he arose and had disgested his wine,
and knowing what his son had done unto him, cursed him: but we read not that
Noah was dronken afterward any time more. Therefore if ye have been dron ken at
any time, take hecde hence forward, and (...) of, abuse not the good creatures
of God. Now then ye will say, (...) I take them measurably then I may eat all
manner of A fourth hedge for eating.
meat at all times and every where: No not so, there is an other hedge
behind, ye must have a respect to your own (...), and to your neighbors.
For I may eat no manner of meat against my conscience, neither may I eatemy
meat in presence of my neighbor, whereby he might be offended: for I ought
to have respect unto him, as S. Paul Romans (...)
plainly shows, saying: I know and am assured by the lord Jesus, that there
is nothing unclean of it self, but unto him that judges it to be common, to
him it is common: if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now (...) thou not
charitablye, destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed: As for an
ensample. When I should come into the North country, where they be not
taught, and there I should call for my eggs on a friday or for flesh, then I
should do naughtely: for I should destroy him for whom Christ did suffer.
Therefore I must beware that I offend no man's conscience, but rather travail
with him first (...) blind are no to be passed upon.
and show him the truth: when my neighbor is taught and knows the truth,
and will not believe it, but will abide by his old mumpsimus, then I may eatc,
not regardyng him: for he is an obstinate fellow, he will not believe gods
word. And though he be offended with me, yet it is but pharisaicall offense,
like as the (...) were offended with Christ our (...): the fault was not in
Christ but in themselves. So (I say) I must have a respect to my (...)
conscience, and then to my own conscience. But yet there is an other hedge
behind, that is (...) laws, the The (...) hedge for (...).
kings statutes and (...), which are gods laws: for as much as we ought to
obey them as well as gods laws and commandments.

S. Paul says, let every (...) himself unto the authority (...). xiii.
of the higher power: for there is no power but it is of god: the powers that
be, are ordained of god: whosoever there fore resists the power, (...) the
ordinance of God: but they that resist shall receive to themselves vamnation.
Now therefore we dwell in a (...). where it has pleased the kin ges majesty to
make an (...), that all his subjects shall abstain from flesh upon fridayes
and saturdayes, and other days which are expressed in the act: unto which
law we ought to obey, and that for conscience sake, except we hauea privilege
or be excepted by the same law. And although Necessity has no law in these
(...) tes.
scripture commands me not to abstain from flesh upon frydayes and
saturdayes: yet for all that, (...) there is a (...) uyll law and (...) made by
the kings majesty, and his most honorable counsel, we ought to (...) all
their ordenances, except they beagainst god.

These be the hedges wherein we must keep (...) selves. Therefore I desire you
in gods behalf, consider what I have said unto you, how ye shall order your
self, how ye shall not eat raw flesh, yt is, ye shall not be cruel toward your
neighbor. Item, you shall not steal your meat from your neigh bor, but let
it be your own meat, and then ye shall take of it measurably. Item, ye shall
not offend your neighbors conscience. Item, ye shall keep you within the laws
of yt realnr. Now to the matter again. S. Paul says we shall take heed of to
much eating and drinking. And I have showed you how ye shall keep you within
the hedges which are appointed in gods laws: let us therefore take heed now,
and let us rise up from the sleep of sin: whatsoever we have done He that
will not rise from (...), shall (...) it (...).
before, let us (...) up now, while we have time: (...) man go in to his own
heart, and there when he (...) any thing amysse, let him rise up from
that sleep, and (...) not in it: if thou remain lying, thou shalt repent it
euerlastyngly: Neither in chamberyng and wantonness.

Beware of S. Paul's nets and Nons. For when he says Non, we cannot make it
yea: if we do contrary unto his sayings, we shall repent it. Beware
therefore of chambering. what is this: Marye he understands by this What
cha^beryng is.
word chamberyng, all manner of wantonness. I will not tarry long in
rehearsyng them, let (...) man and woman go into his own conscience, and
let them consider that God requires honestye in all things. Sainete Panle
uses this word chamberyng: for when folks wylbe wanton, they get
themselves in corners: but for all that God he sees them: he will (...) them
out one day, they can not hyde themselves from his face. I will speak no
further of it, for with honesty no man can speak of such vile vices, and S.
Paul commands us that we shall not speak any vile words: therefore by this
word chamberynge, understand the circumstances of whoredom and lecherye, and
filthy living, which S. Paul forbids here, and would have that no body
should give occasion unto the other Envy hurts the envious most.
to such filthiness. Neither in strife nor envying. Enuys is a foul and
abominable vice, which vice does more harm unto him that enuyeth another,
then unto him which is enuyed.

King Saul he had this spirit of envy: therefore he 1. Re. (...)
had never rest day nor night, he could not abide when any man spoke well
of David: and this spirit of envying is more directely against charity then
any other sin is. No envious man is the child of god.
For sainete Paul says, Charitas non murder, charity enuieth not: therefore
take it so, that he that enuyeth another, is no child of GOD: All his works
whatsoever he does are the deuylles service: he pleases GOD with nothing as
long as he is an envious person. Who would be so mad now, as to be in
such an estate? that he would suffer the devil to bear so much rule over
him? No (...) nor godly man will be in this (...). For it is an ill estate to be
out of the favor of god, to be without (...) sion of sin. Therefore
whosoever is a envious man, let (...) rise (...) from that sleep, lest he be
taken suddenly (...) so be damned everlastingly.

Now ye have heard what we shall not do: we shall not to What we (...) not do.
much eat and drink, and so abuse the gifts of God, we shall not have
pleasure in chamberyng, that (...) in wantonness: Neither shall we be envious
persons, for when we be, we be out of charity, and so be out of the favor of
god.

Now follows what we should do. But put ye on the What all men should do.
lord Jesus Christ: Every man and woman ought to put on Christ, and all they
that have that apparel on their backs, they are well, nothing can hurt
them, neither heat, nor cold: nor wind, nor rain.

Here I might have occasion to speak against this (...) of apparel, which is
used now every where, which thing is disallowed in scripture. There be some that
wylbe (...) ble unto others, they will do as other do, but they consider not
with themselves whether other do well or not, there be We should conform our
selves to them that do well.
laws made and certain statutes, now every one in his estate shall be
apparayled, but God knows the statutes are not put in execution. S. Paul he
commands us to put on Christ, to leave these gorgeous apparels: he that is
decked with Christ he is well: and first we be declite with Christ in our
Baptism, where we promise to forsake the devil with all his works. Now when
we keep (...) promise and leave wyckednes: and do that which Christ our savior
requires of us, then we be decked with him, then we have the weddyng garment:
and though we be very poor, and have but a (...) coat, yet we are well (...)
we are decked with him. There be a great many which go very gaye in velvet
and satin, but for all that I fear they have not Christ upon the^, for all
their gorgeous apparel. I say not this to condemn rich men or their riches:
for no dout poor and rich may Both pore and rich may be clad with Christ.
have Christ upon them, if they will follow him and live as he (...) them to
live For if we have Christ upon us, we will not make provision for the flesh,
we will not set our hearts upon these worldly trifles, to get riches to cherish
this bade withal. As we read of the rich man in the gospel, which thought he
had enough for many years, he had pulled down his (...) barnes, and had set up
new ones which were Luc. xii.
bygger then the other, and when all things were ready after his mind and
pleasure, then he said to himself: soul thou have much good laid up for
many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But what says god
unto him? Thou fool, (says god) this night they will fetch away thy soul
again from thee. then (...) shall these things be which thou have proupded?
So it is with him that ga thereth riches to himself, and is not rich toward
god. I will not say otherwise but a man may make provision for his house, and
ought to make the same, but to make such provision to set aside gods word
and seruyng of him, this is naught: to set the heart so upon the riches, as
though there were no heaven nor hell: how can we be so foolish to set so much
by this world? knowing that it shall endure but a little while. For we know by
scripture, and all learned men affirm the same, that the world was made to
endure six thousand year, Now of these six thousand, be past already A
conjecture of the end of the (...) at hand.
five M. D. LII. and yet this time which is left shall be shortened for the (...)
sake: as Christ himself witnesses: Therefore let be remember that the time is
very short, let us study to amend our lives, let us not be so careful
for this world. for the end of it no dout is at hand: and though the
general day come not by and by, yet our (...) will not be Math. 24. (...)
death is not far of.
(...) of, death will come one day and strype us out of our coat, he will
take his pleasure of us. It is a maruelouse thing to see, there be some which
have lived in this world 40 or 50. (...), (...) yet they lack time, when
death comes they be not (...). But I will require you for gods sake, rise
(...) from your (...) of sin and wickedness, (...) your self (...) all
things in an order, so that ye may be (...) death shall come and fetch you:
for dye we (...), there is no remedy we must leave one day this world: for
we are not created of god, to that end that we should abide here always.

Therefore let us repent befyme of our wicked life, (...) will not the
death of a sinner, but rather that be shall turn from his wickedness, and
live. Viuo ego, (...) mortem peccatoris, sed vt conuertatur, and viuat, As
truly as I live (says GOD) I will not the deathof a sinner, but rather
Ezechiel xviii.
that he shall turn from his wickedness, and live. These are most comfortable
words: for now we may be sure, that when we will leave our sins and
wickedness, and turn unto him with all our hearts earnestly: then he will
turn him self unto us: and will show him self a loving father. And to the
intent that we should believe this, he swears an oath: we ought to believe God
without an oath: yet he swears to make us more surer. What will he have us to
do? Mary to rise up from this sleep of sin, to leave wickedness, to forsake al
hatred and malice, that we have had toward our neighbors, to turn from
enuieng, from stealing, and make restitution: from stouthfulnes to diligence
and painfulnes, from gluttony and drunkenness to soberness and abstinence,
from chamberyng and (...) living to an honest and pure life. And so finally
from all kinds of vices, to virtue and gedlynes. And what soever bath ben in
times past, be sorry for it, cry god mercy, and believe in Christ, and rise up
from sleep: (...) more wickedlye, but live as god would have thee to live.

Now I will bring in here a notable sentence, and a comfortable saying: and
then I will make an end. Iustitia iusti non liberabit ipsum: in quacunque die
peccauerit, and impietas impii non nocebit ei, in quacunque die conuersus
fuerit ab impietate Exec. xviii
sua, The righteousness of the rightuous shall not save him, whansoeuer he
turns away unfaithfully. Again, the wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt
him, whansoeuer he Sin not in hope of mercy.
turns from his ungodliness: And the righteousness of the rightuous shall not
save him when soever he sins. If I say unto the rightuous that he shall
surely live, and so he trusts to his own righteousness, and does sin, than
shall his righteousness be no more thought upon: but in the wickedness Despair
not of mer cy, if thou (...).
that he has done, he shall die. Again, if I say unto the wicked, thou shall
surely die: and so he turn from his sins, and does the thing that is
laufull and right: than he shall surely live: that is to say, al his (...) which
he has done before, shall not hurt him, Here ye hear what promises god has
made us wha^ we will rise from the sleep of our sins, and leus the affections of
the flesh, and do such things as he has appointed unto us in his laws: if we do
so, tha^ we shall surely live and not die: yt is to say, we shall attain after
this corporal life to (...) lasting life: which grant us god the father, sen,
and holy ghost.

Amen.
The vii. Sermon made by Maisten D. Latymer. Math. 4.
AS Jesus walked by the sea of Galiley, he saw two brethren Simon which was
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they
were fyshers: and he said unto them, follow me, and I will makeyou fishers of
men: and they straight way left their nets, and followed him. etc.

This is the gospel which is red in the church this day. And it shows unto
us how our savior called four (...) to his company, namelye Peter, and
Andrew, James, and John, which were all fishers by their occupation, this was
their general vocation: but now Christ our savior called The `Apostles
fysshed after men.
them to a more special vocation. They were fishers still, but they fished no
more for fish in the water, but they must fish for men, with the net which
was prepared to this purpose namely with the gospel: for the gospel is the net
wherewith the Apostles fished after they came to Christ: but specially after his
departing out of this world, then they went and fished throughout the whole
world: and of these fishers was spoken a great while ago by the prophet, for so
it is written: Hiere. (...)
Ecce ego mittam piscatores multos, dicit dominus, and piscabuntur eos, and
post haec mittam eis venatores multos, and vena buntur eos de omni monte, and
de omni colle, and de cauernis petrarum Behold says the lord I will send out
many fishers to take them: and after that will I send hunters to hu^t them out
from al mountains and hills, and out of yt caves of stoue. By these words god
signified by his prophets, how those fishers, that is, the apostles should
preach yt gospel and take the people therewt, yt is, al they yt should believe:
and so bring them to God. It is commonly seen that fyshers and hunters be very
yainfull people both, they spare no labor to catch their game, because they
be so desirous and so gredye over their game, that they care not for pains.
Therefore our (...) Why Christ (...) to be (...).
chose fishers, because of these propreties, that they should be painful and
spare no labor, and than that they should be gredy to catch men, and to take
them with the net of gods word, to turn the people from (...) unto God. Ye
see by daily experience, what (...) and hunters take, how the fisher (...) day
and night at his net, and is ever ready to take all such fyshes that he can get,
that come in his way. So likewise yt hunter runs hither and thither (...)
his game, leapeth over hedges, and crepeth thorough rough bushes: and all this
labor he estemeth for nothing, because he is so desirous to obtain his pray,
and catch his veneson.

So all our prelates, bishops, and curates, persons, and The office of prelates.
vicars should be so paynfull, so gredy in castyng their netts, that is to say,
in preaching Gods word, in showing unto the people the way to everlasting
lyse, in exhortyng them to leave their sins and wickedness. This ought to be
done of them: for thereunto they be called of God, such a charge they have.
But the most part of them set now a days aside this fyshyng: they put away
this net, they take other busynes in hand: they will rather be surueyors or
receivers or (...) The doings of pre lates.
kes in the kitchyn, than to cast out this net: they have the living of
fyshers, but they fyshe not, they are other ways occupied: but it should not be
so. God will plage, and most heinously punish them for so doing. They shall be
called to make account one day, where they shall not be able to make answer for
their misbehauiors, for not castyng out this net of gods word, for sufferynge
the people to go to the dyuell, and they call them not again: they admonyshe
them not: their perishyng greueth them not: but the day will come when The
(...) that such (...) shall have.
they shall (...) from the bottom of their hertes: but than it will be to
late: then they shall receive their well (...) for their negligencye and
slothfulness: for taking their living of the people, and not teaching them.
The Evangelists speak (...) of the calling of these iiii. men, Peter, Andrew,
James, and John. Matthew says that Jesus called them, and they immediately Math
4.
left their netts, and followed him. Luke says, that our savior stood by yt
lake of Genezareth, and there he saw two ships standing by the lake side, and
he entered in one of these ships, which was Peter's. And desired him that he
would thrust it a little from the land, and so he taught the people, and after
that when he had (...) an end of speaking, he said to Simon Pe ter, cast out
thy net in the deep, and Simon answered, we have labored all night and have
taken nothing. Nevertheless at thy commandment I will lose forth the net:
and when they (...) out, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes: Now Peter
(...) such a multitude of fishes, was beyonds-himself, and (...) down at Jesus
(...), saying: Lord go from me, for I am a synful man: for he was (...), and
all that were with him, at the (...) of the fishes, which they had taken. And
there was also James and John the sons of (...). And Jesus said unto Peter:
fear not, from henceforth thou shalt catch men: and they brought the ship
(...) to land and forsook al, (...). So ye hear how Luke describes this
(...), in what manner of ways Christ called them: and though he make no
mention of Andrew, yet it was like that he was amongst them too, with Peter
John and James. The (...) John in the first chapter (...) matter of an other
manner of ways, but it per John. 1.
temeth all to an end, and to one effect: for it was most like, yt they (uere
called first to come in acquaintance with Christ and afterward to be his
disciples: and so in the end to be his apostles, which should teach and
instruct the whole world.

John the Evangelist says, that Andrewe was a disciple of John Baptiste: and
when he had seen his master point Christ with his finger, saying: Ecce (...)
dei qui tolht (...) mundi Lo the lamb of god that takes away the sins of the
world. (They used in the law to offer lambs for the pacifying of god. Now
John called Christ the right lamb which should take away in (...) all the
(...) of the world.) Now when Andrew heard whereunto Christ was come, he
forsook his master John, and came to Christ, and (...) in acquaintance with
him, asked him where he dwelled: and findyng his brother Simon Peter, he told
him of Christ, and brought him to him: he brought him not to John; but to
Christ: And so should we do too, we should bring to Christ as many as we
could, with good exhortations and admonitions. Now Christ seeing Peter, said
unto him, Thou art Si mon the senne of Jonas, thou shall be called Cephas,
which is by interpretation a stone, signifyeng that Peter should be a (...)
fellow not waueryng hither and thither. So ye see how diversely the
Evangelists speak of the calling of these four Apostles, Peter, Andrewe,
James and John: The (...) diverse (...) called
therefore it is like they were called more then one time, they were called
first to come in acquaintance with him, than afterward to be (...)
disciples, and so at the last to be his Apostles and teachers of the whole
world. For we read in the gospel of S. Luke: that our savior when he
would choose apostles which should teach others, he continued a whole night
in prayer, desyryng god to give him worthy Mark this ye (...) chase officers.
men which be might send. Where we have a good monition, how careful they
should be that ought to choose men and set them in offices: how they should call
upon god, that they might have worthy men. For it appeared by our Savior,
that he was very loathe to have unworthy men, in so much that he ceased not
all night to cry unto God, that he might have worthy men, which he might
send, and such men as might be able to tell the truth: and when they have
done, to stand unto it. For when a preacher preaches the truth, but
afterward is fearful, and dare not stand unto it, is afraid of men: this
preacher shall do but littel good: or when he preaches the truth, and is a
wicked liver, after that he has done, this man shall do but little good, be
shall not edifye, but rather destroy, when his words are good, and his A good
(...) and profitable
living contrary unto the same: Therefore I would wish of GOD that all they
that should choose officers, would give theymselues most (...) to prayer:
desyryng god that they may choose such men as may do good in the com mon
wealth, amongst the (...) of God: And I would wyshe, that there should be
none other officers but such as (...) called thereunto lawfullye: for no man
ought to seek for promotions, to bear rule, to be an officer: but we should
farye our vocation till God did call us: we should have a calling of god. but
it is to be lamented how inordinately all things be done. For I fear me that
there has been but A lamentable thing
very few offices in Englance, but they have been (...) boughte or sold: for
I have heard say many times, that some paid great sums of money for
their offices: No man can persuade me, that these men entende to do good in
the common wealth, which bye their offices. For they intend to get that money
again which they have laid out, and afterward to (...) for purchasyng. But
such ambitious men that offer themselves, they should be refused, they should
not be suffered to live in a common wealth: for they be ambitieus Ambitious
men should not live iu a common wealth.
and covetous. We read that Ietro Moses father in law gave unto Mayses
counsel to choose men to offices: and that same counsel that (...) gave was
Gods counsel: God spoke by the mouth of (...). Now what sateth (...), or
God by (...): what manner of men should he choose to offices to (...) the
commonwealth: Thou shall seek Exodus xviii
out, says (...), amongst all the people men of actiuify, and such as fear
God, true men, hating covetousness, and make them heads over the people. etc.
(...) would not have him to take those which offer them selves, or which bye
(...) offices with money and fair speaking: No no, he would none of that
gears, he would not have such fellows. But I pray you, how many officers are
fought out now adays? Officers should be fought.
I think but very few, the most part offer them selves before they be
called, but it should not be so: Justices of peace, (...), and other officers
they should be (...) out, they should be called thereunto, they should not
come before they be sent for. Now when they be sought out, what manner of men
should they be? Mary men of (...), that is to say, men of knowledge and
understanding: which be able to execute yt office, and such as fearegod: for no
dout he must have the fear of god in his heart yt shall be an officer, or else he
shall never well execute his office: he shall soon be corrupt with gifts or
rewards. Further he must be a true man, such a one whom a man may trust by
his words: he must be his words master, he may not be a dissembler, a liar
or a false dealer. And laft of all, he must be a hater of covetousness, he must
first be a man of actiuttye and knowledge, a man that fears god, a true man,
and a man which hates covetousness: he must only not be covetous, but he
must be a hater An officer (...).
of covetousness. Now when he must hate covetousness, than he must ncdes be far
of from that foulc vice of covetousness, and immoderate despre to have goods.
This is the duetye of every (...): so he shall be disposed before he be admitted
there unto: but whether they be so or not, let other indge: it is (...) by
batly erperience what they be a great part of them: I fear me that if Ietro
should see them, the ye doings would mislyke Ietro would (...) of (...).
him: he would say, these are not such men as I have ap pointed, but it is no
matter though Ietro see them not: god he sees them, which wyil reward them
according to their (...).

And so like wise they that be of the spiritualty, the clergy men, they must
not run themselves, they must tarry til they (...) men (...) flatter for
benefices.
be called, they must not slatter for benefices: and therefore yt king and his
most honorable counsel must take heed, and not set up those which call
themselves: for no doubt they that call themselves intend not to do good, nor
to profit the people, but only they seek to feed themselves, and to fill
their coffers: And so likewise al patrons that have to give benefices, they
should take heed and beware of such fellows, which scke for benefices, which
come themselves before they be called. For such (...) intend not to feed the
people, with the wholesome doc tryne of the word of god: but rather they seek to
be fed of the people, to have their ease, for that they look for: if they
were minded to do good unto the people of god, they would (...) tyil god should
cai them, and then when they be called, do their (...): but to run without
the calling of god, is a manifest token that they have an other respect, that
they are worldly minded, and therefore god co^playned by the prophet, (...). 3
saying: Multi currebant quos ego non mittebam, there were many of those that
ran before I sent them, which were (...) ye that be prtrones. Ieis a gter charge
to be a patio (...) this (...) that bie patronages.
not sent by me. Therefore I will desire patrons to take heed upon what manner of
men they bestow their benefyces: for it is a great charge, a great burden
before God to be a patron. For every patron, when he does not diligently
endeavor him self to place a good and godly man in his benefice, which is in
his hands: but is (...), and cares not what manner of man he takes, or else is
(...), and wili have it himself: and hire a (...) Lack latin, which shall say
scruice: so that the people shaibs nothing edified: no doubt that patron shall
make answer before God, for not doing of his duty. And look how (...) soever
perish in that same parish because of lack of teaching, the patron is guilty
of them: and he must make answer for them before god. Therefore it appears
most manifestly, that patro^s may not follow frendships, or other affections:
but they must see that gods honor be promoted, that they place such men as may
be able to teach and (...) the people.

Now to the matter: These men, Peter, Andrew, James (...) came not before they
were called.
and John, they were called from catchynge of fishes, to the catching of men:
they had a calling, they ran not before they were called. But we do not so, we
order the matter as though God saw us not: and no dout there be some that
think in their hearts: what? shall I tarry till god call me: then peradventure
I shall never be called: and so I shall never get any thing. But these be
unfaithful men, they consider not that God sees us every where: In what
corner soever we be, god sees us, and can fetch us when it pleases him: that
we should be officers, or be curates, or such like things. Therefore thou
runner, tarry, til thou art called, run not before (...) Baptist (...) for no
benesice.
the time. John Baptist that holy man, he would not take upon him, to come
before he was bidden: Where was he? Marye in the wilderness: he made no suit, I
warrant you, for any office, he tarried till god called him. For Luke says:
the word of the Lord came unto John, being in the wyldcrnes. It is no marvel
that god fetched him out of the wildernese: for there is no cornar in the whole
world where any man can hyde himself from his presence: therefore when he
will have a man, he can call him, though he be hyd in cornars: Psa. (...).
for the prophet says, Dcus in altis habitat, sed (...) (...), God dwells
aloft; but yet he sees those things which be here in the lowest parts of the
carthe: he dwells in heaven, but for all that, he ouerseeth all the whole
carthe, and what therein is. For though we were cast down in a deep pyt, or
dongeon, as Hieremy the prophet was: yet for God (...) upon (...)
all that he can see us, he will not forgette us: for he looks down upon
those things that be below. Therefore let no man think in his heart, I
must put my self forward, I must seek to bring my self alofte. No no,
consider rather, that God (...) thee, that he can bring thee alofte when it
pleases him, when it is to the furthera^ce of his glory, and to the salvation
of thy soul. John Baptist made no suit for that office namely to be a
preacher, and to baptyse ye people: yet for all that god sought him out, god
called him there unto, god would have him in this office of preaching: So like
wise Iosephe when he was in Egypt, sold of his own brethren, where he served
with a great man, a great officer he was, Potiphar was his name: Now when he
had been a while with him, his (...) percetuyng his beauty, Gene 39.
cast her love upon him, and so would have him to be naught with her: but
Joseph being a man that seared god, would not follow her, but rather (...) her
beastly lusts, ran his ways, and left his cloak behind him. And so (...)
thorough false accusations, he was cast into prison. Thynks Cod saw Joseph in
the prison
ye now that god saw him not? yes yes, he saw him, though he was in the dark
prison, yet he saw him. For when it seemed him good, he brought him out again
of the prison, and made him lord and ruler over all Egypt: though he lay in a
dongeon, though he could make no suit for his (...), yet god when it pleased
him could call him thereunto. Therefore let us learn here, by the ensaumple of
this good Josephe: let us learn I say, that when we be meet, and that God
will have us to bear offices, he will call us thereunto by law full means, by
his magistrates: he will not forgette us: for he sees us in every corner, he
can pycke us out when it is his will and pleasure.

Moses that great friend of God, what was his occupation Mary he was a
shepharde, he kept his fathers in law Gene. 3.
sheep: and though he was in a great wilderness, where (...) a shepherde.
there was no body about him, yet it pleased GOD to call him, and to make him
a captain over his people Israel. And this Moses was very loathe to go, to
take such a great charge upon him: yet at the length he went, because it was
the calling of god. Therefore let us follow this ensaumple of Moses, let us not
take in hand any office, except we be called thereunto of GOD, except we have
a lawful calling. Our Savior commands his disciples, and also us, that
Luke. 10.
we shall pray unto God, that he will send laborers into his harvest: that
is to say, that he will send preachers. Whereby it appears, that our
Savior would that no person should take upon him that office, except he be
sent of god, except god call him thereunto.

King Saul though he was a wicked man in his end, yet he was made a great
hinge of god: for what was his father: No very great man I tell you, and Saul
his son went to seek his fathers affes, and so by chance because he could
not find the asses he came to the Prophet Samuel, which by and by, before
he departed from him, anointed him to be king over Israel, GOD commaundyng
him so to do. Now this Saul he sceketh not for it, it came never in his
heart to think that he Saul sought not to be made king.
should be king: in so much that he (...) himself when Samuel would
prclaime him king, before the whole congregation: yet for all that, he could
not hyde himself so, but GOD spyeth him out, and so finally brought him to
the kingdom.

Here ye see most manifestlye that when GOD will have a thing to be done,
he can synde such means, whereby it must needs be done. Wherefore
should now any of us go about to thruste theymselues into offices
wyithoute the calling of GOD? And no doubt they that (...) so, they show
theymselues to have no says in GOD at all, they trust not GOD, they think
they shall bring all matters to pass by (...) own power and wits: but it
is seen that such (...) the end. (...) a (...).
fellows speed ever ill, that will take in hand to (...) them selves without
any laufull calling. David that (...) man and holy (...) of god, what was he?
Mary a keeper of sheep: he thought not that he should be king, till he was
called there (...) of god. But I pray (...) what was Jonas the Prophet? was he
not in the bottom of the great sea, in the bellye of a great and horrible
whale? what happened unto him? saw not god (...), (...), he saw him, he had not
forgotten him: he called him out again: and so sedeth (...) to (...) to preach
(...) was (...).
unto them, and teach them penance, to leave their synful life. Now god would
have him to that (...), therefore he call (...) him, and was able to do it, (...)
he lay even in the hor rible fishes (...). Now therefore let us well (...)
this, that when god will have a man to bear an (...) he can and is able to
fetch him, wheresoever he be: and that man that is so called of god to any
office, no doubt god will work with him: he will prosper all his doings, he will
(...) from all his enemies, he will not let him perish. (...) and if any man
take in (...) an office whereunto he is not called: no God will (...) he (...).
dout that (...) have no good luck, god will not prosper him. And not only
that, but he will (...) punish that (...) that will take in hand an (...)
whereunto he is not called of god: which (...), or (...) about to promote
himself. As we have an example in the book of yt Number. xvi.
Numbers, that when (...), Dathan, and Abyram, would not be content with their
vocation whereunto they were called of GOD, but would (...) higher, and promote
themselves: what happened? The ground claue asonder, and swalowed An (...).
them up, with wife and children and all that they had: this was their end,
this reward they had for their ambition. Whereby it appears, that GOD will
that every manne shall keep himself in his vocation, til he be further 2.
Reg 6.
called of god. We read further in the books of the kings, that when Dauyd
would bring in the ark of GOD into his city, as they were going with it,
there was one (...) name: he fearyng least the arc should fall, because the
(...) stumbled, went and held it up with his hands: which was against his
(...): for he was not appointed (...): for it (...) the office of the Levites
to (...) the Arc, no body (...) should come (...) unto it: Now what happened?
God stroke him by and by to death: because he took upon him an (...), unto
which he was not called: yet after man's reason, (...) Oza had done a good
work, in keepyng the arc from (...): but what then? God will that his order
shall be kept, which he has appointed in his word. Further we read in the
Bible of a king which was called (...), which would 2. Par. (...)
take upon him the office of a priest, to offer incenses unto the Lord,
whereunto he was not called of god: but would do it of his own (...) will,
would promote himself to the office of the high priest, being not called of
god thereunto. But what (...)? Now (...) he? what (...) had hefor so (...)?
(...) he was yet about it, the Lord smote him by and by with leprosy: and so
this great king endured a lepre all the days of his life. These be ensamples
now which should make us afraid, if we had any fear of God in our hearts,
to promote our selves. And we should learn here to beware of that pestilent
poison of ambition: The (...) that comes of ambition.
which poison, (which ambition I say) has be the cause of the perishyng of
many a man: for this ambition is the most (...) thing that can be in the
world: (...) an (...) man is able to (...) and disturb a whole common wealth:
As it most plainly appeared by the Rhodians, which Rhodians at our time were very
myghtie, and of great estimation thorough all the world. Now what was their
destruction? Mary ambition: through ambition, this myghtie (...) of the Rhodes
was (...), and came into the hands of the Lurks. For Ambition (...) the Rhodes.
the Chronicle she (...), that before their destruction, when all things were
well yet, the (...) of Rhodes died. Now there was (...) called Andrew (...), a
Portingale he desired to be (...): he was an ambitious man, he went about to
promote (...), before he was (...) of god: But for all that, he (...) his
purpose, so that he was not chosen: For there was one chosen whom (...) Philip
de Uyllers. but what doothe this Andrewe, because (...) could not bring his
purpose to pass, he sends letters to the great Lurk, signifying that when
he would come, he would help him to get the yland, which afterward he (...)
but yet it cost (...) his life, for his treason was (...), and so he received a
reward according unto his (...).

So ye may perceue by this ensample which was done in our time, how (...) a
thing this ambition is: for no dout where there is ambition, there is (...),
where there is division, there follows desolation, and so finally destruction:
Math. (...).
even according unto our Saviors, saying: Every kingdom divided (...) it
self, shall be brought to naught, and every city or house druided against it
self, shall not stand. etc.

Well Andrew, Peter, James, and John, were not ambitiouse, they (...) their
calling: so I would wish that every man would follow their ensamples: and tarry
for their vocati on: and not thrust themselves in, till they be called of God.
For no dout vocation has no fellow, for he that (...) by the calling of god
to an office, he may be sure that his adversaries God defen (...) them that he
(...) to office.
shall not (...) against him, as long as he does the (...) of his calling. An
ensample we have in our (...), he was sent from god into this world, to teach
us the way to heaven. Now in what peril and danger was he: as long as he was
here? when he began to preach at Nazareth amongst his kynsfolkes, he
displeased them so that they went and took Iuc. 4.
him, and were minded to cast him headlong from the rock, whereupon their cities
(...) builded: but when it came to the point, he went a way from amongst
the^, because his hour was not come yet: he had not yet fulfilled or executed
that office whereunto god has sent him.

So likewise we read (...) the (...) John, that the Ioh. 10 8.
Jews many a (...) took up stones to stone him, but they could not. And
how many (...) they their men to take (...), yet for all that they could
not prevail (...) him: And these things are not written for Christ's sake,
but for our (...), that we should learn thereby, that when we do diligently our
(...) whereunto god has called us, then no (...) enemies shall as little
prevail against us as, they (...) against Christ: for God wylbe as (...) for
us as he was for Christ. And this appears most mani festly in the Apostle
Paul: I pray you in what (...) and peril was he? how mighty and strong
enemies had he, which took in hand to ryd (...) out of the way? yet for all
that god delivered him: wherefore? Mary because Paul was called, The cause why
Paul was so often (...).
and ordained of god to that office: and (...) god (...) delivered him out of
al troubles, because Paul did according unto his calling.

Peter, when Herod that tirant had killed James with the sword, and cast him
into prison, so that he thought he should dye by and by, yet god delivered him
wounderfullie: and no dout this is not written for Peter's sake, but also to our
comfort: so that we shall be sure, that when we follow our vocation, being
lawfullye come by it, God will aid and (...) us in all our troubles:
whatsoever shall happen unto us, he will be present and help us. Therefore take
this for a certain rule: that no man with following of his vocation, and doing
his duty shall shorten his life: for it is not the following of No (...) his
life by doing his duty
our vocation that shall shorten our life.

We read in the gospel that when Christ (...) unto his disciples, let us go
up into Jury again: his disciples made answer unto him, saying: (...) the
Jews sought lately John. xi.
to stone thee, and will thou go thither again? Jesus answered, are there not
12. hours of the (...)? if a man walks in the day, he (...) not: but if a
man walks in the night he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.

With these words our Savior signifies, that he that walks in the day,
that is to say, he that walks truly and vprightlye in his vocation
whereunto God has called him, that manne shall not stumble, he shall not
shorten his life, till the xii. hour comes: that is to say, till it
pleases GOD to take him out of this world: he shall be sure that he shall not
shorten his life in doing that thing which god has appointed him to do. I pray
god give unto us such hearts that we may be content to live in our calling, and
not to gape further: And first we must walk in the general (...), and after yt
when God calls us, lcaue the general calling The com modities (...) we
shall have by vvalkingin (...) calling.
and follow the special: if we would walk so, we should be sure yt our enemy
(...) not preuayl against us: And though we dye, yet our death shall be nothing
else, but an entrance into everlasting life. Again, we shall be sure, that if we
will follow our vocatio^s, we shall lack nothing, we shall have (...) things
necessary to our bodily sustena^ce. And this appears by many ensamples: when
our sauionr (...) out those 70. men before him to preach the gospel, having
no (...) in their purses, nor any thing whereupon to live: when they came home
again, he asked them, whether they had lacked any thing: they said No. For they
did as Christ had commanded unto them: therefore they lacked nothing: And so
it follows, that they that will follow their vocations shall lack nothing.

Jacob yt holy patriarch had a vocation to go into Mesopotamia: Jacob followed
his vo cation in flying from (...).
for his father and mother commanded him to do so: because they feared least
Esau his brother should have killed him. Now when he went thither, he confessed
that he had nothing but a staff upon his back: but following his calling God
brought him again with great droues of all manner of cattle. These things
are written for our sake, to make us lusty to follow our vocation, and to do
as we are appointed of God to do. Further, when the people of Israel were in
the wilderness, they had a vacation: for God commanded Moses to bring them out
of Egypt: Now he brought them in the wilderness, where there was no corn nor
any thing to (...) upon: what does God the sends them bread from heaven rather
then that they should lack, and water out of the rock. And this is written to
our instruction. Therefore God says: Non solo pane, Man shall not live Math. 4.
by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out Deute. 8
of the mouth of GOD. For when so ever a man applies that vocation, which
GOD has appointed for him: No doubt he shall not be disappointed of living,
he shall have inoughe. Therefore our Savior Christ says: Querite primo
regnum (...), and iustitiam eius, and caetera Math. 6.
(...) adiicientur vobis, Seek first the kyngedome of god and his
righteousness, and all the other things shall be ministered unto you: That is to
say, let us live godly as he has appointed unto us: as for other things,
iacta super do (...). Peter. (...).
minum curam and (...). Cast thy care upon the lord, and he will make it, he
will fynish all things, for he is able to make a good end of all matters:
therefore says the Prophet: Timete dominum omnes sanctieius fear the lord
all Psalm. (...)
ye his saints, Non est inopia timentibus eum, they that fear To distrust the
promis of god is to make him a (...)
the lord, they shall not come to any poverty. Alack what a pytifull thing is
it, that we will not beeleue these fatherly promises which god has made unto
us in his word? what a great sin is it to mistrust gods promises? for to
mistrust his promises is as much as to make him a liar, when we will not
believe him: every man has his vocation, as these men here were fyshers, so
every man has his faculty wherein he was brought up: but and if there come a
special vocation, then we must leave that vocation which we have (...)
before, and apply that whereunto we be called specially, (...) these apostles
did: they were fishers, but as soon as they (...) called to another vocation,
they left their fishings. but ever remember that when we have a vocation we
regard most above all the special points in the same, and see that (...) do
them rather than the accidents.

As for an ensample, unto great men god allows huntyng Huntyng and (...) is
(...) the (...) of great men's calling.
and haukyng at sometimes: but it is not their chiefest duty whereunto God
(...) called them: for he would not that they should give themselves only
to haukyng and huntyng, and to do nothing else: Do not so, but rather (...)
ought to consider the chiefest point then the accidents: haukyng and huntyng
is but an accessarye thing, but the chiefest thing to which God has ordayued
them, is to execute Justice, to see that the honor and glory of god, be set
abroad, this is the chiefest point in their calling, and not haukyng and
huntyng, which is but an accidente. So likewise a scruyng man may use
shootyng or other pastymes: but if a seruyng manne would do nothing else but
to shoot, setting aside his masters busynes, this manne no (...) should not
do well: for a seruyng man's duetye is to wait upon his master: and though he
may shoot sometimes, The chief point of a serving ma^s office
yet his special and chiefest duetye is to serve his master in his business.

Our savior went ones abroad, and by the way as he Math. 8.
went, be said to one, Follow me: the fellow made answer, saying, let me first
bury my father: our savior said unto him again, let the dead bury their dead,
and come thou and fo low me. where our savior teaches us, that when we have a
special vocation, we shall forsake the general: for to burye fatherand mother
is a godly deed, for god commanded to honor father and mother: yet when we
have such a special One special vocation must be followed.
calling as this man had, we must leave al other vocations: for our savior
would rather have ye dead to bury the dead, the^ that this man should forsake
or set aside his vocation. But our spirituality what do they? Mary some be
occupied with worldly businesses, some be clearkes of the kitchine, surueigbers,
or receivers: which no doubt is wicked, and they must A note for the spiritu
alty.
make a heavy account for it. For their special calling is to fish, to
preach the word of God, and to bring the people from ignorance unto the
knowledge of gods word, this they ought to do. Abraham the Patriarch had a
vocation when god called him out of his country, this was a vocation. Abraham
did follow his calling
So likewise when god commands him to offer his son he was ready and
wyllyng to do it: for because god had commanded him, he made no excuses, but
went and followed his vocation most diligently and earnestly. But this I would
have you to note well, that they that hauebut general vocati ons, may not follow
those which have special vocations. As The (...) in that (...) but a gene ral
calling may not fo lovv his ex ample that had a speci al vocation.
when we would follow the ensample of Abraham, we may not. Abraham had a special
vocation of god to offer his son: therefore they that afterward followed the
ensample of Abraham and burned their children, they did naughtly: for they had
no commandment of god to do so. Phinees that godly man, seeing one of the
great men of Israel do wickedly with a naughtye woman, went thither and killed
them both, whilst they were yet doing the act of lecherye. Now in so doing, he
pleased god, and is highly commended of god for it: shall we now follow the
ensample of Phinces? shall we kill a man by and by when he does wickedly? No not
so, we have no such commau^ dement of god as Phinees had: for he had a special
calling, a Nume. 25
secret inspiration of god to do such a thing: we which have no such calling
may not follow him, for we ought to kyl no body, the magistrates shall redress
all matters.

So to preach gods word it is a good thing, and god will have yt there shall be
some which shall do it: but for all that a man may not take upon him to
preach gods word except he be called unto it: when he does it, he does not
well, though he have learning and wisdom to be a preacher, yet for all that
he ought not to come himself without any laufull calling: for it was no doubt
a good thing to keep the arc from falling, yet for all that Oza was stricken to
death, because he took in hand to meddle with it without any commission.

We have a general vocation which is this, in sudore vultus Gene, (...)
tui vesceris pane tuo. In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread,
till thou be turned again into the ground, out of which thou wast taken. This
text does charge al us to labor, rich and poor, no man excepted, but he must
labor that labor which god has appointed for him to do: for god loves not
slouthfulnes he will have us to labor, to do our business: and upon the holy
day he will have us to cease from bodily labor, but for all yt he will not have
us to be idle, but to hear his word, to visit syeke folks and prisoners,
these Holy dais (...).
are holy days work, which god requires of us: therefore we may not be let of
those works with bodily labor: we must set aside bodily labor, and feed our
souls upon sodais, in heryng of gods most holy word, and in receiving his holy
sacraments. So I say, labor is co^masided unto us, unto every one, no man
(...). Al Adames children ar bound to labor. For yt which All Adams children
must labor
was said unto Ada^, is said like wise unto us to, and our savior himself
teaches us to labor when he says to Peter, duc in altu^, lead thy boat into
ye deep, and relaxarete ad captura^, and spread Luca. 5.
out thy net to catch. Here Christ commanded Peter to do his duty, to follow
his occupatio^. Now he yt commanded Peter say ing cast out thy net: he
commands also us, every one in his estate to do yt business of his calling,
he will have yt farmer to fo (...) his trade, to till the ground, to sow, etc.
and yet it is god yt gives the increase of the labor. For we may not think
as though we by our labor may get somewhat: No not (...), we Labor is the
(...) whereby we live.
must labor in deed, but we must pray him to send the increse: for except he
bless our labor, no doubt we shall labor al in vain. The ordinary way whereby
god sends us our food is labor, yet for all that we must not set our (...)
our labor, nor trust therein, but only hang upon (...) is written, Egestate^
operatur manus remissa, a hand that will not labor Prove 10
(says scripture) shall come to (...). That is to say, that man or yt woman
that will not labor, will not do the work of his vocation, shall not prosper in
this world: but a dilligent hand, God will increase our labor
a man that will labor, almighty god will send him (...), he shall have enough.
So that certain it is, that we must labor: for S. Paul (...), qui non laborat,
non (...), he that 2. (...) 3
labors not, let him not eat. I would wish that this commandment of s.
Paul were kept in England, that these idle lubbars that will not labor, that
they should not eat (...) there: For no doubt if they were served so, it would
make them to apply their bodies to a better use then they do. Saint Paul in the
2. These. Vltimo says: we have herd say, yt there are some which walk amongst
you inordinatelye: working not at al, but being busy bodies. The^ that are such
we command and exhort, by our lord Jesu Christ, that they work with quietness
and eat their own bread. In these words we may note Two thin ges noted in S
Paul's words A precher may speak by heresay
two things, first that every one of us ought to labor, and do the office of
his calling. Secundarily we may note here, that a precher may speak by
heresay: as S. Paul does here. I spoke unto you since I came into this country
by here say. For I heard say, that there were some homelye thieves, some
pyckers in this worshipful house, which no doubt is a miserable thing, that
in such a house things should be so (...) away: therefore I exhorted you at
the same time to beware of it, and to make restitution. Now sense there were
some of you which were offended with me, because I spoke by hear say, they
said I slau^dred yt house in speaking so. But I tell you, that I slaundered no
body at that time. I spoke but only to the amendment of the guilty: and
therefore the gyltlesse must give leave unto the preacher, to reprove syn and
wickedness. For the preacher (...) he reproves syn, he sclandereth not the
gyltlesse: but he seeks only the amendment Esaias. 25.
of the gyltie. Therefore God says by the prophet: Annuncia populo scelera
illorum, Show unto the people their sins: therefore when such a thing is
spoken, they that be giltlesse should be content, when sin and wickedness Rab
a gald horse and he will kick.
is reproved. There is a common (...), that when a horse is rubde on the galle,
he will kick: when a man casts a stone amongst dogs, he that is hitte will
cry: So it is with such fellows too: belyke they be guilty, because they
can not suffer to be again said. I remember the Prophet Esaie, in what
manner of wise he reproved the syunes Esaias. 1.
of the people, saying: Argentum tuum versum est in (...). Thy silver is
turned into dross. So no doubt the fall of the money has been here in
England the undoing of many men. (...) vinum tuum mixtu^ est aqua, And thy
wine is myngled with water. Here the Prophet speaks generally. And he goes
forth, saying: Principes tui. etc. Thy princes are wicked, and companions of
thieves, they love rewards all together: as for the fatherles they help them
not to right: neither will they let the widows cause come before the^. (...)
be fore words, spoken generally against al ye princes: where I doubt not but
there were some good amon gest them: yet for all that the prophet slaundereth
them not: for he speaks not against the good, but against the wicked, A great
number is meant when we speak by the universal.
he means not the giltlesse. For such a manner of speaking is used in the
scripture, to speak by the universal: meaning a great number, but yet not
all: only those that be guilty: there fore such manner of speaking is no
slander. Therefore I said at the same time, as S. Paul says to the
Thessalonians, I hear say, that there be some amongst you that will not
labor: So I said, I hear say, that there be some amongst you, which are
given to pickyng and stealyng: and so I showed you the danger of it, and told
you how you should make restitutio^ secretly without anyopen shame: for it is no
shame to forsake sin, and to come to godlynes. For no dout restitution
Restitutio^ of tv vo (...) tes.
must be made either in effect, or affect: That is to say when thou art able
then thou must make it in effect, when thou art not able, then thou must be
forse for it in thy heart, and ask god forgiveness. This I told you at the
same time where I slaundered no body: therefore I would wish that ye would
expound my words now forwards, better then ye have hitherto.

Now to the matter again: when a man should ask this question, saying: we
are all bound to work, for our lyuynges: but I pray you by whom comes the
gain of our works: who gives the increase of it: There be some people
which think, that they bring all things to pass by their labor: they
think they get their liuinges with their own hand work. Some again there
be, which think that the increase of their labor comes by the devil, that
Some think that their increase com meth of the devil.
he increases and blesses their labors. But think ye that any body will
say so, that his increase comes by the dyuell: No I warraunt you, they will
not say so, with their mouth: yet for all that, their conversation and living
shows it to be so in deed with them. For all they that live of vsurye, they
have their gaynes by the devil. So likewise all they that sell false wares, or
sell by false wayght, or use any manner of falshode, they be in the deuylles
service, they have his livery: therefore they seek all their gaynes at his
hands, thorough false and deceytfull dealyng. And so it appears that the
devil is the increase of their gaynes. And no doubt the devil takes upon him
to be the lord over all things in earth: as it plainly appears by the
gospel of Matthew, Math. 4.
where he took in hand to tempte Christ our savior, and brought him upon a
high hill, where he showed unto him all the kingdoms of the world, saying:
Haec omnia dabo tibi, si prostratus adoraueris me, Al these things I will give
un to thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. By these words it appears,
that the devil bears himself in hand to be The devil is not worth a
goose (...).
lord and ruler over the whole world: but in very deed he has not so much
as a goose fether by right. Andyet for all that, he has many children here
upon earth, which hang upon him, and seek their increaso by him thorough
falshode and deceit. Therefore such worldlynges have a common saying amongst
them, they say when a man wylbe rich, he must set his soul behind the
door: that is to say, he must use falshode and deceit. And therefore I fear me
there be many Many set their souls behind the door.
thousands in the world which set their souls behind the doors. The
merchaunte commonly in every city does teach his prentise to sell false
wares. So that a man may say to all cities as Esaias says to Jerusalem:
Argentum tuum Esaias. 1.
versum est in scoriam, thy silver is turned in dross, thy ware is false, thou
have a delight in falshode and deceit, thou gettest thy good per fas and nefas,
by lauful and unlawful mea nes: But the increase that the godly man has,
comes of god, as the scripture says: Benedictio dei facit diuitem, The
blessyng of god makes rich. Now there be some that will Prouer. x.
say, if the blessyng or the increase rome not of my labor, then I will not
labor at all. I will tarry till god sends me my food, for he is able to feed
me without my labor or travel. No, we must labor, for so are we commanded to
do, but we must look for the increase at gods hands: like as Peter did, he
labored the whole night, yet he took nothing at all till Christ came. And yet
this is not a certain rule, he that much laboreth shall have much. For though
a man labor much, yet for all that he shall have no more then god has
appointed him to have: for even as it pleases GOD, so he shall have, Nam
domini est terra and plenitudo eius, For the Psalm. xiiii
earth is the Lords, and all that is therein: and when we He that has much
must account for much.
have much, then we are accountable. For much, for no doubt we must make a
reckenyng for that which we receius at gods hands.

Now to make an end, I desire you let us consider our general vocation,
that is to say let us labor, every one in that estate wherein GOD has
set him, and as for the increase, let us look for it at gods hands: and
let us be content with that which GOD shall send us: For he knows what
is best for us, if we have Victum Tim. 6.
and vestitum, meat and drink, and clothyng, let us be content wythall.
For we can not tell whenne good manne death will comme and make an end of
all together.

And if we have special vocations, let us set aside the general, and apply
the special points of our vocation, rather then the accidents: and let us
labor in our calling, and yet not think to get any thing by it, but rather
trust in God, and seek the increase at his hands: let us look for his
benediction, then it shall go well with us: but above all things beware of
falshode, for with falshod we serve the devil. But as I told you before, I
fear me the devil has a great number ber of servants in England.

The almighty god grant us grace to live so here in this world, and to apply
our business in such wise, that he may be glorified amongst us: so that we
may finallye come to that felicity which he has prepared for us.

Amen.
The viii. Sermon made by Master Doctor Latymer. Luke. 21.
ANd there shall be signs in the Son and in the Moon, and in the Stars,
and in the earth, the people shall be at their wyts end, thorough despair, the
sea and the water shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and
(...) after those things which shall come on the earth. For the powers of
heaven shall move, and then shall they see the Son of man come in a cloud
with power and great glory: when these things begin to come to pass: then look
up and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nere.

This Gospel is red this day in the church, and it shall be for our lesson:
It is taken out of the 21. cap. of Luke: and it makes mention of the glorious
coming of our Savior Christ, how and in what manner of form he shall come:
for as the scripture witnesses, we shall al come before the judge meant of
Christ, and there receive every one according unto (...). Cor. (...).
his deserts: after his works he shall be rewarded of Christ, which shall be at
that time their judge: and there shall be signs and tokens before his glorious
and fearful coming. For then he shall come to (...): his first coming into
this world was to suffer his pain full passion, and so deliver mankind out
of the bondage and (...) of the devil. But when he comes again, he will
come of an other manner of wise, then he did the first time. For he will come
with great power and might, with the (...) of heaven, I is (...) Christ shall
come.
with all the aungelles of god, and so sytte at the audite and judge all men.
And this is most certain that he will come, but we cannot tell when or at
what time his (...) shall be. For the day of his coming is hydden from us, to
that end that we should be redye at all times. Therefore I desire you for
gods sake make you (...), put not of your preparation. For seeing that we be
certain that danger and peril shall come upon us, all they that be wise and
godly will prepare themselves, least they be taken The cause (...) the day of
(...) is hid from us.
suddenly unawares or unready. And therefore I say, this day is hydden from us,
to the intent that we ever should be ready. For if we should know the day
or the hour at what time he would come: No doubt we would be careless, we
would take our pleasure as long as we might, till at such time as we
should depart. And therefore least we should be made careless, this day is
hydden from us. For the Aungelles of GOD theymselues know not the The angels
know not that day.
hour or momente of this great and fearful day. Neither did Christ
himself know it, as he was man: but as he is God, he knows all things,
nothing can be hid from him: as he says himself, Pater commonstrat
John. 5.
mihi omnia, The father shows me all things: therefore his knowledge is
infinite, else he were not very God. But as concerning his manhood, he knew
not that time: for he was a very natural man (sin excepted:) therefore like
as he was content to suffer heat and cold, to be wearye and hungrye, like
as he was content to suffer such things: so he was content, as concerning
his manheade to be ignoraunte of that day. He had perfect knowledge Christ
knew his commission
to do his fathers commission, to instruct us, and teach us the way to
heaven: but it was not his commission to tell us the hour of this day.
Therefore he knew not this day, to tell us of it any thing, as concerning
when it should be. For as far forth as ignorancye is a paynefull thing unto
man, so far forth he was content to be ignorant, like as he did suffer
other things.

I will rather spend the time in exhortyng you to make re dye against that day,
to prepare your selves, then (...) recyte or expound the signs thereof, which
shall go before this fearful day.

And there shall be signs in the (...) and Moon: There be some learned men
which expound those tokens of the (...) of Jerusalem: but that is not the
matter, if they have gone before the destruction of Jerusalem: then they have
gone before the end of the world, and so admonish us to make ready, to leave
sin, least we be taken with it.

As touching the Jews, our savior Christ wept over them, and threatened
them, what should come upon them be cause they dispysed him, and would not
receive gods holy The causes of the destruction of Jerusalem.
word, and leave their sins: like as we do, which take our pleasure, care
little for him or his word: we cannot suffer when our faults are told us, we
repyne and grudge at it, like as yt Jews did. Therefore our savior knowing
what should come upon them, wept over the city, prophesying yt it Titus de
stroyd the City Ieru salem.
should so be destroyed, that one stone should not be left upon another: and so
it came to pass according unto his (...). for Titus the son of Uespasian,
which was Emperor at that time, destroyed that same city Jerusalem utterly,
like a fourtye years after the death of our savior Christ. But wherefore
were they so destroyed? because they would not believe the sayings of our
fauiour Christ: they would take their pleasures, they would follow their
forefathers (as our papists are wont to say.) When they cannot defend them
selfs with Scripture, then they will defend them selfs A note (...) papists.
with the ignorauncye of their forefathers: much like unto the Jews, which
could not away with the doctrine of our Savior, because it was disagreyng
from the customs and traditions of their forefathers. But what happened? their
destruction fell upon them before they perceived it, and destroyed the most
paete of them full miserably god knows: and not only that, but as the storye
does show, they that were left Thyrtie (...) for a penny.
and not brought to destruction, were so (...) handled, and so despised
amongst all men, that thirty were sold for a penye: and so by that means
they were scattered throughout all the world: and in every country where they
came, they were made slaves and Tributaries: and shall be so til to the end of
the world. for Scripture says: Jerusalem calcabitur Luke. (...).
a gentibus, donec implebuntur tempora (...), Jerusalem shall be trodden under
the feet, till the times of the gentiles be fulfilled. By this prophecye is
signified, that the Jews never shall come together again, to inhabit
Jerusalem and Iurye, and to bear rule there, as they have done: for by this
word (calcabitur) is signified as much, as it shall be inhabited it shall be
under the dominion Who be the (...).
of the gentyles. Now which are gentiles? Answer, all the people in the
whole world are gentiles, be it whatsoever they will, except the Jews: all
other are gentiles: We Englismen are gentiles, so likewise the Frenchmen.
Dutchmen, and other nations, all are gentiles: Now the Prophet says, that
Jerusalem shall not be inhabited Donec implebuntur tempora gentium, till the
times of the gentyles be fulfilled, that is to say, till all they are come
into the world which are appointed of god to come: that is to say, they shall
never come together ag^ayn, till to the end of the world. Wherefore? because
they were (...) that they would not be ruled by gods most holy word,
but despised it, and lived according unto their own fantasies and vanities.
Like as we do now adays, the most part of us. Therefore we may reckon that
it shall go with us one day like as it went with them, which are made now
outecastes of the whole world: every manne despises them, and regards
them for nothing: for they have no dominion Like sin like punishment.
more, no king nor ruler, no cities nor pollicye.

And though Jerusalem be builded again, yet the Jews shall have it no more,
they shall never have dominion over it, but the gentyles, they shall have it:
it shall be in their hands: And this is the meaning of this pro phecye against
the Jews, and this God has performed hitherto: The cause why the (...) can no
(...)
for the Jews have many times attempted to build it again, yet for all that
they were not able to bring it to pass: for gods word will not nor can not
be falsified, for the wrath of GOD hangs upon their beads, because of
their wickedness wherewyth they baue provoked God. Further you must
understand that not only Jews were at Jerusalem, but they were scattered
thoroughout all the world: in every country were some, and therefore they were
not all destroyed when Jerusalem was destroyed: but for all that they were
cursed in the sight of god: so that they should not inhabit any more that
city.

We read in stories, that in the days of the Emperor Adzian, the Jews
gathered themselves together out of al cities a wonderful number of men, all the Jews which could be gotten, to the intent that they might get Jerusalem
again, The jew vain (...) prise.
which Jerusalem was at that time in the Emperors hands: and therefore they
made great preparations to have it again, but what does the Emperor, he
gathered together a great and strong heste and made against (...), and in the
end scattered them: so that they were without any hope afterward to recover
that city again: after which things, the Emperor made a proclamation that
not one Jewe should come into the city neither to bye or to sell: yea and
further more, to the intent that they should be without any hope of
recouerye, he changed the name of the city, and called it (...). So that by
the storye it most manifestlye appears that the word of GOD can not be
falsified by any power or cunning: for though they had a strong and
mighty hoaste: yet for all that God which is the ruler of all things
confounded them, so that they could bring nothing to pass after their
minds, as they would have it: but rather were banished further from the
city: for they were in worse case after this fightyng, then they had been
before, for they had an access unto the city before, which liberty afterward
they lost.

After that in Julianus the Emperors time, which Emperor (...) an Aposta ta
and per secutour.
was an Apostata, for he had been a Christian: and after he came to be Emperor,
he forsook the christian faith and al goodness and godliness: and not only that
but he did all that he could to vanquishe and pull down Christ's true religion:
and therefore he went about to set up the Jews again, and gave them
liberties to gather themselves together, and to return again to Jerusalem:
and not only gave them this liberty, but also he help them with all manner of
thing, that they might bring to pass their purpose: and so upon that the Jews
gathered themselves together in an infinite number ber of people, and went to
Jerusalem: and so began to make preparations for the buildyng of the temple,
and so finallye laid the foundation. The storye says, that this host of the
Jews was a wonderful rich host: for their mattockes, and spades, and ye
other instruments, which they occupied to the buildyng of the temple, were made
of fine silver. So these Jews had the Emperoures favor, his aid and
healpe, they were rich and able to set up their kingdom again: and so
falsifye the word of god after man's reason: for they lacked no worldly
things. But what does God? when he saw that no man would withstand them, to
verify his word, he sends a wind, a strong hurlyng wynd, which blue away
God can blovv wha^ he will.
all their provisions, which was made for the buildyng of the temple, all the
sand and mortar and such like things, which men use in such buildinges: and
after that, there came such an earthquake, that they were almost out of their
wits. And this was not enough, but there came also fire and burned by all
their works: and so finally they were scattered again one from another. So by
these stories, it manifestlye appears, that no man's power is able to stand
against god, or to disapoint him of his purposes: for Christ our Savior had
told them, that they should never come to their rule again. And so his words
are verified till this day, and shall be still to the worlds end: for he
says, Coelum and terra peribunt Math. v.
verba autem meum non peribit, heaven and earth shall perish, but my word
shall endure for ever. A man would think that there were nothing so durable
as heaven and earth is: yet for all that, they shall rather perish, then that
the word of god should be falsified. And this appeared in the Jews, which
though they had the aid and help of this great emperor, and the mighty power of
this world: yet for all that they brought nothing to pass at all, for god was
able to confound them: and so no doubt he will confound all his enemies, till
thend God is (...) almighty.
of the world: for he is as able to verify his words now as he was then. I
would have you to consider well the causes wherefore they were cast away from
God, and were made a mockyng stock unto the whole world. wherefore I say?
Marye for their wicked and sinful lives. Seeing then that they were cast out of
their (...), it shall be meet for us to take heed. For no doubt this is written,
for our instruction, to give us warnyng, as the Epistie which is red of this
day (...) us. Now god has fulfilled his word as touching yt destruction of
Jerusalem: he has made true his word of wrath, think ye not yt he will fulfill
his word of mercy to? yes no doubt ye may be sure of it, that he which
promised that if we believe in Christ, we shall be saved: he will as well erecute
and bring to pass that word, as he has brought God will perform his
promise.
to pass the word of his wrath and indignation over the Jews. The temple
which was at Jerusalem was called the temple of god, the people was gods
people, but when they would not come unto him, and live according as he would
have them to live, he cast them away, and utterly destroyed their dominions
and kingdoms, and made them slaves and bondmen for ever. And no doubt this is
written for our instruction and warnyng: for no doubt when we follow them in
their wyckednes, despise gods word, regard it as nothing, but live rather
according unto our fantasies and appetites, than after his word: No doubt we
shall receive like reward with the^. And though god tarry long, yet it shall be to
our greater destruction: for his longanimity and Deferring of punishment makes
it gre tes.
long taryeng for our amendment, shall increase, augment, and make greater our
punishments and (...). But if we will leave sin and wyckednes, and study to
live according unto his will and commanndementes. No douts be will fulfill his
promises which he has made unto (...) of everlasting life: for we baue his
warraunt in Scripture, therefore we ought not to doubt of it. for so he says:
Sic deus dilexit mundum, So entierly has God loved the world that he sent his
only be gotten son to that end, that all that John. 3.
believe in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. This is now a
comfortable thing and a great promise, which GOD makes unto the whole
world. And no dout he is as able to fulfill that promise of grace, as he was
able to fulfill his wrathful word against the Jews.

So likewise he says: Viuo ego dicit domin, nolo mortem Excc, xviii
peccatoris sed vt conuertatur and viuat, As truly as I live (says the Lord
god) I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he shall turn and
live. It is not his pleasure when we be damned, therefore he swears an oath: we
ought The cause why God swear.
to believe him without an oath: yet to satisfye our minds and to the intent
that we should believe him, and be the better assured of his good will
toward us, he swears this oath. Now therefore if we will follow him and leave
our wic ked living, convert and turn our selfs unto him, be sorry for that
which is paste, and intend to antend our life now forward: if we do so, no
doubt we shall live with him everlastingly, world without end. Therefore let every
one of us go in to his own heart, and when he fyndeth that he has brne a
wicked man, an yrefull man, a couetuous or a slouthefull man: let him repent
and be sorye for it. And take a good purpose to leave that same sin, where
in he has lain before. Let us not do as the Jews did, which were
styfnecked, they would not leave their sins, they had a pleasure in the
same, they would follow their old tradicions, The reward of the suffe necked.
refusyng the word of GOD: therefore their destruction came worthelye upon
them. And therefore (I say) let us not follow them, least we receive
such a reward as they had, least everlasting destruction come `vpon us, and
so we be cast out of the favor of god, and finally lost world without end.

And there shall be signs in the Sun and in the Mosne and in the Stars, and
in the earth. There be some which think yt there shall be great Eclipses against
the course of nature, and ye know that (...) has been great things seen in
the Element diuerg (...). Sometimes men have seen a ring about the Sun:
sometimes there has been seen (...) sons Suns that have (...)
at ones: and such like things, has (...) seen in times past: which no dout
signified that this (...) day is not far of, in which Christ will come with his
heavenly (...), to judge and reward every one of us, according unto his
descrtes. And the people shall be at their wits (...) through despair, men
(...) wonderful fearful: they shall pyne away for fear: and no dout these
shall be good men, which shall be thus troubled, with such a fear of this day:
for you know the worldlyn (...) care not for that day: yea they will scant
believe that there shall be such a day, that there shall be an other world Good
(...) shall by mour nyng fore (...) the end.
or at the least way, they would not (...) that (...) should be an other world:
therefore they shall be godly men which (...) so used, to be (...) unto the
world. And no doubt there has been here in England many already, which have
been so vexed and tormoyled with such fear. That same master Bylney which was
burnte here in England, for gods word sake, was induced and persuaded by his
friends to bear a fagotte at the time when the Cardinal was (...), and bare
the swing. Now (...) that same Bylney came to (...) again, a whole year after
he was in such an anguish and agony, so that nothing did him good, neither
eating nor (...) (...) bare a fagotte.
king, nor any other communication of gods word. For he thought that all the
whole scriptures were against him, (...) sounded to his condemnation. So that I
many a time (...) with him (for I was fannliarly acquainted with him) But all
things whatsoever any man could allege to his comfort, seemed unto him to
make against him: yet for all that, afterward he came again, god endued him
with such strength and perfectnes of faith, that he not only confessed his
faith, the gospel of our Saniour Jesus Christ: but also suffered his body to
be burnte for that same Gospels sake, which we now preach in England. (...)
Luther that wonderful instrumet of god, through who^ god has opened (...) Lu
there felt (...) the end
the light of his holy word unto the world, which was a long (...) in (...),
and neglected: he writes of himself that he has been sometymcs in such an
agony of the spirit, that he felt nothing but trembling and fearefulnes. And
I myself know two or three at this present hour, which be in this case. But as
concerning the ungodly, (...) say, (...) and (...) omnia, all things are well
with them, they care for no Before the (...) men (...) careless.
more but for this world. Like as in the (...) time, they were careless at
all, they thought all things were cocksure, till at such time when the flood
feil upon their heads. And so it is at this time with the ungodly too: they
care not for this day of judgment, it greeueth them not, till it fall upon
their heads one day.

It is said in scripture, that god leads into hell, and brings i. Regu^. ii.
up (...): and so it is with such fearful men: for god does cast them into
hall, he hides himself from them: but at the length he brings them out
again, and (...) the^ with a constant says: so that they may be sure of their
salua tion and (...) lyse. I knew ones a woman, that was A woman (...) in
conscience.
17. year (...) such an crercise and fear, but at the length she (...), and
god endued her with a strong and steadfast faith in the end. Therefore no dout
these be warnynges where with the almighty God warns us to make ready against
that horrible and fearful day, which day no doubt is not far of. For the
world was ordained of god to endure, (as scripture and all learned men agree)
sire thousand years: Now of this number are gone; syue thousand five hundred
52. so that there is left only four hundred and fifty lacking The time of the
world.
two: And this is but a little time: and yet this time shall be shortened as
scripture plainly witnesses for the elects sake. So that peraduentare it may
come in my days, as old as I am: or in our childrens days. Therefore let us
begin to (...) and fight be times with sin: let us not set all our hearts
and minds upon this world: for no doubt this day whenever yt shall come,
wylbe wonderful fearful unto all mankind, and specially unto the wicked.
There The end compared (...) a man's death.
will be great alterations at that date, there will be hurly burly: like as ye se
in a man when he dies, what deformity appears, how he stretches out all his
members: what a (...) is there: so that all his body comes out of frame: So
will it be at this fearful horrible day: there wylbe such alterations of the
earth, and the element, they will loose their former nature and be endued with
an other nature.

And then shall they see the (...) of man come in a cloud with power and great
glory. Certain it is, that he shall (...) to judge, but we can not tell the time
when he will come: therefore seeing that he will come, let us make redye, lest
be find us unprepared. And take this for a rule, that as he finds us, so he
shall judge us. Saint Paul to the Thessalonians: These. 4.
when he speaks of the resurrection of the good says, that at the same day
the trompet shall blow, and all shall rise which dyed since the world
began, than they yt shall be found alyus (...) the earth shall be changed
sodely, The manner of our (...).
and shall be rapte up into the air, and so meet Christ our sa uior. All those
(I say) that be content to strive and fight with sin, that will not be ruled
by sin. These (I say) shall of such wise be taken up in the air and meet
with Christ, and so shall come down with him again: but as for the other sort
which be wicked, and have a delight in wickedness, and will The just (...) come
with Christ to udge the (...).
not leave it, but rather go forwards in all (...), they shall be lefts upon
the earth with the deuylles, until they be judged: and after that they have
received their sentence, they shall go to hell with the devil, and all his
aungelles, and there be punished for their sins in hellish fire, world
without end, for so it is written, Vermis little no^moritur, Their worm dies
not.

The Sun shall be darkened and the Moon shall not give her light: ye shall not
take these words so, as though the Sun and Moon should be obscured or
darkened, their light being taken from them. But it is to be understand, that
tho rough the brightness of his glory they shall be obscured and darkened. The
Sun no doubt will shine, but her light (...) inter pretation is true, but
not the (...) of the (...).
shall not be seen, because of the bryghtnes of his glory: like as when ye
set a burning candell in the Sun the (...) burns in deed, but her light
is not seen, because of the bryghtnes of the sun. So it will be at that time,
with the Sun: for though she be the bryghtest and clearest creature above all
others, yet for all that Christ with his glory and (...) will obscure her: for
his light that he shall bring with him, shall be so bright, that the other shall
not be seen. And this his coming shall be wonderful confortable and joyful
unto them which are prepared or chosen to everlasting life: Unto them (I say)
that be content to leave their sins and wickedness here in this world, and
live conformable to god and his holy word: which are not proud or stout:
not covetous, or whoremongers: or if they have been so, they will leave it, and
do no more so: they are sorry for it, from the bottom of their hertes. Item
they that for sake all manner of falsehod, of (...), and all manner of vices, as
gluttony, lechery, swearing. They (I say) that (...) content to wrestle with
sin, they shall (...) at that time and be merry beyond all measure. And
this is the thing wherefore all godly and faithful people pray in this
petition, Adueniat regnum tuum, Thy kingdom come: they desire of God the
almighty, that his kingdom (that is to say) the last day may come, that
they may be ones delivered from their sins, and live with him euerlastyngly
world without end. The end shall be fearful.
As for the other part, this shall be a heavy and fearful coming unto them,
that intend not to leave their sins and (...): but rather will take their
pleasures here in this (...): it shall be a heinous sentence unto them, when he
shall say unto them: Ite (...) in ignem (...), Go (...) Mat. xxv.
cursed into everlasting (...), which is prepared for the devil and all his
angels, get you hence from me: for ye might have been saved, but ye would
not: ye despised my words and commandments: ye regarded more your own
pleasure, than that which I had commanded you. Hense therefore get you
hence to the devil and all his aungelles, after whose will and commandments
ye have lived, his reward therefore ye shall have.

Of such manner Christ our Savior will talk with the At the end all shall be
open.
ungodly, and in the end send them to everlasting damnati on. And this shall be
an heause burden for them: and though they can cloak and hide their sins in
this world, yet for all that god will open their wickedness and filthy (...) at
that (...): where all the world shall know it, and where they shall not be able
to hyde themselves or their sins. This (...) wylbe like unto a parliament: ye
know when things are amysse in a realm, or out of order, all they that be
good hearted, The end (...) to a (...).
that love godlynes, they wyshe for a parliament: these would feign have that
all the rulers of the realm should come together, and bring all things in
good order agayns. For ye know that parliamentes are kept only for this
purpose, that things which be amysse may (...) amended: and (...) it will be
at this last day, at this general parliament, where god himself with all his
heavenly power wylbe present, and ouersee al things, and hear all causes, so
that nothing shall escape him: for than all these things which the devil (...)
brought out of order, they shall be amended: and the devil shall not be able
afterward to corrupt them any further, but all things shall be well for ever:
Let us therefore ever have in fresh remembrance this day, that it wylbe a heavy
day unto them that be wicked: And again, a joyful pleasant day unto them yt
(...) no delight in wickedness. Therefore Christ says, (...) capita vestra. (...)
ye see these things, than hold The end shall (...) to the (...). Luc. (...).
up your heads, that is to say, be merye and rejoice: for ye know when we be
merrily disposed we hold up our heads, and laughe. So Christ (...) us to
hold (...) our hea des: that is to say, to be merry: for our redemption is
come near. So Christ comfort us, and makes us to hold (...) our heads
for our redemption is come nerer then it was before. What? (...) not redeemed
us before by his death and passion? (...) chances it then that our redempti
on is come nerer: Mary Christ has redeemed us before in (...) by his death
and passion: yet it appears not unto us (...) it is that shall be saved or
damned? for we see the good and the bad bear both the name of Christians: good
and bad, faithful and unfaithful, are baptized in the name of Christ: so
likewise they (...) to the communion, so that there is no great difference
here in this world between the elect and reprobate: for the very unfaithful
give alms, and do such out (...) acts which seem unto us to be good, and
be done with a good heart, when it is nothing less. So that I say, (...) can
not tell as long as we be here in this world which (...) elect and which not:
but at the last day, than it shall appear who is he that (...) saved, and
again, who shall be damned. And therefore Christ says, our redemption dralt
(...) necre, that is to say, it shall appear unto the whole world, that we be
the children of god. Therefore his coming will be a glad and joyful coming
unto the faithful: for they (...) of Christ's word.
shall be the children of god, they shall be delivered and rydde out of all
miseries and calamities. But the unfaithful shall (...) to desperation at that
day: they that take their pleasures here, they that remember not this day, they
shall be condemned with the (...) and unchangeable judgment of god. And they
shall not (...) any men of law, to go (...) to defend or (...) their causes.
(...) no, the men of law shall not be troubled at that day in defendyng of
other men's Men of (...) shall notbe: (...) bled (...) matters (...) the (...).
causes: but rather they themselves shall be called to make an account for their
doings: and there they shall be judged, so that they shall not be able to
speak any thing against it: for their own (...) and consc ences shall and
will condomne them. And though this great and general day come not in our
time, yet let us consider that we shall dye: and that we have but a short
time to live here in this world. And as we dye so we shall rise again. If we
dye in the state of damnation we shall rise in that same (...): again if we
dye in the state of salvation, we shall rise again in that same estate, and
come to everlasting (...), both soul and body. For if we dye now in the
(...) of salvation, then at yt last generalday of judgment we shall hear this
joyful sentence procedinge out of the mouth of our savior Christ, when he
There is (...)-(...).
will say. Venite (...) dicti patris (...) paratum (...) ab exordio mundi, Come
ye blessed of my father, Math. 25.
possess that kingdom which is prepared for you from the the beginning of
the world. And though we have much misery here in this world, though it
goes hard with us, though we must (...) in the brydell: yet for all that, we
must be contence, for (...) shall be sure of our deliverance, we shalts sure that
our salvation is not far of. And no dout they that (...) with sin, strive
and fight with it, they shall have the assistaunce of god, he will help them:
he will not forsake them, (...) will strengthen them, so that they shall be able
He that will fight shall have help.
to live up rightlye: and though they shall not be able to fulfill the laws
of god to the uttermost: yet for all that, god will take their doings in good
part, for Christ's his sons sake: in whose name all faythefull people does
their good works, and so for (...) sake they be acceptable unto god: and in
the end they shall be delivered out of all miseries and trou bles, and come to
the bliss of everlasting joy and felicity.

I pray god that we may be of the number of those, which shall here this (...)
and most comfortable voice of Christ our savior when he will say, Venite
benedicti patris. (...) ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom which is
(...) for you (...) fore yt fou^datio^ of the world was laid. There be a great
number (...) yt christian people, which in yt lords (...), when they pray (thy
kingdom come) pray that this day may come, but yet for all that, they are
drowned in the world: they say the words with their lyppes, but they cannot
tell what is the meaning of it: they speak it only with their tongue, which
saying in deed is to no purpose. But that man or woman Some do not know what
(...) ask in prayer.
that says these words (thy kingdom come) with a faithful heart, no doubt
he desires in very deed that God will comme to judgment, and amend all
things in this world, to pull down Satan, that old serpent under our fete.

But there be a great number of us which be not (...). Some have lived in this
world 50. years, some 60. yet for all that they be nothing prepared toward his
coming: they think ever he will not come yet: but I tell you, that though his
general coming be not yet: yet for all that be will come one day, and take us
out of this world: and no doubt as he He will come (...) by death
fyndeth us, so we shall have: if he (...) us ready, and in the state of
salvation, no doubt we shall be (...) for ever world without end. Again, if he
(...) us in the state of damnation, we shall be damned world without end: there
is no (...), after we be ones past this world: no (...) will help than, nor
nothing that man is able to do for us. Therefore it is (...) for every one of us
to take (...) betymes: let us not (...) to long with our amendment, least
peraducnture we shall com to short: for no dout we (...) rewarded according
unto our deserts.

But there be some (and has been a great number of us) which have trusted in
masses and pilgrimages, in setting up (...), and such like (...): but I tell
you, all this gear will not help, it is to no purpose: for if al yt masses which
(...) said in all (...) sense the mass began: if all these masses (I say)
were bestowed upon one man, to bring him out of the state of damnation, it were
all to no purpose, and to no effect. Therefore let us not put our hope and trust
in such The mass is but a (...).
(...): for if we do, no doubt we shall deceive our selves, Again there be some
people which differ and delay their ame^dmentes of life, (...) such time as
they shall dye: then they take in hand to leave sin, when they are not able
to do any more: They will take their pleiures as long as (...) be able to have
(...). they think it be time enough to repent at the last hour, when they
shall depart, and forsake this world.

Such people does very naughtely, and no doubt they be in a danger ous
estate: for they are not sure whether they shall have at that same last time,
gracc, or not, to repent and (...) for their sins. Peradventure their
hearts The surest (...).
shall be so hardened in sin and (...), that they shall not be able to repent,
or be sorye for their fauites. Therefore the best and surest (...) is to
repent betymes, while we have time, and to be sorry for our wyckednes, and to
take an earnest mind and purpose to leave sin: when we do so, then no doubt
we shall be taken up with Christ, and dwell with him in heaven everlastingly,
in great honor and glory 1 Cor. a.
where we shall have such joy, which no tongue ca^ express, no eyes has (...),
nor ears has heard yt inestimable felicities and (...) which god has laid up
for his faithful. And like as our pleasure and joy shall be inestimable, if we
repent betymes, and leave sins: so like wise the (...) of the^ that will not
leave sin, but ever go forward in (...), shall be inestimable and (...) ble to,
their pain shall be (...), and yet they shall bear the^. Therefore let every man
take heed how he spe^deth his tune, how he takes his pleasure in this world,
sor (...) as yt general Our ends shall be (...) certain.
great day shall be vncertai, so also our particular day: where we shall depart this
world shall be (...), peradventure some of us shall die to (...) or yt next day:
therefore it shall be meet and (...) for us to make ready, lest we be taken
sodeinly unawares.

And then shall they see the son of man come in a cloud with power and great
glory. Saint Paul to the Thessalonians sets out the coming of Christ
and our resurrection: but he speaks in the same place only of the rysynge of
the good and (...) that shall be saved. But the holy Scripture in other
places witnesses, that the wicked shall rise to, and shall receive their
sentence of Christ, and so go to hell, where they shall be punished world without
end. Now S. Paul's words be these. This say we unto you in the word of the
Lord: that we which shall live 1. These. 4.
and shall remayn in the coming of the lord, shall not come be fore them which
sleep. For the lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute, and the
voice of the Archaungell and trompe of god, and the dead in Christ shall arise
first: then we which shall live, (...) we which shall remain, shall be caught
up with them also in the clouds to meet the Lord in the (...), and so shall
we ever be with the Lord. wherefore comfort your selves one another with these
words.

By these words of S. Paul it appears, that they which died in the beginning
of the world shall be as soon by Christ as they which shall be alive here at the
time of his coming. S. Paul thought the last days might com in his (...)
I would have you to note well the manner of speaking (...) S. Paul uses he
speaks like as if the last day should have been come in his time. Now when S.
Paul thought that this day should have been come in his time: how much more
shall we think that it shall be in our time? For no dout he will come, and it is
no long thereunto, (...) it appears by all scriptures which make mention of
this day: it will come, but it shall come suddenly, unawares, as a thief in the
night. For a thief when he intends a robbery, to rob a man's house, to
(...) up his (...), and take away his goods, he gives him not warnyng, he
lets not the good The last day (...) to a thief.
manne of the house know, at what time he entendeth to come: but rather he
entendeth to (...) such a time, that no man shall be ware of him. So no doubt
this last day will come one day suddenly upon our heads, before we be ware
of it, like as the fire fell down (...) upon the (...) for: they thought that
all things were well, therefore they took their pleasures, till at such time
when the fire fell (...) from heaven and burned them up al, with all their
substance and goods.

So likewise as it happened unto the first world, which would not amend their
lives, but followed their carnal (...), and appetites, god sent the floude upon
their heads, and so (...) them altogether. (...) let us take (...) this great
day do fall upon us, like as the flood and the fire (...) upon the first
world, and upon the Sodomites.

Saint Hierome that holy man writes in a place, that he S. Hierom looked for:
the (...).
thought ever he herd this trumpet of god and the archangell blow. I would
wyshe that we would follow the ensaumple of (...) in that point, that we would
be so fearful least this day come upon us unawares.

And he showed them a (...), (...) the fygge tree, and all the trees, when they
shute forth their buddes, ye see and know of your (...) selfs yt summer is
tha^ near at hand. So (...) ye see the tokens which shall go before this
fearful day, it is time to make redye. But here a man might ask a question,
saying: I pray you wherein (...) this preparation? how shall I make me redye?
About this matter has been great (...): for there has been an infinite
number, and there be some (...) at this time, which think that this readiness
stands in masses, in setting up candels, in going of pil grimage, and in
such like (...): they thought to be made redye toward that day: and so to
be made worthy to stand before the son of man, that is before our savior
Christ. But I tell you this was not the right way to make ready. Christ our
savior he shows us how we shall make ready our selves, saying. Take heed to
your selves least at any time your hearts be overcome with (...) and
drunkenness and cares of this world, and so this day come upon you unawares:
for as a snare shall it come upon all them that dwell upon the (...) of the
whole world. (...) ye therefore continually, and pray, that ye may (...) all
those things that shall come: and that you may stand before the son of man.
Here Christ she weth wherein this preparation stands (...) in keeping our
selves from superfluous eating and (...), and in watching and praying. For how
comes (...) to pass that the whole world is so deceitful and false? Because
every man would feign fare well, every one loves to The right way to make
ready for the (...).
have good (...) and drink, and to go gaylye. And when they have not wherewith
to get such things, then they fall to pyckyng, and stealyng, and to falshode:
and so (...) their (...). But our savior he gives us warning yt we shall (...)
and drink measurably, and soberly, every one according to his estate and
measure. (...) we ought not to be careful for this life, we should labor and
do our business diligently, every one in that estate, in which god has (...)
him, and let us trust in god, which no doubt will send us increase of our
labor. Therefore Christ adds, saying: Vigilate and (...), watch and pray, as
whosay, be ever in a redines least ye be taken unawares: but those sluggardes
which spend their time vainly in eating, and drinking, and sleping, they
plese not god. for he commands us to watch, to be myndfull, to take (...) to
our (...), lest the devil, or the world, or our own flesh, get the victory
over us. We are allowed to take (...) natural sleep, for it is as necessary
for us as (...) and (...) allo (...) at (...) han des.
drink: and we please god as well in that same, as we please him when we take
our food. but we must take (...), that we do it according as he has
appointed us: for like as he has not ordained meat and drink, to yt end yt
we should play the glutton with it: so likewise the sleep is not (...), that
we should give our selfs to (...), or over much sleepyng: for no doubt whenne
(...) do so, we shall displease god most highly. For Christ says not in vain,
watch and pray. He would have us to be watchers, to have at all times in
remembrance his coming: and to give our (...) to prayer to that (...), that
we may be able to stand before him at this great and fearful day. Meaning
that we (...) not trust in our selfs but call unto God, saying: (...) god
almighty thou haste promised to come and (...) A form of prayer.
the (...) and the (...): (...) beseech thee give us thy grace and (...), that
(...) live so according (...) thy (...) (...): that when thou come, thou
(...) not cause to bestow thy fearful anger, but rather thy loving kyndnes
and (...) upon us. So like wise when we go to bed, we should desire god that we
(...) not in the sleep of (...), and wickedness: but rather that we may leave
(...), and follow his will and pleasure, that we be not led with the desires
of this wicked world. Such an earnest mind we should have toward him, so
watchful we should be. for I tell you it is not a tryfell matter, it is not a
money matter: for our eternal salvation, and our damnation (...) upon it. Our
nature is to do all things that is possible for us, to get silver and gold:
how much more then should (...) endeavor our selfs to make ready toward this
day, when it shall not be a monye matter, but a soul matter: for at that day
it will appear most manifestlye, who they are, that shall enjoy everlasting
life: and who shall be (...) into hell: Now as long as we be in this world, we
have all one (...), we go all to the lords supper, we bear all the names of
christians: but Hypocrites ca^ no: be well espied in this world
then itwyll appear who are the right christians, and again who are the
Hypocrites or dissemblers.

Well I pray god grant us such hearts, that we may look diligently about us,
and make redye against his fearful and joyful coming: fearful to them that
delight in syn and wickedness, and will not leave them: and (...) unto them that
repent, forsake their sins, and believe in him: which no dout will come in
great honor and glory, and will make al his faithful like unto him: and will
say unto them that be chosen to everlasting life, Venite benedicti (...) mei,
Come ye blessed of my father, possess that (...) which is prepared for you
(...) yt beginning of the world. Again to yt wicked (...) not live according
unto his will and pleasure, but follow their own appetites, he will say, Ite
maledicti in ignem aeternum, Go ye cursed in to everlasting (...). O what a
horrible thing will this be? to depart from him which is the fountain of al
goodness and mercy, without who^ is no consolation, comfort, nor rest, but eter
nal sorrow and (...) death? for gods sake, I require you let us consider this, yt
we may be amongst those which shall hear Venite, (...) to me: that we may be
amongst (...), which shall shall (...) eternal life. And no doubt we shall be
amongst them, if we will be content to leave (...) and wyckednes, (...) The co
(...) ye (...) comes of leaving (...).
strive with it, and let it not have the rule and governance over us: when we
have done any man wrong, or have (...) good from him wrongfully, if we (...)
content to restore it again: for no doubt restitution must be made, as I told
you many a time before, Restitutionis famae and rerum sunt opera (...),
Restitution of a man's good or his name must needs be made: for in that point
agree all the writers new and old: they say that restitutions must needs be
made either in effect, or affect. For this is a sure probation, that this man
or woman is not right sorry for his sins, and (...), that is not content to
make restitution when he has taken away things unlawfully against conscience
from his neigh bour. Therefore he that is content to leave his sins, and to
make restitution of such things which he has taken away wrongfully from his
neighbor: shows himself to be a very (...) man. So likewise they that
live in sobernes abuse not the (...) of god, but use them with thanks geuyng.
(...) the (...) thereof.
Item he that lives chastely keeps himself from (...), and when he feels
that he has not the gift of chastity, maryeth in the fear of god, according
unto his ordinance, makes ready for that day: and as concerning young folks,
al ye writers agree, that with a mean (...) young folk may live chaste, when
they be well governed and ruled and kept from ydelnes: then it is no great
matter for them to live chaste, as long as they be in growyng: but such young
persons must beware above all things of foul and filthye talks: for it is as
S. Paul says: Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua, foul and filthy
talks destroy good ma ners, good bryngyng up: and then again young folks must
beware of over much eating and drinking, for S. (...) says: he that is a
great drynker of wine, says he: I will never (...) is a door for the devil to
come (...)
believe yt he is a chaste man: therefore (...) young unmarried folk beware of
drynkyng, and then again of idleness: for when the (...) fyndeth them idle, it
is done with them. they are soon overcome. Therefore let them ever (...) well
(...) till they come to age, and then let them be married in the lord: for the
scripture most highly praises marriage. S. Paul says: Honorabile coniugium
inter omnes, Marriage is honorable amongst all me^. Further, let us take heed
of swearyng. For we may not swear at al, and we may swear by nothing, but by
god, by whom we may not swear, except it be a great urgent cause, except I be
called thereunto by a magistrate: and when I am called so, then I must swear
by no body else, save only by god. Therefore they that are so used to swearing,
do very naught: and no dout gods vengeance Nonemust be svvorn by but god only.
bangeth over their heads. for certain it is, that he which is a great swerer,
is also a great liar. But as I said before, they ye will leave such wickedness,
and will live conformable unto Swearing and lying go together.
gods word, and then believe in (...) our savior, trust and believe to be
cleansed from their syns, thorough his death and passion: no doubt they shall
here this joyful sentence of Christ our savior. Com to me ye blessed of my
father, possess yt king dom which is prepared for you from (...) beginning of
yt world. We esteem it to be a great thing to have a kingdom in this world, to
be a ruler, to be a lofte and bear the swing: how much more then should we
regard this kingdom, which Christ our savior offreth unto us, which kingdom
will be an everlasting kingdom, where there shall be no end of joy and felicitye?
therefore all they that will be content to follow our sauiors steps, to suffer
with him here in this world, and bear the cross after him, they shall reign
with him in everlasting glory and honor. which grant us god the father son
and holy ghost.

Amen.
The ix. Sermon made by Master Doctor Latyiner. Math 11. Luke. 7.
When John being in prison heard the works of Christ he sent two of his
disciples, and said unto him, art thou he that shall come, or do we look for
another: Jesus answe red and said unto them, go and show John again, what ye
have (...) and seen. etc.

This is red in the church this day, and it shall serve us this day for our
(...).

It begins this, when John being in prison heard the works of Christ: and
here is to be had in consideration, of whom he had heard these wonderful
works which our savior did, for he could not hear it without a seller, some
body told him of it. The Cuangelist Luke in the 7. cap. does show, how and by
whom John Baptist heard such things, Luke. 7
which our savior Christ did: namely by his own disciples. (...) dis ciples
told him of the works of Christ.
For when our savior had raised up the widows soune, which was deadat
Naine, the disciples of John came by and by, unto John their (...), and told
him all things: name lie how Christ raised up that same young man, which had
been dead already. And this is a thing to be mcruasled at, that John had so
much liberty: that his disciples could come (...) him, and speak with him:
Herod the king being a cruel man, a (...) king, a miscreaunte, a man of
unbelief: No doubt it is a great matter that his disciples could have
liberty to speak with him: for a man would think that no man should have
been permitted to come nere him. For I know that in christian (...), some
being (...) into prison for the (...), for gods words sake, have not been
(...), that their friends should have come nere unto them: and here it
appears most manifestly that christian princes The heathenrulers more mer
cifull then the (...)
have some times more cruellye and extremely used gods preachers, then the
gentiles, ye heathen used their preachers sent unto them from God to teach
them, they were more straightlye holden and more extremely handeled then (...)
was: So we read likewise of S. Paul which was cast into prison at Rome (...)
that wicked and cruel tyrant the em (...): which Emperor though he was a
cruel tyrant, a wicked man, and a venomous persecutour of gods church, and
his holy word: yet for all that, Paul had liberty to speak with every one
that would come unto him, and common with (...). So that there came unto him,
which (...) and (...) might speak with him what they would: for s. Luke Act.
xxviii
(...) in the last chapter of the (...) these words: And Paul (...) two years
full in his lodgyng, and (...) all that came in unto him, preaching the kingdom
of god, and teaching those things which concern the lord Jesus with all
confidence, no man forbidding him. Here by these words we may perceive, yt
Paul had liberty to say his mind, and to commune with his friends, he was not so
straightly kept. But we see (...) have had experience, that preachers which
profess that same word, which Paul taught, are more straightly handled in
christian realms, then in (...) past they were, when yt rulers (...) princes A
note (...) ru lers.
were not christians: christen princes be (...) earnest to extin guish gods
word and his true religion the^ the heathen were, which knew not or would not
know god. But now ye might ask what manner of works were these which our
savior (...) done in the presence of John's disciples, which by and by
afterward (...) and told their master of it, what special things had our
savior (...). Answer: Luke the Evangelist she (...) a great and marvelous act
which Christ our savior had Luke. 7.
done immediately as John's disciples came unto him. The sto ry is this: when
Christ went into a city which is called Nain and many of his disciples following
him, and much people: when he was come (...) to the gate of the city, behold,
there was a ded man carried out which was yt only son of his mother (...) she
was a widow, (...) much people of yt city went with her: (...) here you may note
by the way, yt these citisens had their burying Burial without cities.
place without the city, which no dout is a laudable thing: and I do much marvel
yt London being so rich a city has not a burieng place without: for no dout it
is an unwholesome thing to bury within ye city, specially at such a time when
there be great sicknesses, so that many (...) together, I think (...) Manytake
their (...) Paul's church (...).
many a man takes his death in Paul's churchyard: (...) this I speak of
experience, for I my self when I have been there in some mornings to hear yt
sermons, have felt such an ill faud red (...) savor, that I was the worse for it
a great while after. And I think no less, but it be the occasion of much sick
nes (...) diseases: therefore the citisens of Nain had a good and laudable
custom to bury the corses without yt city, which ensa^ ple we may (...). Now
(...) our savior saw this corse, (...) the widow, which was now a miserable
(...) sorrowful woman, for she had lost first her husband, (...) afterward her
son, in who^ she had all her hope and comfort in this world, him she had love
no we: therefore she was sorrowful, and not without cause: A comfort for all
(...).
But what does our savior: Mary he comforted her, saying weep not. Here may al
widows, which are destitute of com forte in this world, here (I say) they may
learn to trust in Christ, and to seek aid and help by him. For no doubt,
like as he has comforted this miserable widow: so he will comfort and help
all them that call upon him, in their need and necessity. For his hand is not
abbreuiated, or his power diminished: he is as strong, as rich, and as mighty
as ever he was: therefore let wydowes learn here to seek aid and help by him.
Now, when he had comforted her with his words, he came nigh, and touched the
coffyne: and they that bare the cof fine (...) still. And he said, A dolescens,
tibi dico surge, young man, I say unto thee, arise. And he that was dead sat
up, and began to speak. Now upon this there went such a rumor thoroughout
all the countries, so that every man merueiled at it. And John's disciples went
to their master and told him of it, what wonderful things he did. Note here,
that when we hear, yt our savior is a doer of such wonderful su pernatural
works, it shall be a wondrous great comfort unto us. For by this his deed, it
appeared manifestly, that he is a master over death: and has power to
command him: so that death is in his dominion. For, to raise a man up, whom
(...) has devoured already, is as much, as to command Christ is lord over
death.
death. But I tell you, death is such an arrogant fellow, and so proud, yea
and of so great might and strength, that he will give no man place, nor submit
himself to any man, save only unto god: unto him he must obey and humble
himself before his divine majesty. And therefore it appears here, that our
savior is very god, because death, that stout fellow, must obey him: he is
not able to withstandfor disobey his commandments: which is a most
comfortable thing unto us, which believe in such a savior, which has power
over death. And therefore, if he has power over death, then we shall be sure,
that death shall or can not hurt us, which believe in him: for when we believe
in him, he is able to de send us from death, hell, and devil. So that they
shall beable, with all their might or power, to hurt us, or do (...)
mischief: but we shall have life (...). For John. xi.
he says, Qui credit in me, et si mortuus fuerit, viuet, He that believes in
me, and though he dye, yet he shall live: that is to say, though he depart
out of this natural bodily life: yet for all that, he shall live,
everlastingly with me, world without end. This is now an ercedyng comfort,
to all chri stian people: for they may be assured, that when they believe in
Christ, when Christ takes their parts, there shall be nothing, neither in
heaven, nor in earth, that shall be able to hurt them, or let them of their
salvation: and so we learn by this wonderful miracle, which our savior did
before all the multitude, that he proved himself to be very god, and one that
has power over death. An (...),


But peradventure ye will say. No, it follows not: he raised up the dead,
Ergo he is very god. for we read in the old testamente that Elias, and Elisa,
(these holy Prophets of God) (...) such works too: they raised up the dead
as well as he: and yet for all that, they were not goods: but sinful men as
we be: though they had such a special gifts of god, yet they were not gods,
nor yet took upon them to be gods.

To this question, or objection, I will answer hereafter, and if I forget it
not. In the mean season, I will inoue an other question, which is this. What
should move John's Answer by an other question.
disciples: to come and tell him the miracles which Christ our savior did:
think ye they came with a good will to set out Christ, and to magnifye his
doings: or came they with an ill will, with an envious heart, which they
bear toward Christ? Answer. They came with an ill will, with an envious
heart, which they barc against Christ: as it appears most (...), by the
circumstaunces being well considered. For ye must understand, that John
had very much (...), to bring his disciples to Christ: they thought that
Christ and his doings, his conversation, were nothing in comparison of John.
For John's strayghte life, which he led in the wilderness, made such a show
and outewarde glisteryng, that our Savior was regarded for nothing, in
comparison of him. For our savior led not so hard and straight a life, as
John did: he eats and drunk, and would come to men's tables, when he was
bidden: he would keep company with every body, rich, and poor: (...) received
him: and would believe in him: but John was in the wyldernes, out of the
company of all men. Therefore the disciples of John, they much more regarded
John their master, then Christ their savior. And therefore they ever lay upon
John, in exhortyng him, yt he would John's dis ciples vvo'dhaue had him Christ.
take upon him to be Christ, and the savior of the world.

And when they had heard of any miracles, that Christ had done, they by and by
came unto their master, and told him of it disdainfully: as who say, thus and
thus, we have heard that Christ has done: wherefore show not thou thy self
to: wherefore workest not as well miracles as Christ does? every man speaks of
him: do thou somewhat too, that the people may know thee to be a great man as
well as Christ. We read in the gospel of Matthew, that John's disciples came
once to Christ, and quarelled with him, saying: Cur nos and Math. ix.
pharisaei ieiunamus frequenter, discipuli autem tui non ieiuna^t? Wherefore
fast we, and the pharisees, so many a times, but thy disciples fast not at al?
They thought in their own opinions, that John's life was a great deal more to
be esteemed then Christ's, because John's life was more painful, in the outward
show of the world: therefore it grieved them that Christ should be more esteemed
then John. So yt we may perceive by John's disciples, that they had a good
zeal, Sed non secundum scientiam, but not according unto knowledge. John's dis
ci ples did naught.


For it is a good thing, for a servant to love his master: but John's
disciples did naught in that they envied Christ, and went about to stir
up their master to take upon him to be Christ. Now John, entending to
correct and amend their false opinion, which they had in Christ, and in him:
(for they regarded him to much, and Christ which was to be most regarded,
him esteemed they for nothing, in compa John plai eth a wisepart.
rison of John: therefore John, that good and faithful man, seeing the
ignorauncy of his disciples, plays a wise part, For hearing them talk of the
wonderful works, which Christ our savior did, he sends them unto Christ:
with this question: Art thou he that shall come, or shall we look for another?

When we look only upon the outward show of these words, a man might think,
that John himself, was doutefull whether Christ were the savior of the world
or not, because he sends his disciples to ask such a question of him. But ye
must understand, that it was not done for John's sake, to ask such a question,
but rather for his disciples sake. For John thought that this should be the
way, to bring them to a good trade, namely to no them to Christ. For as for
John John knevve Christ in his mothers womb.
him self, he douted not, he knew that Christ was the savior of the world, he
knew it (I say) whiles he was yet in his mo there is womb. For we read in the
(...) of Luke: that after (...) came unto Mary, and brought her such tidings,
she arose and went thorough the mountains, and came to Jerusalem, to Elizabeth
her cosyne: and as she saluted her, the Evangelist says, saliit infans, in
vtero suo, the infant, which was John, lept in his mothers belly: So that John
being in his mothers belly yet, knew Christ which should be born out of the
virgin Mary. After that we read in the 3. of Mathews when John (...) baptize
Christ, he said unto Christ, Ego po Math. 3.
tius. I have more need to be baptized of thee, the^ thou of me. So that it
manifestly appears, yt John douted not of Christ but knew most certainly,
that he was the eternal son of god and the (...) which was promised unto the
fathers, to come into the world. For it was told him, from above, that upon
whomsoever he should see the holy ghost coming down from heaven (...), that
same was he, which afterward (...): for John after that he had baptized him,
saw the holy ghost come down in a form of a dove: further John appointed
him with his finger, saying: Ecce agnus (...) qui tollit peccata mundi See the
lamb of God, which takes John. i.
a way the sins of the world. So (I say) it is most (...), that John himself
douted not: for he knew it assuredly, that Christ was the savior, but he did
it only to remedy the doutes of his discyples. Now when John's disciples
came to Christ, they did their message, saying: Es (...) ille, qui venturus
est, an alium expectamus? Art thou he that shall come, or shall we look for
another? What does Christ? Christ shevved himself by deeds.
he made not answer with words, but with the deeds: he made not much adoo,
in setting out himself, with great words: but he showed himself to be
Christ in deed. For he does such miracles, which no man else could do, but only
he which was both very god and man. I would wish of god, that we would do so
to: that when we be asked a question, whether we be Christians, whether we
have the gospel, the true word of god, or not, I would wyshe (I say) that we
could show our faith by our works and godly conuersations: like as he showed
himself to be Christ, by his acts and deeds: but I tell you, we be far
otherwise: our acts and deeds disagree far from our profession. For we are
wicked, We show not our faith by ourvvorks
we care not for gods laws, nor his words: we profess with our mouth that we be
the haters of sins: but (...) conversation shows, that we love sin, that
we follow the same, that we have a delight in it. So it appears, that our
words and (...) agree not: we have gods holy word in our mouth, but we follow
yt will and pleasure of the devil in our outward (...) satio^ and living. But
Christ he did not so: for he showed himself by his outward works and
conversation, yt he was very (...) yt savior of yt world. So we should do to: we
should live so uprightly, so godly, that every one might know us by our outward
co^uersatio^, to be very christians. We should so hate and (...) sins, yt no man
justly might or could disalow our doings. But what manner of works does Christ,
whereby he shows (...) works vvher by (...) is (...)
himself to be yt very Messiah and savior of yt world? Answer. he heals al
manner of diseased folks, yt blind, yt lame, yt (...), and al other, which would
come unto him, and desire help at his han des. And finally, he preched the
gospel, this joyful tidings un to the poor: unto the^ Christ preched the
gospel: But I pray you, how chanced it, that he says: Pauperes
Eua^geliza^tur. The poor receive the gospel? answer: because the most part of
the rych men in this world, despise and contemn the gospel (...) esteem it for
(...): why? wherefore despise (...) yt gospel? Because they put their hope,
trust, and confidence in their riches. For the most part of the (...) in
this world, (I will not say all) do either put their hope in their riches: The
cause (...) che men contemn the gospel.
or else they come naughtely by their riches: or else they keep it ill, they
heap them up together: or else they spend them (...). So that it is a very
rare thing to (...) a godly rich man: for commonly they are given to gather and
to make (...), and so forget the poor in the mean season, who^ they ought to
relief: or (...) when (...) them, they spend (...) naughtely, not as god has
appointed unto them, (namelye to help their poor and needy neighbor:) but
rather do use them to excess, wantonness and pleasure. Therefore Christ says:
The poor receive the gospel, (...) they are most (...) The poor are most me
(...) he (...).
thereunto, they are all comfortless in this world, and so most meet to (...)
the gospel.

The prophets long aforehand had (...) of these works, which Christ when
he should come should (...). For so it is written. God comes his own
self, and will deliver you, then shall the (...) of the blind be lightened,
and the ears of the (...) opened, then shall the lame man (...) 35.
leap as an heart, and the domme man's tongue shall give thanks. In the
wyldernes also there shall be welspringes. This text of the Prophet witnesses
that Christ is very Es. y. lx. i.
god: for he has done such (...) and miracles, of which the prophet speaks.
Now in the same prophet it is further (...) ten, how that Christ should preach
the gospel unto the poor (...) people, for so he says. The spirit of the
lord god is upon me: for the lord has anointed me, to preach good things
unto the poor, that I might bynd up the wounded (...), that I might preach
deliverance to the captyue, and open the prison to them that are bound, that
I might declare the acceptable year of the lord.

Here the prophet (...) that whe^n Christ should come he should be a worker of
such acts, and a preacher which (...) works make (...) for (...).
should preach the gospel unto the poor: and therefore now when the disciples
of (...) came unto him, demandyng of him, whether he were Christ or not, he
answered by his works. Like as he says in an other place in the gospel to
the Phariseis. The works which I do, bear witness of me. As who say I prove my
self what I am, by my works: Again he says, if I (...) do the works of my
father, believe me not. So that most manifestly he proves himself to be that
prophet, which was spoken of before by the prophets and other holy men of
god. John the Evangelist in his gospel sai eth: and many other signs truly did
Jesus in the presence of John. xx.
his disciples, which are not written in this book, these are written that ye
might believe, that Jesus is Christ the (...) of GOD, and that in believing ye
might have life thorough his name. This is a very notable saying and most A
comfor (...).
comfortable to all troubled consciences, Jesus has done ma ny things which are not written, but these are written that we should (...) him to be Christ:
that that Jesus, Mary's son that was (...) at Bethleem, and nourished at
Nazareth, that he is the savior of (...): and so in believing in him, we shall
have life (...). So that there was never none that believed in Christ, which was
lost, but all bele uers were saved: therefore it is not to be douted, but yt if
(...) will believe, we shall be saved to. We (...) in a book which is An histo rye.
entitled Vitae patrum, the lyfes of the fathers, in that same book, we read
that there was ones a great holy man, (as he (...) to all the world) worthy to
be taken up into heaven: Now that man had many disciples, and at a time he
(...) syck: And in his sickness he fell in great agony of his conscience: in so
much that he could not tell in the world what to do. Now his disciples standing
about him, and (...) him in this case they said unto him: how chances it that
ye are so troubled father? for certainly there was no body so good a liver, so
(...) ly, as ye have (...): therefore you have not need to fear, for no dout
but you shall come to heaven. The old father made them answer again, saying,
though I have lived uprightly, yet for all that it (...) not help me, I lack
some thing yet: and so he did in deed. for (...) if he had followed the counsel
of his disciples, and had put his trust in his godly conversation, no dout
(...) should have been gone to the devil. For though we are commanded We must
not put (...).
to do good works, and we ought to do the^: yet for all that, we must beware
how we do them: when we do them (...) yt end to be saved by them, then we do
them not as we ought to do: then we thrust Christ out of his seat and (...).
For in deed ye kingdom of god is merited, but not by us. Christ he merited the
kingdom of heaven for us, through his most pain full death (...) passion. There
has been many perfect (...) among the heathen, which lived very well and
uprightly, as concerning their outward (...), but for all that they went to the
devil in the end, because they knew not Christ: for so says scripture,
whosoever believes not in the son, he is judged already. Therefore let us lern to
know Christ, and to believe in him: for knowledge must go before the believe, we
must first hear yt word of god and know it: And afterward we must believe the
same, and then we must wrestle and strive with sin and wickedness, as much as it
is possible for us: and so live well and godly, and do al manner of good works,
which god has (...) us in his holy laws: and then we shall be rewarded in
everlasting life, but not with everlasting life: for yt (...) life is a gift of
god, a (...) gift, (...) unto men through Christ. Now when ye disciples of
(...) were come to Christ, and had done their (...), had asked him whether he
were Christ (...) life is the gift of god.
or not: our (...) said unto the^: Go and show John again what ye have heard
and (...): and (...) we may learn by the way, what a pacie^t man our savior
Christ was, which could so well bear with the grosenes of John's disciples: for
they had (...) before many times of John, their (...), yt Christ was the savior
(...) the world, yet they could not (...) it: and so with their (...) they
came to Christ, which refused the^ not nor yet re uiled the^, but entreating
the^ most lovingly and gently, bears with their weakness: leaving us an (...)
to do so to. For we may (...) here by his (...), not to be hasty, but to An
example of (...) Christ.
(...) with our neighbors, though they be not by and by (...) we would have them
to be: yet we (...) not by and by reuyle them, or (...) them out of our
company, as (...), but (...) with their weakness, like as Christ bears with
the disciples of John.

Now to my question which I moved before: how could the The answer (...)
before.
works which our Savior did in raising up the (...), how could they prove him
to be yt savior of the world which was promised of God by his holy prophets,
when other holy (...) did the same works as well as he? And this must be aun
swered to, we may have no doutes in that matter: for when we doubt whether he
be the very savior or not, then we cast down the foundation of our faith, and
so bring our selves to the very pytte of hell. Therefore this shall be my
answer, Elias and Elisa raised up dead bodies, to prove by such miracles that
they were the right ministers of the (...) god: and that their doctrine was the
true doctrine, and the (...) word of god: to that end did they their miracles:
but they never said we be Christ's, or we be the sons of God, yea and very
gods. No no, they never took upon them such things: But our savior when he
did the same works, he took upon him to be Christ, to be the savior of the
world, to be the natural son of god, and so to the confirmation of such his
sayings, he did such works: therefore he says I John. 6.
am the bread of life: Item Ego sum resurrectio and vita, I am John (...).
the resurrection and the life. Item Ego sum via veritas and vita, John. (...).
I am the way, the truth, and the life, yea and when he talked with the woman
at the well, she (...) unto him: when the Messiah comes he shall teach us
all things. Then John. 4.
he says unto her: I am he that speaks unto thee: I am that same Messiah
which was to come, and promised of God, I am he.

Further, he says Venite ad me omne: qui laboratis, Come Math. xi.
to me al ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you. So it appears
that Christ is the very savior of the world, because he did the deeds of our
savior: and then again he took upon him to be he in deed, and openly confessed
it.

Further the time gives it that Christ should come, for so it was prophesied
of the good holy father and (...) Jacob, when he blessed his sons, he said:
The scepter shall Gene. 49
not depart from Judah, and a law geuer from between his (...) fig. (...) th
(...) of (...).
feet, until Schilo come: and unto him shall the gatheryng of the people be.

Now at that time when our savior was come, the scepter was taken from Judah:
for all Iurye was under the domini on of the (...), therefore Schilo must needs
come. So it appears that by the reason of the time, Christ must needs come
at the same season. So likewise Daniell in his vision showed, that after 62.
wekes should Christ be (...), (...). (...) shall have no pleasure in him. So ye
see that by the reason of yt time he must needs be the right savior of al
mankind, again Christ raised up the dead, and healed the (...) in his own
Christ (...) i the (...).
name, by his own authority: So did not the prophets or the apostles: for they
did it not in their own strength, but by the help of god. S. Peter raised up
Dorkas yt good godly woman but not by his own power: but Christ our (...) he
did all things, tanqua^ authoritate^ habe^s, as he that had authority. (...)
tibi dico, surge, young man, I say unto thee arise. So his works which he did
by his own divine power, prove him to be very god, and yt same (...), which was
promised unto the world.

Now when our (...) had told the disciples of (...) his worcester kes and miracles
which he did, he adds a pretty clause, and gives them a goodly (...), saying:
Et beatus qui no^ (...) on the galle.
fuerit offensus in me, And blessed is he that is not offended by me: here he
touches them, he rubbeth the^ at the gall, he did not mean John, for John was
not offended: but he did mean the^ themselves: for they were offended because
of his familiar and mean conversation. But ye will say, how can a man be hurt
by him, from whom comes no hurt at all? Mary I tell you, John's disciples were
hurt of Christ, and yet the fault was not in Christ but in them: Christ lived
a common life, he was a good familiar man, he eat and drank as other did he
came to men's tables when he was called: in so much that some called him a
gloser: therefore the disciples of John, (...) his simple life, were offended
with him. But I pray you should Christ have forsaken his manner of (...), and
follow the life of John, because some were offended with him? No not so. It was
scandalum acceptum and non datum, they took offenses themselves, he gave the^
none: he did according (...) taken and (...) given.
unto his calling, as he was appointed of his father. Here I have occasion to
speak of offenses. Scandalum is slander, (...) it has an other signification
with us: it is taken for an (...) or hurt, ye may define it so. An offense is,
when I say order any thing great or small, or speak any word whereby my (...) is
made the worse: but this offense is of two manner of (...), first when I do
well, and an other man is offended with my Offense is of (...) for (...).
well doings, this is Scandalu^ acceptu^. he takes offense, I (...) none,
again Scandalu^ (...) is, when I do wickedly and with my ill ensample hurt my
neighbor, this is offense given. There were many at our sauiors time which were
offended with him, because he preched yt word of god, and rebuked sins Math xv.
but Christ says, Sinite illos, let the^ alone, care not for the^, let them be
offended as long as they will, we may not leave the preaching of the truth, for
offenses sake, because my neighbor can not away with it. No not so, let us say
the truth, having a calling, as in deed every man has a calling, and most
specially prechers: We read in the gospel of John, when our (...). (...).
(...) says unto his (...), and to yt other people: Nisi comederitis, except
ye eat the flesh of yt son of man, ye shall have no life in you. By these
sayings of Christ, were many offended with him, in so much yt the gretest (...)
went from him and forsook hi they could not abide him. Now was Christ to be
blamed for yt? because he said so? No no, for he said nothing but yt truth. So
likewise yt preacher when he says the truth, is not to be blamed though some
be offended with him. When Moses came into Egypt what (...) happened because of his
com ming, in so much yt almost yt whole la^d perished: was he (...)? No, for he
did nothing but yt which god commanded him, but the Egiptia^s, they were
obstinate, they would not obey the voice of god: therefore Moses hurt them not,
but they hurt the^ A good thing (...) not be lef. undone.
selves with their infidelity and obstinate heart. So ye see, yt we may not leave
yt truth to be unspoken or an honest deed to be undone, because some (...)
offended with it. As for an ensample, here is a priest which (...) by himself yt
he has not the gift of (...): and therefore would fain mary, but he is afraid
yt some of his parishners should be offended with it, with his marriage: now shall he
leave his marriage because some will be (...) with him? No yt he shall not, let yt
priest instruct his parishners, tell the^ out of yt word of god, ye it is as
(...) for him to mary, as well as for another man after yt he has taught the^:
if they will not believe him or refuse his doctrine let him mary, and care not
for their offenses. I told you before, yt there be two manner of offenses,
scandalu^ datu^, and scandalu^ acceptu^, scandalu^ (...) is, when I offend my
neighbor by my wickedness, by my (...) and inordinate living: scan dalu^
acceptu^, when he is offended with me when I do a good deed: but for all yt we
ought not (...) leave an bonest act: because of an other ma^s offenses. But I
tell you, it is a perilous thing, and a (...) sin to do such a thig whereby my
neighbor shall be made yt worse, by my wicked en (...) al (...).
sample. As we have an ensample of (...) which offended al Israel, for he went
and set, up two golden calves, by which act he gave occasion to the whole
people to commit idolatry against god: and this was a heinous horrible sin: for
of it (...) wonderful mischief after. So likewise we read of a great (...) in
scripture, which is called Zambri, which gave an ill ensample in committing
lechery openly with a whore, who^ Phinees yt godly man killed: for his act of
lechery was a sto^bling block to al yt people of Israel. So ye see yt sca^dalu^
datu^, is a wicked act which I do, whereby my neighbor is made yt worse.
Therefore I pray you for gods sake, beware of such offenses: for so it is Math.
(...)
written in yt gospel of Mat. V ae hoi^ (...) qua^ scandala veniunt, (...) unto
yt man or woman by who^ offenses come. Therefore I say let us beware, let us
keep our selfs (...) yt (...) of gods ho Agree with gods word and pass (...)
for offense.
ly word, so yt all our doings may be agreeable unto yt same: and the^ (...)
when we agree with gods word, yt world will needs be offen ded with us, let us not
care for yt, for they hurt not us but the^sel (...). Let us therefore take good
head to our selfs, lest we do any thing whereby our neighbor might be offended.
for our sa uior says, whosoever does offend one of these little ones, which
believe in me, it were better (...) him yt a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drouned in yt deep of yt sea. There fore let parents take heed
how they speak in the presence of their little children, and masters ought to
take heed how they give ensa^ples unto their servants. For there be some
masters and parents yt will speak so (...) and (...) before their children and
servants, yt it is out of measure: and not only yt, but (...) will also swear
in the presence of their children, yea they will teach them to swear. Our
Savior how earnestly he commanded vsto beware of sweryng, therefore parents
ought to take (...), and specially such as be rulers over houses, or be
(...): if they do swear, all the householde will swear to, for it is commonly
seen that the servant follows the (...) of his (...), when they be ill, but
the servants The (...) are not hasty fo (...) en sample.
are (...) so (...) their (...) in goodness. and (...) is so (...) in an use,
that we can say nothing at all, (...) we (...) by god, or by my says, or such
(...) but there be some which when they be (...) decause of (...) they will say
(...) will not believe me (...) I (...) is a token that they have been great
liars. For (...) true man is to (...) without (...) and (...) certain (...)
that when a man (...) not (...), or has not a (...) to break this law of god,
(...) is to (...), he is I (...) neither (...) any (...), to do (...) Swering
and lying (...)
for because swering is as well forbidden as lying, and lying, as swering:
therefore he (...) makes no (...) in the one, will make less (...) in
theother. I my self have had (...) in usage to say in my earnest matters: yea
by S. Mary: and such like things, which in deed is naught. For we are
commanded not to swear at al. Therefore (...) unto the^ that swereth, that
(...) their neighbors or their children by swering, or other-wickednes. For it
were better that a (...) were hanged about our neck then to offend any body:
that is to say, he were better to be killed bodily, to suffer (...) Agaeat
(...) to be sone offen ded.
punishment bodily, for they that offend, they be (...) of their neighbors.
But we are faulty the most part of us, two manner of wais: first we will be
offended when there is no offense given, and again we will be bold to do (...)
thing whereby our neighbor may be (...) offended. But he (...) is a charitable
man, will not be lightly (...): for certainly it is a great fault to be rashly
offended. And to indge our neighbors deings to be naught and wicked, before we
know the truth of (...) matter: For we cannot see the hearts of men. Therefore
(...) long as (...) thing (...) not openly wicked, let us not be offended.
Again, if the (...) be necessary and good, let us not fear (...) ces: yet we
must take heed (...) we walk charitably. We have a liberty in the gospel, yet
(...) must take heed that we use that 1 Cor. 6
same liberty aright, according unto the rule of charity: for s. (...) says, o
nnia (...) sod non omnia conducu^r, All (...) are (...) unto me, but not al
things perfect. I must (...) with him, that is weak in (...): As for an
ensaumple, we may eat flesh upon frydayes by gods word, if there were not a law
made by the king and his most honorable (...): if there were no law (I say)
then I might cate (...) upon friday: yet for (...) that we must use our liberty
so that the use of it may (...) our neighbor, or (...) it when it may do
harm. So like as my liberty must be subject to charity, so my charity must
be agreeable to the (...) of the faith: for Thessa. v (...) of (...).
we may by no means leave the truth, leave gods word, (...) che we must most
steadfastly keep. We have a law that says, Abomni specie mala abstinete, So
that it is not a small matter to be a (...). We read a story that one Attalus
and Baldwine were cast into prison, for gods religions sake, in which prison
(...) were some which would not cate (...), (...) drink wine. Now the same
Attalus was instruct of god (...) he should monish those prisoners their
rigorousnes, which (...) did. And so at the length brought them to (...) their
foolishnes. But we can not do so here in England. For our (...) is taken away
by a law, if there were no such law, the^ we might eat as well (...) upon
frydayes as upon holy (...). And this Refraining of flesh is a matter of
policy.
law is but a matter of policy, not of religion or holiness: and we ought to
live according unto (...) laws of (...) realm, made by the kings (...): for
in all manner of things we (...) to (...) our selfs (...) the hedges of the
laws: in eating and (...) king, in apparel, in pastimes. In summa, our whole
conuer (...) should be agreeable unto the laws. For scripture says, (...) i
Peter. (...).
we should be obedient to al manner of ordinances, made by the lauful maiestrate:
therefore we must spend our life, and take our (...), so that it may stand with
the order of the reaim. (...) we would have in consideration these offenses, to
take (...) de of giving offenses. And again to beware of (...) or rashness to
(...) or condemn our brother: for to be offended haste ly is against charity.
But the world is so full of offenses, and so ready to be offended, that I think
if our savior were here upon earth again as he has been bodily, and should talk
with a woman at the well as he did once, I think that there would some be found
amongst us, which would be offended with him, they would think that he had
been naught with her: (...) I pray yon beware of rash (...) and rash (...). If
Rash (...) ces must be (...). (...). (...). (...).
my neighbor does somwaht whereby I am (...), let me go unto him, and speak
with him: but to judge him by and by without knowledge, that same is naught.
And further we must follow this rule, Nemo quod suu^est (...), sed quod al
terius, No man shall seek his own (...) but his neyghbors. I must vfe my
liberty, so that my neighbor may not (...) hurt by it, but rather (...). So
did S. Paul, when he (...), and at another time, when be perceived (...) the
people was stout in defending the ceremonies of the law he would not (...). Now
when the disciples of John were gone, then he begins to speak to the people
of John Baptist: for our (...) had a respect to (...), to bis (...) mation,
lest the people should think that (...) were in (...) of him, whether he were
(...) or not. What went ye out in (...) wyldernes to (...) A read that is (...)
of the (...) There was once an old man which cou^celled a young man, (...) should
(...) council (...) by an old (...)
be like as a read, he should be ruled as the world goes: for a read never
breaks but it follows the wind which way socuer it blows, the ocke tree
sometimes breaks because she will not bend. But Christ speaks these words to
the greats commendation of (...), because of his stedfastnes: there be many
redes now adais in the world, many men will go with the world. But religion
ought not to be subject unto policy Many re des in he (...).
but rather pollicye unto religion. I fear me there shall be a great number of
us redes when there shall come a persecution, that we must suffer for gods
word sake. I fear me there will be a great many that will change, which
will not be constant as John was. When a man is in the wrong or exronious
way, then he may and should change: but (...), says Saint Paul, we must
endure and stand (...) in that which is good and right, in gods word we
should stand fast, but not in (...). So that first we must see that we be
right, and afterward we must stand. This is a great praise where with our
(...) praised (...), for it is God ge (...)
no small matter to be praised of him which (...) the least thoughts of all men.

(...) what went ye out to (...) A man clothed in soft ray meant: be hold
they that were soft raymentes are in kings Clergy menought not to (...) fine
(...).
houses. Here in these words our Sautour condemned not (...) gear, as Sylke,
Sattyne, (...): for there is nothing so (...) but it may be worn, but not of
every body, kings and great men are allowed to wear such fine gear: but
(...) he was a clergy man, it behooved not him to wear such gear:
peradventure if he had been a slatterer as some be now a days, then he
might have gotten such gear, but (...) knowing his office, knew well enough
that it behooved not him to wear such fine gear: but how our cleargye men
were then, and with what (...) I can not tell; but I can tell that it
beehoueth not unto them to wear such delicate things.

Sainete (...) disallow gorgeousnes in women, how much more then in men:
for a man would thynks that women should have more libertyes in such
tryfles, but holy Scripture disalloweth it: and not only in women, Men
(...). stand by the (...) and contra.
but also in men. For he names women, because they are more given to that
vanitye them men be. For Scripture uses sometimes by this word women, to
understand men too. And again by the word (...) it understands women too.
For else we should not (...) in all scripture that women should be baptized.

Here were a good place to speak against our cleargye men, which go so
gallauntlye now adays. I hear say, that sum of them wear veluette
shoes, and velvet (...): such fellows are more meet to dance the morris
dance, then to be admitted to preach. I pray God amend such worldelye
fellows, for (...) they be not meet to be preachers.

(...) I will make an end, as concerning offenses: peradventure ye will say
how chances it that God suffers such (...) in the (...) Answer: (...)
sunt iuditia altissimi, The (...) of the Romans xi.
most highest are inscrutable, god can use them to (...) purpo ses: therefore he
says, (...) est vt scandala veniant, the^ ye will say: why should we then be
damned for offenses, when offenses are needful? Answer. When we do ill, we shall
receive our reward for our ylnes: for it is no thanks to us when god can use
them to good purposes, we ought to be punished when we do naught. Therefore the
best is to beware and take heed of offenses, and all other ungodliness and live
vprightlye in the fear of god. So that we may inherit the life (...) which he
has prepared for us from the beginning of the world, which grant us god the
father, god the Son, and God the holy ghost, one god and three per sons, now
and ever world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
27 SERMONS PREAched by the right Reverend father in God and constant Matir of
Jesus Christ, Master Hugh Latimer, as well such as in times past have been
printed, as certain other coming to our hands of late, which were yet never
set forth in print. Faithfully perused and allowed according to the order
appointed in the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions.

1. His sermon Ad clerum. 2. His fourth sermon upon the plough. 3. His.7.
sermons before king Edward. 4. His sermon at Stamforde. 5. His last sermon
before king Edward. 6. His.7. sermons upon the Lords prayer. 7. His other. 9.
sermons upon certain Gospels and Epistles.
Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae May. statis, per septenium. Anno. 1562.

The Sermon that the Reverend Father in Christ Hugh Latimer Bishop of
worcester, made to the Clergy, in the (...), before the Parliament began, the.
9. day of June, the. 18. year of the raygne of our (...) Lord King (...) the.
viii. Now translated out of latin into English, to (...) that things well said
to a (...) may be understand of many, and do good to al them that (...) to
(...) the truth.
Filii huius seculi. etc. Luc. 16.
(...), ye be come together (...) day (as far as I perceive) to hear of great
(...) waightye matters: Ye be come together to entreat of things that (...)
appertain to the common wealth. This being thus, ye look (I am assured) to
hear of me, which am commaun ded to make as a preface, this exhortacion
(albeit I am unlearned and unworthy) such things as shall be much meet for
this your assemble. I therefore not only very desirous to (...) the
commandment of our primate, but also right greatly coveting to serus and
(...) all your expectacion: lo, briefly and as (...) as I can, will speak of
matters, both worthy to be heard in your Congregation, and also of such as
best shall become mine office in this place. That I may do this the more
(...), I have taken, that notable sentence, in Luke. (...).
which our Lord was not afraid to pronounce: The children of this world to be
much more prudent and politic, than the children of light in their
generation. Neither I will be afraid, trustinge that he will aid and guide
(...) to use this sentence, as a ground and foundation of al such things, as
hereafter I shall speak of.

Now I suppose that you see right well, being men of such learning, for what
purpose the Lord said this, and that ye (...) no (...) to be helped with any
part of my labor in this have no need to be helped with any part of my labor
in this thing. But yet, if ye will pardon me, I will wade somewhat deeper in
this matter, and as nigh as I can, fetch it from the first original beginning.
For undoubtedly ye may much maruayl at this saying, if ye well ponder both what
is said; and who says it. Define me (...) these three things, what prudence
is, what the world, what light, and who be the Children of the world, who of
the light, see what they signifye in scripture. I maruail if by and by ye al
agree, that the children of the world should be wiser then the Children of the
light. To com somewhat nighec the matter, thus the Lord (...):

There was a certain rich man, that had a Steward, which was accused unto
him that he had (...) and wasted his goods. This rich man called his Steward
to him and said: What is this that I hear of thee: Come, make me an account
of thy steward ship: Thou may no longer bear this office.

Brethren, because these words are so spoken in parable, (...) are so wrapped
in wrynkels, that yet they (...) to have a face and (...) of a thing done in
deed, and like an hystory, I think it much profitable to tarry somewhat in them.
And though we may perchance synde in our hearts to believe all that is there
spoken to be true: yet I doubt whether we may abide (...), that (...) words
of Christ do pertain unto us, and (...) us of our duty, which do and live
after such sort, as though Christ when he spoke any thing, had as the time
served him, served his turn, and not regarded the time that came after him,
neither provided for us, or any matters of ours, as some of the Philosophers
thought, which God is no (...)
said, that God walked up and down in heaven, and thinks never a (...) of
our affairs. But my good (...), err not you so, stycke not you to such your
imaginacions. For if ye in wardly beheld these words, if ye diligently role
them in your minds, and after explicate and open them, ye shall see our (...)
much touched in these mysteries. Ye shall (...) that god, by this example
shakes us by the noses, and pulteth us by the ears. Ye shall perceive very
plain, that God sets before our eyes in this similitude, what we ought most
to flee, and what we ought sonest to follow. For Luke says, the Lord spoke
these words to his disciples. Wherefore let it be out of al doubt, that he
spoke them to us, which even as we will be compted the successors and (...) of
Christ's disciples, so we be, if we be good dispensers, and do our duitie. He
said these things, partly to us, which spoke them partly of him self. For he
is that rich man, which not only bad, but has, and shall have evermore, I
say not one, but many Stewardes, even to thend of the world.

He is man, seeing that he is god and man. He is rich, not only Christ is rytch.
in mercy, but in all kind of riches. For it is he, that gives us al things
abundantly. It is he, of whose hand, we received both our lives, and other
things necessary for the conservation of the same. What man has any thing I
pray you, but he has received it of his plentyfulnes? To be short, it is he,
that opens his hand, and fills al (...) with his blessyng, and not only
gives unto us, in most ample wise his bendiction. Neither his treasure can be
spent, how much so Christ's treasure ca^ not be spet
ever he (...) but, how much so ever we take of him, his treasure tarieth
still, ever taken, never spent.

He is also the good man of the house, the church is his household, which ought
with all dilyge^ce, to be fed with his word and his sacraments. These be his
goods, most precious, the dispensation and administration whereof, he would
Bishops and Curates should have. Which things. Paul affirms, saying: The
office of Ministers.
Let men esteem us, as the ministers of Christ, and dispensours of Gods
mysteries. But I pray you what is to be looked for in a dispensour? This
surely, that he be found faithful and that he truly dispense and lay out the
goods of the Lord, that he give meat in time, give it I say, and not sell it:
meat I say, and not poison. For the one does intoricate and slay the Mark
master person
eater, the other feeds and nourysheth him. Finally, let him not (...) and
differ the doing of his office, but let him do his duty when time is, and
need requires it. This is also to be looked for, that he be one, whom God
has called, and put in office, and not one that comes vncald, unsent for,
not one that of him self presumes to take honor upon him. What is to be
looked for? Surely, if all this that I say, be required in a good Minister, it
is much lyghter to require them all in every one, then to find one any where,
that has them al. Who is a true and a faithful Steward? He is true, he is
faithful, that coyneth no new money, but takes it ready coined A faithful
Steward.
of the good man of the house, and neither changes it, ne (...) it, after it
is taken to him to spend, but spends even the self same, that he had of his
Lord, and spends it as his Lords commandment is, neither to his own
advantage vtteryng it, nor as the lewd servant did, hyding it in the ground.
Brethren, if a faithful steward ought to do, as I have said, I pray you
ponder and examyne this well, whether our (...) and Abbotes, Prelates and
Curates have been hitherto faithful stewardes or no? Ponder, whether yet many
of the^ be, as they should be or no. (...) ye to, (...) me now, as your
conscience leads you (I will let pass to speak of many other) was there not
some, that despising the Counter fai ters of gods coin.
money of the Lord, as copper, and not curraunt, either coined new them selves,
or else vttred abroad newely coined of other, some time either adulterating the
word of God, or else mingling it (as taucrners do, which brewe and utter the
evil and good both in a pot) sometime in the (...) of Gods word blowing out
the dreams of men? While they thus preached to the people, the redemption that
comes by Christ's death to serve only them that died before his coming, that
were in the time of the old testament, and that now since redemption, and
forgyuenesse of sins purchased by money, and devised of men, is of efficacy,
and not redemption purchased by Christ. They have a wonderful pretty (...), to
persuade A proof of (...).
this thing, of a certain married woman, which when her husband was in
purgatory, in that (...) sornace, that has bur ned away so many of our pens,
paid her husbands ransom, and so of duty claimed him to be set at lyberty:
(...) they thus preached to the people, that dead images (which at the Dead
yma. ges.
first, as I think, were set up only to, represent things absent) not only
ought to be covered with gold, but also ought of al faithful and christen
people, yea in this scarsenes and penury of al things, to be cladde with sylke
garments, and those also laden with precious gemmes and (...). And that beside
all this, they are to be lighted with ware candelles, both within the church
and without the church, yea at none days, as who should say, here no cost can
be to great, where as in the mean time, wese Christ's faithful and lively
images, bought with no less price, tha^ with his most precious blood, alas
alas, to be an hu^gred, a thurst, a cold, and to lie in darkness, wrapped in all
wretchedness, yea to lie there, until death take away (...) miseries: While
they preached, these wylworkes, (...)
that come but of our own denotion, although they be not so necessary, as the
works of mercy, and the precepts of God, yet they said, and in the pulpit,
that wylworkes were more principal, more excellent, and (plainly to utter what
they mean) more acceptable to God, then works of mercy: as though now man's
inventions and fancies, could please God better then gods precepts, or
strange things better the^ his own: while they thus preached, that more
fruit, more devotion comes of the beholding of an image, though it be but a
Pater noster while, then is gotten by reding and contemplation in scripture,
though ye read and contemplate therein (...) years space. Finally, while they
preached thus, souls (...) in purgatory, to have most need of our help, and
that they can have no aid, but of us in this world, of the which two, if the
one be not false, yet at the least it is ambiguous, uncertain, doubteful, and
therefore rashly and arrogantly with such boldness affirmed in the (...) of
people, the other by all men's opinions is manifestly false. I let pass to
speak of much other such like countrefayte doctrine, which has been blasted
and blown out by some for the space of. iii. hours together. Be these the
christian and divine mysteries, and not rather the dreams of men? Be these the
faithful dispensers of Gods mysteries, and not rather false dissipatours of
the^? whom god never put in of fice, but rather the Devil set them over a
miserable family, More (...) if they preached never.
(...) an house myserably (...) and entreated. Happy were yt people, if such
preached sildom. And yet it is a wonder to se these, in their generation, to be
much more prudent and polytike, then the faithful ministers are in their
generation, while they go about more prudently to (...) men's (...), the^ these
do, to hold up Gods (...). Thus it contmeth to pass, that works lucratiue,
will works, men's fancies reign and christian works, necessary works, fruitful
works, be trode^ under the foot. Thus the evil, is much better set out by
evil men, then is the good, by good men: because the evil be more wise, then
be the good in their generation. These be the false Stewardes, whom al good and
faithful men every day accuse unto the rich master of the household, not
without great heaviness, yt they (...) his goods, whom he also one day will call
to him, and say to them as he did to his steward, when he said: what is this
that I hear of thee? Here God partly wondreth at our ingratitude and persidie,
partly chydeth us for them, and being both full of wonder, and ready to chide,
asks us, what is God is ready to chide.
this, yt I hear of you? As though he should say unto us, all good me^ in all
places, complain of you, accuse your avarice, your ex actions, your tirany.
They have required in you a long season, and yet require diligence and
sincerity, I commanded you yt withal industry and labor, ye should feed my
sheep: ye earnestly feed your selves, from day to day, wallowing in delites
and ydlenes. I commanded you, to teach my commandments, and not your
fancies, and that ye should seek my glory and my vauntage: you teach your
own traditions, and seek your own glory and profit. You preach very seldom,
and when ye do preach, ye do nothing but cumber them that preach truly, as much
as lies in you, that it were much better, such not to preach at al, tha^ so
perni (...) to preach. Oh, what I hear of you? You that ought to be my
preachers. What other thing do you, tha^ aply al your study hither, to bring al
my preachers to (...), shame, contempt, yea more tha^ this, ye pull them into
perils, into priso^s, and as much as in you lies, to cruel deaths. To be
short, I would, that Christen people should hear my doctrine, and at their
convenient leisure, read it also, as many as would: your care is not, that al
men may hear it, but al your care is, that no lay man do read it. Surely being
afraid, least they, by the reding, should understand it, and understanding,
learn to rebuke our slouthfulnes. This is your generation, this is your
dispe^sation this is your wisdom. In this generation, in this dispe^sation, you
be most politic, most witty. These be the things that I hear of your (...), I
wished to hear better report of you. Have ye thus deceived me? or have ye
rather deceived your selves? Where I had but one house, that is to say, the
church, and this so derely beloved of me, that for the love of her, I put my
self forth to be slain, and to shed my blood: this Church at my departure, I
committed unto your charge, to be fed, to be nourished, and to be made much of.
My pleasure was, ye should occupy my place, my desire was, ye should have (...)
like love to this Church, like fatherly affection, as I did. I made you my
Uicars, yea in matters of most importance. For thus I taught openly: He that
should hear you, should Luke. x.
hear me: He yt should despise you, should despise me. I gave you also keys,
not earthlye keys, but heavenly, I left my goods, yt I have evermore most
hyghly esteemed, that is, my Math. xvi.
word and sacraments, to be dispensed of you. These (...), I gave you, and do
you give me these thanks? Can ye find in your hearts, thus to abuse my goodness,
my benignity, my (...)? Have (...) thus deceived me? No no, ye have not
deceived me, but your selves. My gifts and benefits toward you shall be to
your greater dampnation. Because ye have contempned the lenity and cleme^cy of
the master of the house, ye have right well desexued to abide the rigor and
severity of yt judge. Come forth the^, let us se account of your stewardship.
An horible and fearful sentence. Ye may have no longer my goods in your hands.
A voice to weep at, and to make men tremble. You se brethren you se, to what
evil, the euel stewardes must come to. Your labor is paid for if ye can so
take heed, that no such sentence be spoken to you, Nay, we must all take heed,
lest these (...) one day take place in us. But lest the length of my sermon
offend you to sore, I will leave the rest of the Parable, and take me to the
handling of the end of it, that is, I will declare you, how the children of this
world be more witty, craf ty and subtle, then are the children of the light in
their generation. Luke. (...).
Which sentence, would God it lay in my poor tongue, to explicate with such
light of words, that I might seem rather to have painted it before your eyes,
then to have spoken it: and that you might rather seem, to se the thing, the^
to here it. But I confess plainly, this thing to be far above my power.
Therefore this being only left to me, I wish for yt I have not, and am sorry,
that yt is not in me which I would so gladly have That is, power so to handle
the thing that I have in hand, that al yt I say, may turn to the glory of god,
(...) health, and the (...) of (...) body: wherefore I pray (...), to (...) with
me unto God, and that in your peticio^ you desire, that (...) two things, he
vouchsafe to grant us, first a (...) for me to speak ryghtly, next, ears for
you, yt in hearing me, ye may take profit at my hand: and that this may com to
effect, you shall Two thyn. ges to be (...) for.
desire him, unto who^ our Master Christ bad we should pray, saying even the
same prayer, yt he him (...) institute, Pater noster. Wherein ye shall pray for
our most gracious sovereign Lord yt king, chief and supreme head of the
church of England, under Christ, and for the most excellent, gracious, and
virtuous Lady Queen Jane, his most lawful wife, and for all his, whether they
be of the clergy or (...), whether they be of the nobi lity, or else other his
graces subjects: not forgetting those, that being departed out of this (...)
life, now sleve in yt sleep, of peace, and rest from their labors, in
quietness, and in peaceable (...), faithfully, lovingly, and patiently lookyng
for that, yt they clearly shall se, when God shall be so pleased. For all these,
and (...) grace necessary, ye shall say unto god, gods prayer Pater noster.

Filii huius seculi. etc. Luc. 16. CHrist in this saying, touched the sloth
and (...) of his, and did not allow the fraud and subtility of other: neither
was glad, that it was in deed (...) he had said, but complained rather, that it
should be so: as many men speak many things, not that they ought to be so,
but yt they are wont to be so. Nay, this grieved Christ that the children of
this world, should be of more policy, then the children of light, which thing
was true in Christ's time, and now in our time is most true. Who is so blind,
but he sees this clearly, except perchance there be any, that can not discern
the children of the world, from the children of lyghtThe children of the world,
conceive and bring forth more prudently, and things conceived and brought
forth, they (...) and conserve with much more polycy, then do the children of
light. Which thing is as sorrowful to be said, as it seems absurd to be herd.
When ye hear the children of the world, you understand the world, as a father.
For the world is father of many children, not by first creation and work, but
by imitation and love. He is not only a father, but also the son of an other
father. If ye know once his father, by and by ye shall know his children. For he
that has the Dyuel to his father, Prince of the world, the dyuel.
must needs have diuellysh children. The dyuell is not only taken for father,
but also for prince of the world, that is, of worldly folk. It is either all
one thing, or else not much different, to say, children of the world, and
children of the (...), according to that, yt Christ said to the Jews, ye are
of your John. 10.
father the dyuel: where as undoubtedly he spoke to children of this world. Now
seeing the Devil is both author and ruler of the darkness, in the which the
children of this world walk, or to say better, wa^der, they mortally hate both
the light, and also the children of light. And hereof it comes, that the
children of light never, (...) very seldom, lack persecution in this world,
unto which the children of the world, that is of the devil brings the^. And
there is no man but he sees that these use much more policy in procuring the
hurt and damage of the good, than those in defending them selves. Therefore
brethren, gather you the disposicion and study of the children, by the
disposition and study of the fathers. Ye know this is a proverb much used: an
evil crow, an evil egg. The^ the children of this world that are known to
have so evil a father, yt world so evil a grandfather, A (...) petigree.
the devil cannot choose but be evil. Surely the first head of their auncestie,
was yt deceitful serpent the dyuell, a monster monstrous above al monsters. I
cannot wholly express him, I wot not what to call him, but a certain thing al
together made of the hatred of God, of mistrust in God, of lyings, deceites,
persuries, A description of the devil.
discordes, manslaughters, and to say at one word, a thing concrete, heaped up,
and made of al kind of mischief. But what the devil mean I, to go about to
descriue particularly the devils nature, when no reason, no power of man's mind
can comprehend it. This alonly I can say groslye and as in a sum, of the which
all we (our hurt is the more) have experience, the dyuel to be a stinking
sentine of al vices, a foul filthye chanel of al mischiefs, and that this
world his son, even a child (...) to have such a parent, is not much unlike
his father.

Then this dyuell being such one as can never be unlike himself: Lo of Envy,
his well-beloved Le^man he begat the world, and after left it with Discord at
nours. Which world, af ter that it came to man's state, had of many Concubines,
ma The Mothers of the (...) chil dren.
ny Sons. He was so fecund a father, and had gotten so many children of lady
Pride, dame Glottony, maistres Avarice, lady Lechery, and of dame Subtilty:
that now hard and scant, ye may find any corner, any kind of life, where
many of (...) children be not. In court, in coules, in cloisters, in rotchets,
be they never so white, yea, where shall ye not find them. How be it, they
that be secular and lay men, are not by and by children of the world, ne they
children of light that are called spiritual, and of the Clergy. No no, as ye
may find among the Laity many children of light, so among the Clergy (how
much so ever we arrogate these holy titles unto us, and think them only
attributed to us: Vos estis lux mundi, pe Math. v.
culium Christi. etc. Ye are the light of the world, the chosen people of
Christ, a kingly priesthode, an holy nation, and such I. Peter. ij.
other:) Ye shall find many children of the world, because in all places the
world gets many children. Among the Lay people, the world cease not to
bring to pass, that as they be called worldly, so they are worldly in deed,
driven hedlong by worldly desires, in so much that they may right well seem to
have take as well the manners, as the name of their father. In the Clergy, the
world also has learned away, to make of men spiritual, world lynges, yea and
there also to form worldly children, where with great pretense of holiness, and
crasty cou lour of religion, they utterly desire to hyde and cloak the name
Worldligs ashamed of their father
of the world, as though they were ashamed of their father, which do execrate
and detest the world (being nevertheless their father) in words and outward
signs, but in heart and work they col and kiss him, and in all their lives
declare them selves to be his babes, insomuch that in all worldly points, they
far pass and surmount those, that they call Seculars, lay men, men of the
(...). The child so diligently follows the steps of his father, never
destitute of the aid of his grandfather. These be our holy holy men, that say
they are dead to the world, when no me^ be more lively in worldly things, then
some of the^ be. But let them be in profession and name, most farthest from the
world, most alienate from it, yea so far, that they may seem to (...) no
occupying, no kindred, no affinity, nothing to do with it: yet in their life
and deeds, they show them selves no (...), but right begotten children of the
world, asyt which the world long since had by his dear wife dan Hipocrisy,
and since has brought them up and multiplied them to more then a good many,
(...) them to much, to much, al be it they swear by all he Saints and the
Saints to, that they know not their father, nor mother, neither the world, nor
Hipocrisye, as in deed they can semble and dissemble al things, which thing
they might learn wonderful well of their parents. I speak not of al religious
men, but of those that the world has fast knit at his gyrdel, even in the
mydst of their religion, that is, of many, and mo then many. For I fear, least
in all orders of me^, the better, I must say, the greater part of them be out
of order, and children of the world. Many of these might seem ingrate and
unkind children, that will no better aknowledge and rccognise their parents in
words and outward (...), but abrenounce and cast them of, as though they hated
them as dogs, and serpents. Howbeit they, in this wise, are most grateful to
their parents, because they be most like them, so lyuelye representing them in
countenance and conditions, that their The lively images of the world.
parcntes seem in them to be young again, for as much as they ever say one, and
think an other. They show them selves to be as sober, as temperate, as Curious
the Romain was, and live every day, as though al their life were a shrouing
time. They be like their parents I say, in as much as they in following them,
seem and make men believe they hate the^. Thus Grandfather devil, father world,
and mother Hipocrisy, have brought, them up. Thus good obedient sons have
borne away their parents commandments, neither these be solitary, how
religious, how mocking, how munking, I would say; (...) they be. O ye (...) lay
this to my charge, that Monachus and Solitarius signifies al one. I grant
this to be so, yet these be so solitary that they he not alone, but accompanied
with great flocks (...) Fraternities. And I marvel if there be not a great sort
of Bishops and (...), that are brethren germain unto these, and as a great
sort, so even as right borne, and worlds children by as god title as they. But
because I cannot speak of al, when I say pre (...), I understand bishops,
Abbots, Priors, (...), deanes, and other, of such sort, that are now called to
this (...), as I so, to entreat hereof nothing, but of such matters as both
appertain to the glory of Christ, and to the wealth of the people of England.
Which thing I pray God they do as carnestly as they ought to do. But it is to
be feared, least as Light has many her Children here, so the world has sent
some of his whelps hither. Among the which I know (...) of (...) opinions
agrce (...) they be togcther.
there can be no concord nor unity, albeit they be in one place, in one
congregation, I know there can be no agreement (...) these two, as long as they
have minds so unlike, and so contrary affcctions, judgments so utterly
diverse in all poynte^s. But if the children of this world be either mo in
nombre, or more prudent then the Children of Light, what then avails us to
hauc this Convocation? Had it not been better we had not been called together
at al? For as the children of this world be evil, so they breed and bring
forth things evil, and yet there be mo of them in all places, or at the
least they be more politic, than the children oflyght in their generation. And
here I speak of the generation, where by they do engender, and not of that
whereby they are engendered, because it should be to long to intceate, how the
(...) oflyght are engendered, and how they come in at the (...) and how the
children of the world be engendered, and come in an other (...). How be it, I
think al you that be here were not engendered after one generation, neither that
ye al came by your promocions after one manner. God grant that ye, Worldly
engendered, must ingen der worldli
engendered worldly, do not engender worldly: And as now I much pass not how
ye were engendered, or by what means ye were promoted to those dignitics, that
ye now occupy: so it be honest, good, and profitable, that ye in this your
Consultation shall (...) and engender. The end of your Convocation shall show
what ye have done, the fruit that shall come of your consultacion, shall show
what generation ye be of. For what have ye done hitherto I pray you, these.
(...). years and mo? What have ye engendered? what have ye brought forth? what
fruit is come of your long and great assemble. What one thing, that the people
of England has (...) better of an hear? or you your selves, either more
accepted. before God, or better discharged toward the people, committed unto
your cure? For that the people is better learned and taught now, then they were
in time past, to whether of these ought we to attribute it, to your industry,
or to the providence of God, and the foreseing of the kings grace? Dughte we to
thank you, or the kings highness? Whether (...) other (...), you the king,
that ye might preach, or he you, by his letters, that ye should preach ofter?
Is it unknown think you, how both ye and your Curates were in manner by
violence enforced to let books to be made by you, but by profane and lay
persons, to let them, I say, be sold abroad, and read for the instruction of
the people? I am bold with you, but I speak latin, and not englysh, to the
clergy, not to the (...), I speak to you being present, and not behynd your
backs. (...) spcaketh la tine.
God is my wytnes, I speak, what so ever is spoken, of the good will that I
bear you, God is my wytnes, which knows my heart, and compels me to say,
that I say.

Now I pray you, a God his name, what did you so great fathers, so many, so
long a season, so often assembled together? What went you about? what would ye
have brought to pas Two noble acts.
two things taken away? The one, that ye (which I heard) burned a dead man:
the other, that ye (which I felt) went about to burn one being alive. Him,
bccause he did, I can not tell how, in his testament withstand your profit: in
other points, as I have heard, a very good man, reported to be of an honest
life, while he lived, full of good works, good both to the Clergy, and also to
the Laity, this other, which truly never hurt any of you, ye would have raked
in the coals, be cauc he would not subscribe to certain Articles, that tooks
away the supremacy of the King. Take away these two no ble acts, and there is
nothing else left, that ye went about, that I know, saving that I now remember,
that somewhat ye attcmpted against Erasmus, all be it as yet nothing is com to
light. Ye have often (...) in consultacio^, but what have ye done? Ye have had
many things in deliberation, but what one is put forth, whereby either Christ
is more glorificd, or else Christ's people made more holyer? I appele to your
own conscience. How chanced this? how came this thus? because there were no
children of light, no children of God among you, which setting the world at
naught, would study to illustrate the glory of God, and thereby show them
selfs (...) oflyght? I think not so, certainly I think not so. God (...),
that all you: which were gathered together, under the pretense oflyght would be
children of the world. Then why happened this? Why I pray you: Perchance
either because, the children of the world, were mo in nombre, in this your
congregation, as it often happens, or at the lest of more policy than the
children of light in their generation. Whereby it might very son be brought to
pass, that those were much more stronger, in gendryng the evil, than these in
producing yt good. The children of light have policy, but it is like the policy
of the serpent, and is joined with (...) symplicitie. They Children of lyghts
policye.
ingendre nothing but simply, faithfully, and plainly, even (...) doing all that
they do. And therefore they may with more facility be combred in their
ingendring, and be the more ready to take injuries. But the children of this
world, have worldly policy, forely craft, lyonlyke cruelty, power to do hurt,
more then either (...) or Basiliscus, ingendring and doing al things
fradulently, deceytfully, gylefully. Which as Nembrothes and such sturdy and
stout hunters, being full of simulation and dissimulation, before the Lord,
deceive the children of light, and combre them easily. Hunters go not forth in
every ma^s sight, but do their affairs closely, and with use of gyle and
deceit, ware every day more craftier then other. The children of this world
by like crafty hunters, they be misnamed children oflyghte, for as much as they
so hate light, and so study to do the works of darkness. If they were the
children of light, they would not love darkness. It is no marvel, that they go
about to keep other in darkness, seeing they be in darkness, from top to toe
overwhelmed with darkness, darker than is the darkness of hell. Wherefore it is
well done, in all orders of men, but in especial in the order of prelates, to
put a difference between children of light, and children of the world, because
great deceyte arises, in taking the one for the other. Great imposture
comes, when they that the common people take for the light, go about to take
the sun and, the light out of the world. But these be easily known, both by
the diuersitye of minds, and also their armours. For where as the children of
light are thus minded, that they seek their (...), wealth, and profit, with
loss of their own commodities, and often times with ieoperdy of their life:
The children of the world, contrary wise, have such stomakes, that they
wylisoner se them dead, that does them good, then sustain any loss of
temporal things. The armor of the Armor of the children of light.
children of light, are first the word of God, which they (...) set forth, and
with (...) diligence put it abrod, that as much as in them lies, it may bring
forth fruit: after this, patience and prayer, with the which in all adversities
the Lord comfort them. Other things they (...) to God, unto whom they leave
al reuengeme^t. The armor of the children of the world, Armor of worlds chil
dren.
(...) sometime frauds and deceytes, sometime lies and (...): By the first, they
make their dreams, their traditions: by the second, they (...) and confirm
their dreams, be they never so absurd, never so against scripture, (...),
reason. And if any man resyst them, even with these weapons they procure to
(...) him. Thus they bought Christ's death, the very lyghtit self: and
obscured him after his death. Thust hey hye every day the children of light,
and obscure them, and shall so do, until the world be at an end. So that it may
be ever true, yt Christ said, The children of the world be wiser, etc.

These worldlynges pull down the lively faith, and full confidence that me^
have in Christ, and set up an other faith, another confidence, of their own
making: the children of (...) contrary. These worldlynges set lyttel by such
works as God has prepared for our salvation, but they extol traditions and
works of their own invention: the children oflight contrary. The worldlynges,
if they spy profit, gaynes, lucre in any thing, be it never such a tryfle, be
it never so pernicious, they preach it to the people, (if they preach at any
time), and these things they defend with toth and nail. They can scarce (...)
the abuses of these, al be it they be intolerable, least in disalowyng the
abuse, they lose part of their profit. The children of the light, contrary
put al things in their degree, best highest, next, next, the (...) lowest. They
extol things necessary, christian, and commanded of God. They pull down
wylworkes feyned by men, and put them in their place. The buses of al thing
they ernestly rebuke. But yet these things be so done on both parties, and so
they both do gendre, that children of the world show them self wyser then the
children of light, and that frauds and deceites, (...), and money, (...)
evermore to have the upper hand. I hold my peace, I will not say, how fat
feasts and ioly bankettes be ioly instruments to set forth worldly matters
withal. Neither the children of Fat feasts and banquets
the world, be only wyser, than the children of light, but are also some of
them, among them self, much wiser then the other in their generation. For all
be it, as touching the end, the generation of them all, is one: yet in this
same generation, some of them have more craftily engendered, then the other of
their fellows. For what a thing was that, that once every hundred year, was
brought forth in Rome, of the children of this world, and with how much policy
it was made, ye heard at Paul's cross, in the beginning of the last
parliament. How some brought forth Canonizations, some Expectations, some
pluralities, and unions, some (...) quots, and dispensations, Things engendered
at Rome.
some pardons, and these of wonderful varitie, some Stationaries, some (...),
some Pocularies for Drinkers, some manuaries for handlers of relics, some
pedaries for pilgrims, some oscularies, for kissers: some of them engendered
one, some other such fetures, and every one in that he was delivered of, was
excellent, politic, wise, yea so wise, that with their wisdom they had
almost made all the world fools. But yet they that begot and brought forth,
that our old ancient purgatory pick pourse, that that was swaged and couled
with a franciscans cowle, put upon a dead man's back, to the The coule comes
to late, yt syns be gone before with the soul.
fourth part of his sins, that that was utterly to be spoiled, and of none
other, but of our most prudent Lord Pope, and of him as oste as him lysted:
that satisfactory, that myssal, that scalary: they, I say, that were the wise
fathers and genitours of this purgatory, were in my mind, the wysest of al
their generation: and so far pass both the children of light, and also the
rest of their company, that they both are but fools, (...) compare them with
these. It was a pleasant fiction, and from the beginning so profitable to the
feyners of it, that almost, I dare boldly say, there has been no emperor,
that has gotten more by taxes and tallages of them that were alive; the^ these
the very and right begotten sons of the world got by dead (...) the (...)
worldlynges.
men's tributes and gifts. If there be some in England, that would this sweting
of the world to be with no less policy kept still, than it was borne and
brought forth in Rome, who the^ can accuse Christ of lieng? No no, as it has been ever true, so it shall be, that the children of the world, be much wyser,
not only in making their things, but also in conseruing them. I (...) not what
it is, but somewhat it is, I wot, that some men be so loath to se the abuse of
this monster, purgatory, which abuse is more then abominable. As who should
say, there is none abuse in it, or else as though there can be none in it. They
may (...) heartily to love the old thing, that thus earnestly en devour them to
restore him his old (...). They would not set an hear by the name but for the
thing They be not so ignorant (no they be crafty) but yt they know, if the name
come again, the thing will come after. Thereby it aryseth, that some men make
their crakes, that they (maugre of al men's heads) have found purgatory. I can
not tell, what is found. Fynders of things not lost.
This, to pray for dead folks, this is not found, for it was never lost. How
can that be found, that was not lost? (...) subtyl finders, that can find
things (and God will) ere they be lost. For that coulysh delyuerance, their
scalarie losinges, their popal spoliations, and other such their figmentes,
they can not find, they can not find. No these be so lost, as they them selfs
grant, that though they seek them never so diligently yet they shall not find
them, except perchance, they hope to se them come in again with their names.
And that then money gathering may return again, and deceit walk a boute yt
country, and so stablysh their kingdom in all kingdoms. But to what end this
chiding between the children of the world, and the children of light, will come:
only he knows, that once shall judge them both.

Now to make have, and to come some what nygher the end, go ye to good brethren
and fathers, for the love of God go ye to, and seeing we are here assembled, let
us do some thing, (...) we may be known to be the children of light. Let us
do somewhat, lest we, which hitherto have been judged children of the world, seem
even still to be so. All men call us (...) lates, then seeing we be in counsel,
let us so order our selfs, yt as we be prelates in honor and dignity, so we
may be prelatcs: in holiness, benevolence, diligence, and sincerity. All men
know, that we be here gathered, and with most fervent desire they anheale,
breath, and gape for the fruit of our convocation, as our acts shall be, so
they shall name us, so that now it lies in us, whether we will be called
children of the world, or children of light. Wherefore lift up your heads,
brethren, and look about with your eyes, spy what things are to be reformed
in the church of England. Is it so hard, is itso great a matter for you, to se
many abuses in the clergy, many in the laity? What is done in the arches?
Nothing to be amendedWhat The Arches.
do they there? Do they evermore ryd the peoples busy nes and matters, or
combre and ruffle them? Do they evermore correct vice, or else defend it,
sometime being well corrected in other places? How many sentences be given there
in time, as they ought to be? If mensay truth, how many with Bishops (...).
out brybes? Dr if all things be well done there, what do men in bishops
Consistories? Shall you ofter se the punishments assigned by the laws
executed, or else money redemptio^s used in their stead? How think you by the
Ceremonies, that are in England, often times with no little offense of weak
consciences, Ceremonies.
contempned: more oftener with superstition so desyled, and so depraved, that
you may doubt, whether it were better, some of them to tarry still, or utterly
to take them away? Have not our forefathers complained of the nombre of
ceremonies, of the superstition, and estimation of them?

Do ye se nothing in our holy days? of the which very few Holydaies.
were made at the first, and they to set forth goodness, virtue and honesty:
But since, in some places, there is neither mean nor measure in making new
holy days: as who should say, this one thing is serving of God, to make this
law, that no man may work. But what does the people on these holy The day is
holy if we be holy.
days? Do they give them self to godiynes, or else ungodliness? See ye nothing
brethren? If you se not, yet God sees. God sees all the whole holy days, to
be spent miserablye in dronkennes, in glossing, in strife, in envy, in
daunsing, dicing, ydelnes and gluttony. He sees all this, and threateneth
punishment for it. He sees it, which neither is deceived in seeing, nor
deceyueth when he threateneth. Thus men serve the Devil, for God is not thus
served, al be it ye say, ye serve god. No the devil has more service done unto
him on one holy day, then on many working days. Let al these abuses be compted
as nothing, who is he, that is not sorry, to se in so many holy days, rytch and
welthy persons to flow in delicates, and men that live by their trauayl, poor
men, to lack necessary meat and drink for their wives, and their children,
and that they can not labor upon the holy days, except they will be cited and
brought before our officials? Were it not the office of good prelates, to
consult upon these matters, and to seek some remedy for them? Ye shall se my
brethren, ye shall se once, what will come of this our wynking.

What think ye of these images that are had more the^ their Images.
fellows in reputation? that are gone unto, with such labor and werines of the
body, freque^ted with such our cost, sought out and visited with such
confidence? What say ye by these images, that are so famous, so noble, so
noted, being of them so many and so diverse in England? Do you think, that this
preferring of picture to picture, image to image, is the right use, and not
rather the abuse of images? But you will say to me, why make ye al these
interrogatio^s? And why in these your demaundes do you let and withdraw the
good devotion of the people? Be not al things weldon, that are done with good
intent, when they be profitable to us? So surely covetousness both thinks and
speaks. Were it not better for us more for estemation, more meeter for men in
our places, to cut away a (...) of this our profyt, if we will not cut away al,
then to wynke at such ungodliness, and so long to wink for alyttel lucre,
specially if it be ungodliness and also (...) unto you ungodliness? These be
two things, so often to seek (...) of Saints.
mere images, and sometime to visit the relikes of saints. And yet as in
those, there may be much ungodliness committed, so there may here some
superstiti o^be hyd, if that sometime we chance to visit pigs bones, in
steed of saints Pigges bones honored,
relyques, as in time past it has chanced (I had almost said) in England.
Then this is to great a blindness, a darkness to sensible, that these should
be so commended in sermons, of some men, and preached, to be don after such
manner, as though they could not be evil done, which not withstanding are such,
that neither God nor man commands them to be don. No, rather, men commanded
them either not to be done at all, or else more slowlyer and seldomer to be don:
for as much as our au^cetours made this constitution. We command the Priests
that they often admonish the people, and in especial women, that they make no
vows, but after long deliberation, conse nt of their husbands, and counsel
of the Priest. The church of England in time past made this constitution. What
saw they, that made this decre? They saw the intolerable abuses of Images.
They saw the peryls, that might ensue, of going on pilgremage. They saw, the
superstitious difference that men made between image and image. Surely somewhat
they saw. The constitution is so made, that in manner it takes away al such
pilgrimages. For it so plucketh away the abuse of them, that it leaves either
none, or else seldom use of them. For they that restreine making vows, for
going of pilgrimage, restreine also pilgrimage. Seeing that for the most part,
it is seen, that few go on pilgremage, but vow makers, and such as by promise
bind them self to go. And when, I pray you should a man's wife go on
pilgremage, if she went not, before she had well debated the matter with her
self, and obtained the consent of her husband, being a wise man, and were also
counseled by a learned Priest so to do? When should she go (...) of, to these
famous Images? For this the common people of England think to be going on
pilgremage, to go to some dead and notable image out of town, that is to say
far from their house. Now if your forefathers made this constitution, and yet
thereby did nothing, the abuses every day more and more increased, what is
left for you to do? Brethren and fathers, if ye purpose to do any thing, what
should ye sooner (...).
do, then to take utterly away, these deceytful and iugling Images? or else if
ye know any other mean, to put away abuses, to show it, if ye intend to
remove abuses. Me think if should be grateful and pleasant to you to mark the
ernest mind of your forefathers, and to look upon their desire, where they say
in their constitution, We command you, and not, we counsel you. How have we
ben so long a cold, so long slack in setting forth so holsom a precepte of the
church of England, where we be so hot in all things, that have any gaynes in
them, all be it they be neither commanded us, nor yet given us by counsel: as
though we had leauer, the abuse of things should tarry still, then it taken
away, lose our profit. To let pass the solemyne and (...) bacchanals, the
prescript miracles, that are done upon certain days in the Tligils and night
wat chynges.
Weste part of England, who has not hard? I think, ye have heard, of saint
Blesis heart, which is at Maluerne, and of saint Algars bones, how long they
deluded the people? I am afraid, to the loss of many souls. Whereby men may
well conjecture, that al about in this realm, there is plenty of such iuglinge
deceites. And yet hitherto ye have sought no remedy. But even still the
miserable people is suffered, to take the false miracles for the true, and to
lie still a sleep in all kind of superstition. God have mercy upon us.

Last of al, how think you of matrimony? Is al well here? Matrimoni
What of baptism? Shall we evermore in ministering of it, speak latin, and
not english rather, that the people may know what is said and done?

What think ye of these mass priests, and of the Masses them selves? What
say ye? Be al things here so without abuses, that nothing ought to be amended?
Your forefathers saw somewhat, which made this constitution, against the
venality, and sale of Masses, that under pain of suspending, no priest should
sell his saying of tricennals, or annals. What saw they, that made this
constitution? What Priests saw they? what manner of masses saw they, trow ye?
But at the last, what beca^ of so good a constitution? God have mercy upon us.
If there be nothing to be amended abrod, concerning yt whole, let every one of
us make one better. If there be neither abrod nor at home any thing to be
amended, and redressed: My lords be ye of good chere, be merry: and at the
least because we have nothing else to do, let us reason the matter how we may be
richer. Let us fall to some pleasant communication, after let us go home, even
as good as we came hither, that is right begotten thildren of the world, and
utterly worldlynges. And while we live here, let us al make bone chere. For
after this life, there is small pleasure, lyttel myrthe for us to hope for, if
now there be nothing to be changed in our facions. Let us say, not as Saint.
Peter did? Our end approaches nigh, this (...). Peter. 4.
is an heavy hearing: but let us say, as the evil servant said: It will be long
ere my maistere come. This is pleasant. Let Math. 24.
us beat our fellows. (...) us eat and drink with dronkerds. (...). 12.
(...) as often as we do not take away the abuse of things, so often, we beat
our felows. As often as we give not the people their true fode, so often we beat
our fellows. As often as we let them (...) in superstition, so often we beat the^.
To he short, as often as we blind, lead them blind, so often we beat and
grievously strike our fellows. When we walter in plesures and idelnes, then we
eat and drink with drunkards. But God will come, God will com, he will not tarry
long away. He will come upon such a day, as we nothing look for him: and at
such hour, as we know not. He will come, and cut us in pieces. He will reward
us, as he does the hipocrites. He will set us, where wayling shall be my brethren,
where gnashing of teeth shall be my brethren. And let here be the end of our
tragidie, if ye will. These be the delycate dishes, prepared for worlds well
beloved children. These be the wafers and ionketes, provided for worldly
prelates, wayling and gnashing of teth. Can there be any mirth, where these two
courses, last all the feast? Here we laugh, there we shall weep. Our teeth make
merry here, ever dashing in delicates, there we shall be torn with teeth, and do
nothing but gnash and grind our own. To what end have we now excelled other in
policy? What have we brought forth at the last? Ye se brethren what sorrow, what
punishment is provided for you, if ye be worldlynges. If ye will not thus be
vered, be not ye the children of the world. If ye will not be the children of
the world be not stryken with the love of wordly things, lean not upon them.
If ye will not dye eternallye, live not worldly. Come go to my brothers go to,
I say again, and once again, go to, leave the love of your profit, study for
the glory and profit of Christ, seek in your consultations, such things as
pertayne to Christ, and bring forth at the last, so^what, that may please
Christ. Feed ye tenderly with all diligence, the flock of Christ. (...) truly
the word of God. Love the light, walk in the light: and so be ye the children
of light, while ye are in this world, (...) ye may shine in the world, that is
to come, bright as the son, with the father, the son, and the holy ghost,
to whom be all honor, praise and glory.

Amen.
A notable sermon of the reverend father Master Hugh Latimer, preached in the
Shroudes at Poules church in London, on the xviii. day of January. Anno. 1548.
(*)
Quecunque scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Roma. xiiii.
AL things which are written, are written for our The rest of these sermones of
yt plough, are not ye (...) to our hands.
erudition and knowledge. Al things that are written in gods book, in the
Bible book, in the book of the holy scripture, are written to be our doctrine.
I told you in my first sermon, honorable audience, that I purposed to declare
unto you. ii. things. The one what seed should be sown in Gods field, in
gods plough land. And the other who should be the sowers. That is to say, what
doctrine is to be taught in christ's church and congregation, and what men
should be the teachers and preachers of it. The first part I have told you in
yt. 3. sermons past, in which I have assaied to set forth my plough, to prove
what I could do. And now I shall tell you, who be yt plowers, for Gods word is a
seed to be sown in Gods field, that is the faithful congregation, and the
preacher is the sower. And it is in the gospel: Exiuit qui seminat seminare
semen suum. (...) that sows, the husbandman, the ploughman went forth to sow
his sede, so that a preacher is resembled to a ploughman, as it is in a another
place: Nemo admota aratro manu, et a tergo respiciens aptus est regno Dei. No
man that puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is apt for the
kingdom of god. That is to say: let no preacher be negligent in doing his
office. Al be it this is one of the places that has been racked, as I told you
of rackyng scriptures. And I have been one of the^ A place of scripture racked
(...) mysunderstand.
my self, that has racked it, I cry God mercy for it, and have been one of
them that have beseued and have expounded it, a against religious persons, yt
would forsake their order, which they had professed, and would go out of their
cloister, whereas in deed it touches not Monkery, nor makes any thing at al
for any such matter. But it is directly spoken of diligent preaching of the
word of God. For preaching of the Gospel The right understanding of this place.
is one of Gods ploughe works, and the Preacher is one of Gods plough men. Ye
may not be offended with my similitude, in that I compare preaching to the
labor and (...) of ploughyng, and the preacher to a plowman. Ye may not be
offended with this my similitude, for I have been (...) red of some persons for
such things. It has been said of me: Oh (...), (...), as for him I will never
believe him, while I live, nor never trust him, for he likened our blessed Lady
to a saffron bag, where in deed I never used that similitude. But it was as I
have said unto you before now, according to that which Peter saw before in the
spirit of prophecye, and said that there should come afterward men: Per quos
via veritatis maledictis afficeretur, there should come fellows by whom the way
of truth should be yil spoken of and sclaundred. But in case I had used this
similitude, it had not ben to be reproved, (...) out lady might be compared to
a saf (...) bag.
but might have been without reproach. For I might have said thus: as the
saffron bag that has been full of saffron, or has had saffron in it, does ever
after savor and smell of the sweet saffron that it contains: so our blessed
Lady which conceived and bare Christ in her womb, did ever after resomble
the manners and virtues of that precious babe which she bare. And what had our
blessed Lady been the worse for this? or what dishonor was this to our blessed
Lady. But as preachers must be ware and circumspect that they (...) not any
(...) occasion to be sclaundered, and ill spoken of by the hearers: so must not
the Auditors be offended (...) cause. For heaven is in the gospellykened to a
musterde seed. It is (...) used in the Gospel
compared also to a piece of leaven, as Christ says, that at the last day he
will come (...) a these, and what (...) is this (...) (...) what (...) is this
to heaven? Ye may not then (I say) he offended with my similitude, for because
I lyken preaching to a (...) labor, and a prclate to a plowman. But now you
will ask me whom I call a prelat. A prelate is that man, whatsoever he be, that
has a flock to be taught of The description of a prelate.
him, who so ever has any spiritual charge in the faithful congregation, and
whosoever he be that has cure of soul. And well may the Preacher and the
Plowman be lykened together. How the preacher is lykened to yt plowma^.
First for their labor of al seasons of the year. For there is no time of the
year, in which the plowman has not some special work to do, as in my country
in Lecester shire, the plow man has a time to set forth, and to assay his
plough, and other times for other necessary works to be done. And then they
also may be lykened together for the diversity of works, and variety of
offices that they have to do. For as the plowman first sets forth his
plough, and then tylleth his land, and breaks it in furrows, and sometime
rydgeth it up again. And at an other time harroweth it, and clotteth it, and
sometime dongeth The Prelate has many offices.
it, and hedgeth it, diggeth it, and weedeth it, purges and makes it clean:
so the prelat, the preacher has many diverse offices to do. He has first a
busy work to bring his Parishners to a right faith, as Paul calls it. And
not a swaruing faith, but Note the Properties of a right faith.
to a faith that embraces Christ, and trusts to his merytes, a (...) faith,
a (...) faith, a faith that makes a man ryghteous without respect of works.
As ye have it very well declared and set forth in the Homily. He has then a
busye The first.
work I say, to bring his flock to a right faith, and then to confirm them
in the same faith. Now castyng them down with the law, and with threatninges
of God for sin. Now The law fears.
(...) them up again with the Gospel, and with the promises of Gods favor.
Now (...) the^, by tellyng them their faults, and making them forsake sin.
Now clottyng them, The gospel comforts.
by breaking their stony hearts, hearts, and by making the^ supple hearted, and
making them to have hearts of flesh, yt is soft hearts, and apt for doctrine to
enter in. Now teaching to know god right ly, and to know their duty to God and
to their neighbors. Now exhorting them when they know their duty, that they
do it, and be diligent in it: so that they have a continual work to do.
Great is their busynes, and therefore great should be their hire. They have
great labors, and therefore they ought to have (...) Great (...) should have
good rewards.
lyuinges, that they may commodiously feed their flock, for the preaching of
the woordc of God unto the people is called meat. Scripture calls it meat,
not strawberies, that com but once a year and tarry not long, but are soon
gone, but it is meat, it is no dainties. The people must have meat yt must be
familiar and continual, and daily given unto them to feed upon. Many make a
strawbery of it, ministering it but once a Preachig (...) a daily (...).
year, but such do not the office of good Prelates. For Christ says: Quis
putas est seruus prudens et fidelis? qui dat cibum in tempore. Who think you
is a wise and a faithful servant? he yt gives meat in (...) time. So that he
must at all times convenient preach diligently. Therefore says he: Who trow
you is a faithful servant? He speaks it as though it were a care thing to
find such a one, and as though he wonld say: there be but a few of them to
find in the world. And how few of them there be throughout this realm that
give meat to their flock as they should do: the Uisitours can best tell. To
few, to few, the nioze is the pity, and never so few as now. By this then it
appears that a prelate, or any that has cure of soul, must diligently and
subitancially work and labor. Therefore says Paul to Timothe: Qui
episcopatum desidcrat, bic bonum opus desiderat. He that desires to have the
offi: e of a Bishop, or a prelate, that man desires a good work. Then if it
be good work, it is work. Ye can make but a work of it. It is Gods work,
Gods plough, and that plough God would have still going. Such then as (...)
and live ydlelye, are not good prelates or Ministers. And of such as do not
preach and teach, nor do not their duties, God says by his prophet Jeremy: Ma
ledictusqui facit opus dei fraudutenter. (...) or deceitfully, some books have
negligenter, negligently or slackly. How ma ny such prelates, how many such
bishops, Lord for thy mercy, are there now in England? And what shall we in this
case do? Shall we company with them? O Lord for thy mercy shall we not company
with them? O Lord whither shall we flee from them? But curssed be he that does
the work of God negligently or gylefully. A sore word for them that are
negligent in discharging their office, or have done it fraudulentlye, for that
is the thing that makes the people ill. But true it must be that Christ says:
Multi sunt (...), pauci (...). (...).
vero electi. Many are called, but few are chosen. Here have I an occasion by
the way, somewhat to say unto you, yea, for the place that I alleged unto you
before out of Jeremy the. 48. Chapter. And it was spoken of a spiritual work
of God, a work that was commanded to be done, and it was of shedding blood,
and of destroying the Cities of Moab. for (says he) cursed be he that keeps
back his swoorde from sheddyng of blood. As Saul when he kept back the
sword from sheddyng of blood, at what time he was sent against Amalech, was
refused of God for being disobedient to Gods commandments, in that he spared
Agag the King. So that, that place of the Prophet was spoken of them that went
to the destruction of the Cities of Moab, among the which there was one called
Nebo, which was much reproved for wolatry, supersticion, pride, avarice,
cruelty, tyranny, and for hurdnes of heart, and for these sins was plaged of
God and destroyed. Now what shall we say of these rich citizens of London? An
admoni cion to Lodon.
What shall I say of them? shall I call them proud men of London, malicious men
of London, merciles men of London? No, no, I may not say so, they will be
offended with me than. Yet must I speak. For is there not raygning in London,
as much pride, as much covetousness, as much cruelty, as much oppression, as
much supersticion, as was in Nebo? Yes I think, and much more to. Therefore I
say, repent O London, repent, repent. Thou hear thy faults told thee,
amend them, amend them. I think if Nebo had had the preaching that thou
have, they would have converted. And you rulers and officers, be wise and
circumspect, (...) to your An (...) cion to the rulers and (...).
charge, and se you do your duties, and rather be glad to amend your (...)
living, then to be angrye when you are warned or told of your fault. What a do
was there made in London at a certain man, because he said (and in deed at that
time on a sust cause) (...) (quoth he) nay butterflies. Lord what a do there
was for that word. And yet would God they were no wrose then Butterflies.
Butterflies do but their nature, the Buttersly is not (...), is not greedy of
other men's (...), is not full of (...) and hatred, is not malicious, is not
cruel, is not merciles. The Butterflye (...) not in her own deeds, (...)
prefers the tradicions of men before Gods word, it commits not idolatri,
nor worshippeth false Gods. But London can not abide to be rebuked, such is the
nature of man. If they be pricked they will kick. If they be rubbed Galed
baiarde will wynche.
on the gale: they will wynce. But yet they will not amend their faults, they
will not be ill spoken of. But how shall I speak well of them? If you could be
content to receive and follow the word of God and favor good preachers, if you
could bear (...) be told of your faults, if you could amend when you hear
of them: if you would be glad to refourme that is a mysse: if I might se any
such inclinacion in you, that you would leave to be mercyles and begin to be
charitable, I would then hope well of you, I would then speak well of you. But
London was never so ill as it is now. In times (...) The euyls (...) are now in
London
men were full of pity and compassion, but now there is no pity, for in London
their brother shall die in the streets for cold, he shall lie sick at their door
between stock and stock. I cannot tell what to call it, and perish there for
hunger, was there any more unmercifulness in Nebo? I think not. In times past
when any rich man dyed in London, they were wont The (...) of (...), by the
rych in Lo^ don is gone.
to help the poor Scholars of the (...) with exhibycion. When any man dyed,
they would bequeth great sums of money toward the relife of the poor. When I
was a scoler in Chambridge my self, I heard very good report of London, and
knew many that had relief of the rich men of London, but now I can hear no
such good report, and yet I enquire of it, and harken for it, but now charity
is waxen cold, none helps the scholar, nor yet the (...). And in those (...)
Charity is waxen cold in London
what did they when they helped the scholars? Mary they main teined and gave
them liuinges that were very (...) and professed the Popes doctrine, and now
that the knowledge of Gods word is brought to light, and many earnestly study
and labor to set it forth, now almost no man helps to maintayn He moves
London. to repentance by example of Nebo.
them. Oh London London, repent repent, for I think God is more displeased
with London, then ever he was with the City of Nebo. (...) therefore repent
London, and remember yt the same god lives now yt punished Nebo, even yt same
god and none other, and he will punish syn as well now, as he did then, and he
will punish yt iniquity of London as well, as he did the^ of Ne An admoni cion to
prelates to (...) their office
bo. Amend therefore. And ye that be prelates, (...) well to your office, for
right prelating, is busy laboring and not lordyng. Therefore preach and teach,
and let your plow be doing. Ye Lords I say yt live like loiterers, (...) well to
your office, yt plow is your office and charge. If you live idle and loiter,
you do not your duty, you follow not your vocation let your plow therefore be
going and not cease, that the ground may bring (...) fruit. But now me thinks
I hear one say unto me: (...) ye what An answer to a (...).
you say? Is it a (...) Is it a labor? how then has it haypenened, that we
have had so many hundred years, so many unpreaching prelates, lordyng
loyterers and idle ministers? Ye would have me here to make answer, and to
show the (...) thereof. Nay, this land is not for me to ploughe, it is to
stony, to thorny, to hard for me to plough. They have so (...) things that
make for them, so many things to lay for them selves, that it is not for my
weak teame to plow them. They have to lay for the^ selves, long customs,
(...), A weak teame.
and authority, placing in Parliament, and many things more. And I fear me
this land is not yet ripe to be plowed. For as the saying is: It lacks
wetheryng: This gear lacks wethering, at least way it is not for me to
plough. For what shall I look for among thorns, but prickyng and scratchyng?
What among stones, but stumblyng? What (I had almost said) among Serpents but
stinging? But this much I dare say, that since lordyng and loyteryng has come
up, preaching has come down, contrary to the Apostles times. Lordyng has put
down (...) chyng.
For they preached and lorded not. And now they Lord and preach not. For they
that be Lords, will ill go to plow. It is no meet office for them. It is not
seeming for (...) estate. Thus came up lording (...). Thus crept in vnpreachi^g
prelates, and so have they long continued. For how many (...) prelates have we
now at this day? And no marvel. For if yt plow men that now be, were made
Lords, they would clean give (...) ploughyng, they would leave of their
labor, and fall to lor The necessitye of the plough.
ding outright, and let yt plowe stand. And then both (...) not walkyng,
nothing should be in the (...) but hunger. For ever since the Prelates were made
Lords and Nobles, the plough stands, there is no work done, the people
sterue. They hawk, they hunt, they card, they dice, they pastime in there
prelacyes with galaunte gentlemen, with their daunsing minions, and with their
(...) companions, so that ploughing is set a side. And by the lording and
loytring, preaching and ploughing is clean gone. And thus if the ploughmen of
the country, were as negligent in their office, as prelates be, we should not
long live for lacks of sustenaunce. And as it is necessary for to have this
ploughyng for the (...) of the body: so must we have also the other for the
satisfaction of the soul, or else we can not live long gostly. For as the
body An apt Amilitude.
wastes and consumes away for lack of bodily meat: so does the soul yyne
away for default of gostly meat. But there be two kinds of in closing to let
or hinder both theso. Two kinds of inclo sing.
kinds of ploughyng. The one is an enclosing to let or hinder the bodily
ploughyng, and the other to let or hinder the holy day ploughing, yt church
ploughing. The bodily plough ing, is taken in and enclosed through singular
commodity. For what man will let go or diminish his private commodity, for a
commune wealth? and who will sustain any damage for the respect of a public
commodity? The other plough also no man is diligent to set forward, nor no man
will harken to it. But to hinder and let it, al men's ears ar open, yea and a
great many of this kind of ploughmen which are very busy, and would seem to be
very good workmen. I fear me some be rather mock gospellers the^ faithful
ploughmen. I know Mock Gospellers.
many my self that profess the gospel, and live nothing there after. I know
them, and have been conversant with some of them. I know them, and I speak it
with an heavy heart, there is as little charity and good living in them, as in
any other, according to that which Christ said in the Gospel to the great
number of people that followed him, as though they had had an earnest zcale to
his doctrine, where as in deed they had it (...). Non quia vidist is signa, sed
quia comedistis de panibus. Ye follow me (says he) not because ye have (...)
the signs and miracles that I have don, but because ye have eat the bread,
and (...) your bodies. (...) me, so that I think many one now a days
professes the Gospel for the living sake, not for the lone they bear to Gods
word. But they that will be true ploughmen must work faith fully for Gods
sake, for the edifiyng of their (...). And as diligent lie as the husband man
plougheth for the sustentacion of the body: so diligently must the prelates and
ministers la bour for the feding of the soul: both the ploughes must still be
doing, The (...) of Magistrates.
as most necessary for man. And wherefore are magistrates ordained, but that
the tra^quility of the commune weal may be confirmed, limiting both ploughes.
But now for the fault of unpreaching Prelates, me think I could guess what
might be said for excusing of them. They are so troubled with (...) living,
they be so placed in palacies, couched in courts, ruffelyng in their rentes,
dancing in their dominions, burdened with ambassages, pampering of their
paunches like a Monk that makes his Jubilie, mounching in their maungers, and
moiling in their gay manours and man syons, and so troubled with loyteryng in
their Lordshippes, that they can not attend it. They are otherwise occupied,
some in the kings matters, some are Ambassadors, some of the priuye (...)
prelates excused.
council, some to furnish the court, some are Lords of the Parliament, some
are Presidentes, and some Comptrollers of myntes. Well, well. Is this their
duty? Is this their office? Is this their calling? should we have ministers of
the church to be comptrollers of the myntes? Is this a meet office for a
priest that has cure of souls? Is this his charg? I would here ask one
question: I would feign know who co^ptrolleth the devil at home at his parish,
while he comptrolleth the mynt? If the Apostles might not leave the office of
preaching to be deacons, shall one leave it for minting? I can not tell you, but
Myntyng Priests.
the saying is, that since Priests have been mynters, money has been wurse
then it was before. And they say that the euilnesse of money has made al
things dearer. And in this behalf I must speak to England. Hear my country
England, as Paul said in his first epistle to the Cor. vi. Chapter. For Paul
was no sitting Bishop, but a walking and a preaching Bishop. But when he went
from them, he left there behind (...) the plough going still, for he wrote unto
them and rebuked them for going to law and pleading them causes before (...)
then Judges. Is there (says he) utterly among you no wise man, to be an
arbitratour in matters of judgment? What? not one of all that can (...)
between brother and brother? But one brother go to law with an other, and that
under (...) Judges? Constitute contemptos qui sunt in ecclesia. etc. Appoynte
them Judges that are most abject, and vile in the congregacid, which he
speaks in rebuking them, for (says he) Ad erubescentiam vestram dico. I
speak it to your shame. So England I speak it to thy shame. Is there never a
noble man to be a Lord President, but it must be a prelate? Is there never a
wise man in the realm to be a Comptroler of the Mint? I speak it to your
shame, I speak it to your shame. If there be never a wise man, make a Water
bearer, a Tinker, a Cobbler, a slave, a page, Comptroler of the Mint. Make a
mean (...), a Groom, a Yeman, make a poor baggar Lord president. Thus I
speak not that I would have it so, but to your shame. If there be never a
gentilman meet The bringing up of Gentlemen.
nor able to be Lord president. For why are not the noble men and young
gentlemen of England, so brought up in knowledge of god and in learning, that
they may be able to execute offices in the commune weal? The King has a great
many of wards, and I trow there is a court of wards, why is there not a scoole
for the wards, as well as there is a court for their lands? Why are they not
set in schools, where they may learn? Or why are they not sent to the
Uniuersityes, that they may be able to serve the king when they come to age? If
the wards and young gentlemen were well brought up in learning and in the
knowledge of God, they would not when they come to age so much gave them selves
to other vanities. And if the Nobility be well trayited in godly learning, the
people would follow yt same train. For truly, such as the noble men be, such
will the people be. And now the only cause, why noble (...) noble (...) not
(...) Lord (...).
men be not made Lord (...), is because they have not been brought up in
learning. Therefore for the love of god appoint teachers and schole masters,
you that have charg of youth, and give the teachers stipe^ds worthy their
pains yt they may bring them up in Gra^mer, in Logike, in Rethorike, in
Philosophy, in yt civil law and in that which I cannot leave unspoken of, the
word of God. Thanks be unto god the nobility, otherwise is very well brought
up in learning and Godlynes, to the great joy and comfort of England, so that
(...) is now good hope in the youth, that we shall an other day have a
flourishing common wealth, considering their godly educacion. Yea, and there he
all ready noble men enough, though not so many as I would wysh able to be Lord
Presidentes, and wysemen enough, for the mynt. And as (...) a thing it is for
Bishops to be Lord preside^tes or (...) to be minters, as it was for the
Corthinthians to plead matters of variau^te before heathen Judges. It is also a
sclau^der to the noble (...) as though they lacked wisdom, and learning to be
able for such offices, or else were no men of consclence, or else were not
meet to be trusted, and able for such offices. And a prelate has a charge and
cure otherwise, and therefore he cannot discharge his duty, and be a Lord
president to. For a presidentship A just cause to deny him to offices.
requires a whole man, and a Bishop can not be two men. A Bishop has his
office, a slock to teach, to look unto, and therefore he can not meddle with an
other office, which alone requires a whole man. He should therefore give it
over to whom it is meet, and labor in his own business, as Paul writes to
the Thessalonions. Let every man do his own business, and follow his calling.
Let the Priest prcach, and the noble men handle the temporal matters. Moses was
a meruaslous man, a good man. Moses was a wonderful fellow, and did his duty
being a married man, we lack such as Moses was. Well, I would al men would look to
their duty, as God has call led them, and then we should have a flourishing
Christian common weal. And now I would ask a strange question. Who is the
most diligentest Bishop and prelate in all England, that The most diligentest
preacher in England.
passes all the rest in doing his office? I can tell, for I know him who it
is, I know him well. But now I think I se you listining and barkening, that I
should name him. There is one that passes all the other, and is the most
diligent prelate and preacher in all England. And will ye know who it is? I will
tell you. It is yt devil. He is the most dilligent preacher of (...), he is never
out of his dioces, he is never from his cure, ye shall never find him
unoccupied, he is ever in his (...), he (...) at al times, ye shall never find
him out of the way: call for him when you will, he is ever at home, the
diligentest preacher in all the realm, he is ever at his plough: no lording
nor loyteryng can hinder him, he is ever appliyng his busynes, ye (...) never
find him idle I warrant you. And his office is to hinder religion, to maintain
super sticion, to set up Idolatry, to teach al kind of popery. He is ready as
can be wyshed, for to set forth his plough, to deuyse as many ways as can be
to deface and obscure Gods glory. Where the Devil is resydent and has his
plough going: there away with books, and up with candelles, away with Note
where the Dyuel dwells.
Bybles and up with beads, away with the light of the gospel, and up with the
light of candelles, yea at noone days. Where the Devil is resident, that he
may prevail, up with all supersticion and Idolatry, sensing, painting of
Images, candels, palms, ashes, holy water, and new service of men's inuenting,
as though man could invent a better way to honor God with, then God him self
has appointed. Down with Christ's cross, up with purgatory pick purs, up with
him, the popish Purgatory I mean. Away with clothing the naked, the pore and
impotent, by with decking of Images (...) are (...) ready to (...) our (...)
inuencious, then Gods (...).
and gay garnishing of stocks and stones. Up with man's tradicions and his
laws, down with Gods tradicions and his most holy word. Down with the old
honor dew to god and up with the new Gods honor: let all things be don in
latin. There must be nothing but latin, not as much as. Memento homo quod
cinis es, et in cinerem reuerteris: Remember man that thou are ashes, and into
(...) thou shall return. Which be the (...) that the (...) speaks to the
(...) people, when he gives the^ ashes upon asshe wensdaye, but it must be
spoken in latin. Gods word may in no wise be translated into English. Oh that
our prelates would be as diligent to sow the (...) of good doctrine, as
Satan is, to (...) cockel (...) darnel. And this is the Deuelish ploughing,
the which works to have things in latin, and (...) the (...) edificacion.
But here some manne will say to me: what sir, are ye so (...) of the Devils
counsel, that ye know all this to be true? Truly I know him to well, and have
obeyed him a little to much in co^discending to some folies. And I know him as
other men do, yea, that he is ever (...) and (...) busy in following his plow. I
know by S. Peter which says of him. Sicut leo rugiens circuit quaerens quem
deuoret, he goes about like a roaring lion (...) whom he may (...): (...). I
would have this text well vewed and examined every word of it. Circuit, (...)
goes about in every (...) of his dioces. He goes on visitacion daily. He
leaves no Note a (...) well (...).
place of his cure (...). He walks round about front place to place, and
cease not. Sicut leo, as a (...) that is strongly, bodly, and proudly,
stately, and fiercely with haut looks, with his proud countenaunces, with his
(...) bragginges: rugiens, roaryng, for he lets not slip any occasion to
speak or to roar out when he (...) his time. (...), (...) goes about seking
and not sleping, as our Bishops do, but he seeks diligently, he searches
diligently al corners, (...) as he may have his (...). He roueth abroad in
every place of his (...), he stands not still, he is never at rest, but ever
in hand with his plough that it may go foreward. But there was never such a
preacher in England as he is. Who is able to tell his dylygent preaching? which
every (...) and every (...), laboreth to sow cockel and barnel, that he may
bring (...) of form and out of estimacion and (...), thinstitution of the
Lords supper and Christ's cross, for there he lost his right, for Christ said:
Nunc iudicium est mundi, princeps (...) eiicietur (...). Et sicut (...) Moses
serpentem in deserto, it a (...) oportet filium hominis. Et cum exaltatus
fuero, a terra, omnia traehom ad meipsum. Now is the judgment of this world,
and the Prince of this world shall be cast out. And as Moses did lift up the
serpent in the wyldernes, so must the son of man be lift up. And when I shall
be lift up from the earth, I will (...) all things unto my self. For the devil
was dysappoynted of his purpose, for he thought al to be his own. And when he
had once brought Christ to the cross, (...) thought al cock sure.

But there lost he all his (...), for (...) said: (...) meipsum, I will (...)
all things (...) self. He means drawyng of man's soul too (...). And that
he said he would do: Por semetipsum, by his own self, not by any other
bodies Sacrifice. He meant by his own sacryfice on the cross, where he offered
him self for the cedemption of mankind, and not the sacrifice of the (...) to
be offered by an other. For who can offer him, but him self? He was both the
Offerer and the offering. And this is the prick, this is the marcke at the
which the Devil The mark that the dyuel shoteth at.
shoots, to euacuate the cross of Christ, and to myngle the institucion of
the Lords Supper, the which although he can not bring to pass: yet he goes
about by his sleightes and subtyle means, to frustrate the same, and these
(...) hundredth years he has been a dooer, only purposyng to euacuate
Christ's death, and to make it of small efficacy and virtue. For where as
Christ, according as the Serpent was lift up in wyldernes: so would he him
self to be exalted, that thereby as many as (...) in him should have
salvation. But the Devil would none of that. They would have us saved by a
daily oblacion propiciatory, by a sacrifice expiatory, or remissory. Now if I
should preach in the country among the unlearned, I would tell what
propiciatory, expiatory and remissory is: but here is a learned au (...), yet
for them that be unlearned I wilerpound it. Propiciatory, expiatory, remissory,
or satisfactory, for they signify al one thing in effect, and is nothing else
but a thing whereby to obtain (...) ofsynnes, and to have salvation. And this
way the Devil used to euacuate the death of Christ, that we might have
affiaunce in other things, as in the daily sacrifice of the priest, where as
Christ would have us to trust in his only sacrifice. So he was: Agnus occisus
ab origin mundi, the lamb that has been slain from the beginning of the
world, (...) therefore he is (...), judge sacrificium, a continual sacrifice, and
not for the continuance of the (...), as the Blaunchers have blaunched it, and
(...) it. And as I my self (...) once mystake it. But Paul says: Per
semetipsum purgatio facta, by him self and by none other, Christ made (...)
and (...) for the whole (...). Would Christ this word (by him self) had
(...) better weighed and looked upon, and in sanctificationem, to make them
holy, for he is judge sacrificium, a continual sacrifice, in effect, fruit and
operation, that like as they which (...) the Serpent hang up in the
deserte, were put in remembrance of Christ's death, in whom as many as
believed The use of the brazen Serpent.
were saved: so al men that trusted in the death of Christ shall be saved, as
well they that were before, as they that came after. For he was a continual
Sacrifice, as I said in effect, fruit, operacion and virtue. As though he
had from the beginning of the world, and continually should to the worlds end,
hang still on the cross, and he is as fresh hangyng on the cross now, to
them that believe and trust in him: as he was fyftene hundredth years a go, when
he was (...). Then let us trust upon his only death, and look for none other
sacrifice propitiatory, then the same bloudye Sacrifice, the lively sacrifice,
and not the dry Sacrifice, but a bloudye Sacrifice. For Christ him self said:
con summatum est, It is perfectly finished. I have taken at my fathers hand
the dispensation of redeemyng mankind. I have wrought man's redemption, and
have dispatched the matter. Why then mingle ye him? why (...) ye divide him?
why make you of him mo sacrifices then one: Paul says: Pascha nostrum
immolatus est christus, Christ our (...) is (...) up, so that the thing is
done, and Christ has done it, and he has done it semel, once for all. And it
was a bloudye Sacrifice, not a dry Sacrifice.

Why then, it is not the (...) that avails or profits for the quycke and
the dead? (...) worth thee, O Dyuell, woe woorthe (...), that have prevailed
so far and so long, that have made England to (...) false Gods, forsaking
Christ their Lord. (...) worth thee Devil, woe worth thee Devil and al thy
Angels. If Christ by his death (...) althinges to him self, and draws all
men to salvation, and to heavenly bliss, that trust in him: Then the Priests
at the Mass, at the popyshe Mass (I say) what can they (...), when (...)
some. thing.
Christ (...) all, but lands and goods from the right (...)? The Priests
draw goods and richesse, (...) and promotions to them selves, and (...) as
believed in their (...), they draw to the Devil. But Christ it is that draws
souls unto him by his bloudye Sacrifice. What have we to do then, but epulari
in domino, to eat in the Lord at his Supper.

What other service have we to do to him? and what other sacrifice have we to
offer, but the mortification of our sleshe? What other oblacion have we to
make, but of obedience, of good living, of good works, and of helping our
neighbors? But as for our redemption, it is done already, it cannot be better.
Christ has done that thing so well, that it can not be amended. It can not be
devised how to make that any better then he has done it. But the Dyuell by
the help of that Italian Bishop yonder, his Chaplayne, has labored by all
means that he might, to frustrate the death of Christ, and the merits of his
passion. And they have devised for that purpose, to make us believe in other
vain things by his pardons, as to have remission of sins, for praying on
hallowed beads, for drynkyng of the bakehouse bole, as a Channon of Waltam
Abbeyonce told me, that when so ever The Monk of Walta^.
they put their loaves of bread into the oven, as many as drank of the pardon
bole, should have pardon for drynkyng of it. A mad thing to give pardon to a
bole. Then to (...) Alexanders holy water, to hallowed belles, palms, candels,
ashes, and what not? And of these things every one has taken away some part
of Christ's sanctification. Every one has robbed some part of Christ's passion
and cross, and has mingled Christ's death, and has been made to be
propitiatory and satisfactory, and to put away sin. Yea and Alexanders holy
water yet at this day remains in England, and is used for a remedy against
spirits, and to chase away Deuyls, yea and I would this had been the woorste.
I would this were the woorst. But woe worth thee, O Devil, that have
prevailed to euacuate Christ's cross, and to mingle the Lords Supper. These
be the Italian Bishops devises, and the Dyuel has prycked at this mark, to
frustrate the cross of Christ. He shot at this mark long before Christ came,
he shot at this prycke four thousand years before Christ hanged on the
Cross, or suffered his passion. For the brazen Serpent, was set up in the
(...) to put men in remembrance of Christ's coming, that like as they which
beheld the brazen Serpent were healed of their bodily diseases: so they that
looked spirituallye upon Christ that was to come, in him should be saved
spirituallye from the Devil. The Serpent was set up in memory of Christ to
come, but the Devil found means to steal away the memory of Christ's
coming, and brought the people to woorshyp the Serpent self, and to sense
him, to honor him, and to offer to him, to woorshyppe him, and to make an
Idol of him. And this was done by the market men that I told you of. And the
Clarke of the market did it for the lucre and advantage The (...) of the (...).
of his Master, that thereby his honor might increase, for by Christ's
death, he could have but final world ly advantage. And even now so has he
certain blaunchers longyng to the market, to let and stop the light of the
Gospel, and to hinder the Kings proceedings in setting forth the word and
glory of God. And when the Kings Majesty with the advice of his honorable
Counsel goes about to promote Gods word, and to set an order in matters of
religion, there shall not lack blaunchers that will say: As for Blau^chers
Images, where as they have been used to be senced, and to have candels offered
unto them, none be so foolysh to do it to the stock or stone, or to the Image
self, but it is done to God and his honor besore the Image. And though they
(...) abuse it, these blaunchers will be ready to whysper the King in the ear,
and to tell him, that this abuse is but a small matter. And that the same, with all other like abuses in the church may be reformed easily. It is but a (...)
abuse (say they) and it may be easily amended. But it should not be taken in
(...) at the first for fear of trouble, or further inconveniences. The people
will not bear sudden alteracions: an insurrection may be made after (...)
mutacion, which may be to the great harm and loss of the Realm. Therefore al
things shall be well, but not out of hand, for fear of further busynes. These be
the blaunchers that hitherto have stopped the word of God, and hyndered the
true setting forth of the same. There be so many put offes, so many put byes,
so many (...), and considraetions of worldly wisdom. And I dout not but there
were blaunchers in the old time, to whysper in the ear of good King
Ezechyas, for the mayntenaunce There have been blaunchers still.
of Idolatrye done to the brazen Serpent, as well as there has been now
oflate, and be now that can blaunche the abuse of Images and other like
things. But good King Ezechias would not be so blinded, he was like to
Apollos, fervent in spirit. He would give no ear to the Blaunchers, he was
not moved with the worldly (...), with these prudent considerations, with these
policies, he feared not insurrections of the people. He feared not least his
people would not bear the glory of God: but he (without any of these
respects, or (...), or considerations, like a good king for Gods sake, and
for conscience sake) by and by plucked down the brazen serpente, and destroyed
it utterly, and beat it to powder. He out of hand, did cast down all
Images, he (...) al Idolatry, and clearly did extirpate al supersticion. He
would not hear these blaunchers and wordly wise men but with out delay,
follows gods cause and destroys all (...) out of hand. Thus did good king
Ezechias, for he was like Apollo, fervent in spirit, and diligente to promote
Gods glory. And good hope there is that it shall be likewise here in
England, for the kings Majesty is so brought up in knowledge, virtue, and
godliness, that it is not to be mystrusted, but that we shall have al things
well, and that (...) glory of God shall be spread abroad, throughout all
parts of the realm, if the Prelates will diligently apply their plough and be
preachers, rather then Lords. But our blaunchers, which will be Lords, and no
laborers, when they are commanded to go and be resident upon their cures, and
preach in their benifices, they would say.

What, I have set a deputy there, I have a deputy that looks (...) bishops.
well to my flock, and the which shall discharge my duty. A deputy (quod
be) I looked for that word all this while. And what a deputy must he be, trow
ye? Even one like himself, he must be a Cannonist, that is to say, one that
is brought up in the study of the Popes laws and decres. One that will set
forth papistrie as well as him self will (...) and one that will (...) al
supersticion, and Idolatrye. And one that will nothing at all, (...) else very
weakly resist the Devils plough, yea happy it is if he take not part with the
Devil, and where he should be an enemy to him, it is well if he take not the
Deuiles part against Christ. But in the mean time the Prelates take their
pleasures. They are Lords and no labou rers, but the Devil is diligent at his
plough. He is no unpreaching prelate. He is no Lordly loyterer from his cure,
but a busy plough man, so that among all the prelates, and among The (...) shall
go for Latimers money.
all the pack of them that have cure, the (...) shall go for my money. For he
still applies his busynes. Therefore ye unpreaching prelates, learn ofthe Devil
to be diligent in doing of your office. Learn of the Devil. And if you will not
learn of God nor good men: for shame learn of the Devil, ad (...) dico. I
speak it for your shame. If you will not learn of God nor good man to be
diligent in your office, learn of the Devil. (...) there is now very good hope
that the Kings majesty, being by the help of good governance of his most
honorable counsailours, he is trained and brought up in learning and knowledge
of gods word, will shortly provide a remedy and set an order herein, which thing
that it may so be let us pray for him. Pray for him good people, pray for
him ye have great cause, and need to pray for him.

FINIS.
THE SEVEN SERmons of the reverend father, M. Hughe Latimer, which he preached
before our late sovereign Lord of famous memory king Edward the.vi. within the
Preaching place, in the Palace at Westminster, in the year of our Lord. 1549.
the first Sermon the.viii. of March.

whereunto are added other two Sermons, as well that he preached at Stamford, as
also the last that he made before the late king Edward, which he called his
vltimum vale.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cumgratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per septennium.

An. 1562.

To the right virtuous and gracious Lady Katherine Douches of Suffolk, Thomas
Some, her humble and faithful Orator, wishes godly favor and ever lasting
salvation from God the father through Jesus Christ our mereifull Lord.
When man is borne for man, that one to another should be a God, and not a
devil, an helper, no hynderer, unto whom also the use of the tongue is only
given, whereby they do both express and show the affections of their minds,
there is no man which can say, I have no need of any man. But among infinite
mischiefs and euilles of man's poverty and anguish, by which he has need of
other men's help, is the instruction of prudence or virtue and of science. For
mankind in this do precel chiefly brute beasts, because they help one
another by mutual communication. In learning good and virtuous manners, the use
of commoning is required chiefly, that men erryng, and ignoraunte should be
taught, for there is none which shall ever learn of himself, al though he be
never so happily borne.

Therefore, it shall become every man, which do intend to live godly, to here
and learn godly books, to print heavenly docume^ts in their hearts. For as
evil doctrine, deuelish books, and filthy talk do corrupt good manners: so
faithful precepts, godly books, chaste co^moning and honest shall edify, and
co^firm. wherefore, intending to do good unto al men and namely un to such, as
err and be ignorante, I have gathered, writ, and brought into light, the
famous friday (...) of M. Hugh Latimer, which he preached in Le^t last past,
before our most noble king Edwad the sixth, at the new palaice of westminster
the third year of his reign. which Sermons (most virtuous La die) I dedicate
unto your honorable grace, nothing doubting but that you will gladly embrace
them, not only because of their excellency, but chiefly for the profit which
shall ensue thorough them unto the ignorant. For in them are fruteful and godly
documents, directing ordinatly not only the steps, conversation, and living of
kings: but also of other ministers and subjects under him. And let no man
begreued though it be not so exactly done as he did speak it, for in very deed
I am not able so to do, to write word for word as he did speak, that passes
my capacity, though I had xx. men's wits, and no fewer hands to write with
all. As it is impossible that a little river should receive the recourse of the
main sea with in his brimmes, so that no water should over whelm the sides
thereof, In like manner is it more unlike my simple wit to comprehend
absolutely the aboundante eloquence and learning which flows most abundantly
out of godly Latimers mouth. Notwithstanding, yet had I rather with
shamefastnes declare charitably, this part of his godly documents, and
counsel, then with slouthfulnes forget or keep close folishly, that thing
which may profete many.

who is that will not be glad to hear and believe the doctrine of godly
Latymer? whom God has appointed a prophet, unto our most noble King, and
unto our Realm of England, to declare the message of the living god, to (...)
and (...) out all sins and vice, to plant and graffe in men's hearts the
plenteousnes of all spiritual blessings in Jesus Christ our Lord?

Moses, Ieremias, Helias, did never declare the true message of God unto their
rulers and people, with a more sincere spirit, faithful mind and godly
zeal, then godly Latimer does now in our days unto our most noble King and
(...) the whole realm. Furthermore, also Iosia received never the book of Gods
will at the hands of Helkia the hye priest, or the admonicion of Hulda that
prophetess, with a more perfect and godly fear, then our most noble King
does most faithfully, give credit unto the words of good fa there Latimer. And
I have no doubt but all godly men will likewise receive gladly his godly
Sermons and give credit unto the same. Therefore this my rude labor of another
man's sweet (most virtuous lady) I offer most humbly unto your, grace, moved
there unto of godly zeal, thorough the godly fame, that is dispersed
universally of your most Godly disposicion, and unfeigned love toward the
living, almightye, eternal God and his holy word, practysed daily both in
your graces most virtuous behauour, and also godly charity toward the
edificatio^ of every member graffed in Christ Jesus, most humbly desyring your
grace to accept favorably this my temerous enterprise. And I your most humble
and faithful Orator, shall pray unto Jehovah, the God which is of himself,
by whom, and in whom, all things live, move, and be, that that good work which
he has begone in you, he may perform it unto your last endyng, through our
Lord Jesus Chiste, who preserve and keep your grace now and ever, So be it.

The argument of the first Sermon.
IN this first Sermon is declared, and taught the godly election of a king, and
a rule of godly living as touching his own person. (...) here (...) proves
our most excele^t king Edward, to be our most lawful king both by nativity,
and country, yea, and now appointed in these our days to deliver us from the
danger and captivity of Egypt and wicked Pharao, that is from (...) and
ignorance and the deuelish antichrist the Pope of Rome. The form of his godly
rule also he divided here in this Sermon in three parts. First that he should
not trust to much unto his own strength and policye, but only to walk (...)
with God and to make him his (...) man and chief guide. Secondarily that he
live not lassiuiously and wantonly, following veneriall affections, but to live
chastely. And when time shall require, to lead a pure life, under the yoke of
matrimony, admonishing both his grace, and al other Maiestrates to be
circumspect in chosyng a wife, either for themselves or for their children,
having this always in mind, that she be, of a faithful house, godly brought
up, and of a pure life? Thirdly he admonished the kings grace, that he should
not desire gold and silver to much, proving by many arguments that that kind
of vice with the other forsaid, to be destruction not only unto the kings
grace: but also unto the whole realm and people, In these things consists
the whole sum of this sermon.

QVecunque scripta sunt: ad nostram doctrinam scrip Romans xv. (...)
ta sunt. What so ever things are written a fore time, are written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of scripture, might have hope.
In taking this part of scripture (most noble audience) I play as a trowant,
which when he is at schole, will chose a lesson, wherein he is perfight,
because he is loath to take pain in studieng a new lesson, or else fears
stripes for his slothful nes. In like manner I might seem now in my old age
to some men, to take this part of scripture, because I would wade easily away
therewith, and drive mi matter at my ple sure and to be bound unto a certain
theme. But ye shall consider, that the foresaid words of Paul are not to be
understand of al scripturs, but only of those, which are of god written in gods
book, and all things which are therein, are written for our learning, The
excellency of this word is so great, and of so hye dignity, that there is no
earthly thing Genesis i (...). (...) xvii (...)
to be compared unto it. The author thereof is great, that is God himself,
eternal, almighty, everlasting. The scripture Deuteronomy. iiii. (...)
because of him, is also great, eternal, most mighty, and ho Esaias. xxvi. (...)
ly. There is no king Emperor, Maiestrate, and ruler, of (...). viii. c
Daniel. vii. c
what state so ever they be but are bound to obey this God We ought to obey,
god, to believe his word, and to follow it.
and to give credence unto his holy word in directing their steps ordinatly
according unto the same word, yea true ly they are not only bound to obey gods
book, but also the minister of the same, for the words sake, so far as he
spe keth sitting in Moses chair, that is, if his doctrine be taken out of
Moses law. For in this world god has. (...) swerdes This world (...) led with
two swords.
the one is a temporal sword the other a spiritual, The temporal swerd
rests in the hands of kings, maiestrats, The temporal sword.
and rulers under him, whereunto all subjects, as well the clergy as the layty
be subject, and punisheable, for any offense contrary to the same book.

The spiritual swerd is in the hands of the ministers and The spiritual sword.
preachers whereunto all kings, maiestrates, rulers ought to be obedient, that
is, to hear, and follow, so long as the ministers sit in christ's chair,
that is, speaking out of chri Math. xxii.
stes book.

The king corrects transgressors with the temporal The king may correct the
(...) cher.
(...) yea, and the preacher also if he be an offender, But the preacher can
not correct the king if he be a transgressor (...) the prea cher may correct
the king.
of gods word, with the temporal sword. But he must cor rect and reprove him
with the spiritual swerd fearing no man setting god only before his eyes under
whom he is a minister to supplant and root up all vice and mischief by gods
word, whereunto all men ought to be obedient, as is mentioned in many places of
scripture, and among many this is one. Quoecunque iusserint (...) seruare
seruate, et (...) Math. xxiii. a.
te What so ever they bid you observe, yt observe and do. There (...). (...).
iii. a.
fore let yt preacher teach, improve, amend and instruct in right (...). Pet.
i. a.
wisenes, with the spiritual sword, fering no man though death should ensue.
Thus Moses fering no man with this Exodus v. vi. vii. etc.
swerddid reprove king (...), at gods commandment.

Micheas the prophet also did not spare to blame king iii. Reg. xxii.
Achab for his wickedness, according to Gods will and to prophery of his
destruction contrary unto many false prophets. These foresaid kings being
admonished by the ministers of gods word, because they would not follow their
godly doctrine and correct their lives, came unto btter des truction. Pharao
giving no credit unto Moses the prophet King Pharao punished.
of God, but appliant unto the lusts of his own heart, what time he hard of the
passage of gods people, having Exodus xiiii.
no fear or (...) of gods work, he did prosecute after entending to destroy
them and was drowned in the Ahab.
red sea. king Ahab also because he would not harken unto iii. Reg. xxi.
Micheas was killed with an arrow. Likewise also the house iii. Reg. xiiii.
of Ieroboan with other many, came unto destruction, because The preacher must
have god before his eyes.
he would not hear the ministers of gods word, and correct his life according
unto his will, and pleasure. Let the precher therefore never fear to declare
the (...) of god unto all men. And if the (...) will not hear (...), then the
preachers may admonish and (...) them with their duties, and so leave them
unto god and pray for them. But if the preachers digress out of Christ's
chair, and Euel prechers are to be refused.
shall speak their own fantasies, then in stead of. Quoe eunque iusserint
vos facere, facite, and seruate. What soever they bid you observe, that observe
and do. Change it into these Math. vii. g
words following: Cauete vero vobis a (...) venunt ad vos. etc. Beware of false
Prophets which come unto you in shepes clothing, but in wardly, they are rave
ning woulfes, ye shall know them by their fruts: yea chang Quoecunque iusserint,
(if their doctrine be evil) into Cauete a Luke. (...). (...)
fermento pharisoeorum, etc. That is: Take heed and beware of the leaven of
the Phariseis, and of the Saduces. In tea ching evil doctrine, all preachers
are to be eschewed, and in no wise to be harkned unto. In speaking truth: they
are to be hard. Al things written in gods book, are most certain true, and
profitable for all men. For in it, is contained mete matter for kings,
princes, Rulers, bishops, In gods book is matter for all estates.
and for all states. Wherefore, it behooves every preacher, some what to appoint
and accomodate him self, and his matter a greable unto the comfort, and
amendment of the audience, unto the which he declares the message of god. If
he preach before a king, let his matter be concerning A preacher must have
res pect to his au dience
the office of a king, if before a bishop, then let him treat of bishoply
duties and orders, and so forth in other matters, as time and audience shall
require.

I have thought it good, to inteate upon these words following which are
written in the. xvii. Chapter of Deuteronomy. Cu^ veneris in terra^ qua^
Dominus Deus dat tibi possede Deuteronomy. xvii.
risque eam, etc. That is. When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy
God gives the, and enioyest it, and dwell therein: If thou shall say, I
will set a king over me: like unto all the nations that are about me: Then
thou shall make him king over the, whom the Lord thy god shall chose.

One of thy brethren must thou make king over the, and may not set a stranger
over the, which is not of thy brethren. But in any wise, let him not hold to
many horses, that he bring not the people again to Egypt, through the
multitude of horses, for as much as the Lord has said un to you: ye shall
henre forth go no more again that way. Also he shall not have to many wives,
lest his heart turn away, nether shall he gather him silver and gold to much.
As in diverse other places of scripture is mete matter for all (...). So in this
foresaid place is discribed chefly the doctrine fit for a king. But who is
worthy to utter th is doctrine before our most noble king? Not I God knows,
which am through age, both weak in body and obliuious, (...) apt I am, not only
because of painful study, but also for yt short warning. Well unto god I will
make my moan, who never failed me. Auxiliator in necessitatibus. God is my
helper in all my all my necessities, To him alone will I make my peticion. To
pray unto saints departed I am not taught, to desire like grace of god as
they had (right godly it is) or to belene god to be no less merciful unto us
(being faithful) then he was unto them, greatly comfortable it is. Therefore
only unto god let us lift up our hearts and say the loros prayer.

Cum veneris etc. When thou art come unto the land Things touched most chief
ly in the hole sermon.
which the Lord, etc. Thou shall appoint him king etc. One of the brethren
must thou make king over the, and must not set a stranger over the which is
not of thy

But in any wise let not such one prepare unto him self

Furthermore let him not prepare unto him self many (...). xvii. (...).
mised that thing. For unto Abraham he said: Ego crescere te faciam vehementer
ponamque te in gentes, sed et reges ex te prodibunt. That is, I will multiply
the excedingly, and will make nations of the, yea and kings shall spring out of
the These words were spoken long before (...) children of Israel had any
king. Not withstanding, yet God prescribed unto them an order, how they should
chose their king, and what manner a man he should be, where he says: when thou
shall come into the land, etc. As who should say. O ye children of Israel, I
know your nature right well, which is evil, and inclined unto al evils. I know
that thou will chose a king to reign over the and to appear glorious in the
face of the world, after the manners of Gentyles, But because thou art (...)
necked, wild, and art given to walk without a brydell, and line: Therefore now
I will prevent thy evil and beastly manners, I will hedge strongly thy way, I
will make a durable law, which shall compel thee to walk ordinatly, and in
a plain way, that is: thou shall not (...) thee a king after thy will and
fantasy but after me thy Lord and God. Thus, God condicioned with the Jews,
that their king should be such a one as he himself would chose them. This was
not much unlike a bargayn that I herd of late should be betwixt two frinds for
a horse, the owner promised the other should have the horse if he would, the
other axed the price, he said: xx. nobles. The other would give him but iiii.
pound: the owner said he should not have him then. The other claymed the horse
because he said, he should have him if he would. Thus this bargain became a
Westminster matter, the law A notable (...).
yers got twyse the valor of the horse, and when all came to all, two fools
made an end of the matter. Howbeit, the Israelites could not go to law with
God, for chosyng their king, for would they, nyl they, their king should be of
his chosyng, lest they should walk inordinatly, in a deceiuable way, unto
their utter loss and destruction. For as they say commonly. Qui (...) plane,
vadit sane, that is, he that A common (...) ing:
walks plaiuly walks safly. As the Jews were (...), and were ever ready to
walk inordinatly, no less are we English men given to unto wardnes, and
inordinate walking after our own fantasies and brains. We will walk without
the limits of Gods word, we will chose a king at our own pleasure. But let
us learn to frame our lives Reg. xix.
after the noble king David which when he had many occasions, given of king
Saul to warke evil, for evil, yea and having many times opportunity to
perform mischief and to slay king Saul. Nevertheless yet fearing, 1. Reg.
xxiiii.
would not follow his fleshly affections and walk inordinatly, Red the (...)
they be very pleasant and profitable.
without the will of Gods word, which be confessed always to be his
direction, saying. Lucerna (...) ineis ver (...) et lumen semitis meis. Thy
word, O Lord, is a Psalm. cxix.
Lanterno unto my feet and a light unto my steps. Gods word is our light.
Thus having in mind, to walk ordinatly he did always (...) to do evil. For
when king Saul was in a cave with out any man. David and his men sitting by the
sides of the cave, yea and David's men moving him to kill Saull, David made
answer and said unto them: Seruet me dominus, ne rem istam. etc. contra dominum
meu^ Messiam. etc. That is: David did walk ordinatly.
The Lord keep me from doing this thing unto my master that is the Lords
anointed. At another time also, moved by Abisay to kill Saull slepyng, David
said Ne interficias i. Reg. xxvi. b
e / dt / u, quis enim impune manu^ sua^ inferret (...) domino. etc. That is:
Destroy him not, for who can lay his hands on the lords anointed and
begiltyles. etc. I would God we would follow king David, and then we should walk
ordinatly, and yet do but that we are bound of duty to do, for God says:
Quod ego proecipio, hoc tantum facito. That thing which I command
Fantastical brains are reproved inordinatly,
that only do. There is a great error risen now a days among many of us,
which are vain and new fangled men climbyng beyond the limits of our
capacitye and wit, in wrenchyng this text of scripture, hereafter following,
after their own fantasy and brain, their error is upon this text: Audi
vocem populi in omnibus quoe dicunt tibi, (...). Reg. viii.
non enim te reprobant sed me reprobarunt ne regnem super eos. That is: Hear
the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee, for they have not cast
thee a way but me. They wrench these words a wrye after their own fantasyes,
and make much doubt as touching a king, and his Godly name. They that so do
walk inordinatly. they walk not directly and plainly, but delight in balkes,
and stubble way.

It makes no matter by what name the rulers be named, God calls his
ministers by diverse names.
if so be they shall walk ordinately with God, and derect their steps with
God. For both patriarchs, Judges, and kings, had, and have their authority of
God, and therefore Godly. But this ought to be considered which God says. Non
proeficere tibi potes hominem alienum, that is. Thou must not set a stranger
over the. It has pleased god to grant us a natural lieg king and Lord, of
our own nation an English King Edward the vii. is our natural king and a most
precious treasure.
man, one of our own religion. God has given him unto us, and is a most
precious treasure, and yet many of us do desire a stranger to be king over
us. Let us no more desire to be bankers, but let us endeavor to walk ordinatly
and plainly, after the word of God. Let us follow Dansell, let us not seek yt
death of our most noble and rightful king, our own brother, both by
natiuytie, Let us pray for his life.
and Godly religion. Let us pray for his good state, that he live long among
us.

Oh what a plage were it, that a strau^g king of a straung land, and of a
strange religion should raygne over us. Where now we be governed in the true
religion, he should A stranger would rout out all godlynes and plant again all
hipocrisy.
extirp and pluck away all together, and then plant again all abomination,
and popery, God keep such a king from us. Well, the kings grace has sisters,
my Lady Mary, and my Lady Elizabeth, which by succession and course are
inheritoures to the crown: Who if they should mary, with strangers, what
should ensue: God knows. But God grant if they so do: whereby strange
religion comes in, that they never come unto coursyng nor succeding. Therefore
to avoid this plage, let us amend our lives and put a way all pride, which
does drown men in this realm at these days, all covetousness wherein the
magistrates and rich men of this realm are overwhelmed, all lechery and other
excessive vices, provoking Gods wrath were he not merciful, even to take from
us our natural king and leig lord, yea, and to plage us with a strange king for
our unrepentant They that (...) God or the king will amend their sinful
living.
heart. Wherefore (if as ye say ye love the king) amend your lives, and then ye
shall be a mean that God shall lend him us long to reign over us, for
undoubtedly sins provoke much gods wrath scripture says: Dabo ti by regem
in furore meo, That is: I will give the a (...) in my wrath. Now we have a
lawful king, a godly king, nevertheless yet many evils do raygne. Long time the
ministers appointed, have studied to amend, and redres al evils, long time
before this great labor has been about this matter, great crakes has been
made that all should be well. But when all came to all for all their (...),
little or nothing was done, in whom these words of (...) may well be verified
saying. parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. (...).
The mountains swells up, the poor mouse is brought out, long before this
time, many has (...) in hand to bring many things unto pass, but finally
their works came unto small effect and profit. Now I hear say all things
are ended after a Godly manner, or else shortly shall be. Make have, make have, and
let us learn to convert, to repent, and amend your lives. If we do not, I
fear, I fear, lest for our sins and unthankful nes, an Hipocrit shall reign
over us. Long we have been ser The Pope has long reigned.
uaunts and in bondage, seruyng the Pope in Egypt. God has given us a
deliverer, a natural king. Let us seek no stranger of another nation, no
hipocrite which shall bring God has sent us a deliverer.
in again all papistrie, hipocricie, and Idolatry. No diabolical minister
which shall maintain all deuelish works and evil exercises. But let us pray
that God maintain and Let us no more seek to serve a stranger.
continue our most excelleut king here present, true inheritour of this our
realm, both by nativity, and also by the Let us pray for our king.
special gift and ordinance of God. He does us rectifye in the liberty of
the Gospel, in that therefore let us stand. State ergo in liberate, qua
Christus nos liberauit. Stand ye in Gal. v. a.
the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free. In Christ's liberty we shall
stand, If we so live that we profyt. If we cast away all evil, fraud and
deceyt, with such other vices, contrary to Gods word. And in so doing we shall
not only prolong and maintain our most noble kings days in prosperity: but
also we shall prosper our own lives, to live not only prosperously, but also
godly.

In any wise, let no such a wone prepare unto him self The second part of his
sermon.
many horses. etc. In speaking these words, ye shall under stand, that I do
not entend to speak against the strength, polisye and provision of a king, but
against excess, and vain trust that kings have in them selves, more then in
the living God the author of all goodness, and geuer of all vic tory. Many
horses are requisite for a king, but he may not excede in them, nor triumph in
them, more then is needful, for the necessary affairs and defense of the
realm: what means it, that God has to do with the kings stable? but only he
would be master of his horses, the Scripture Psalm. (...).
says, In altis habitat. He dwells on hye, it follows. Humilia respicit.
He looks on low things, yea, upon the kings stables, and upon all the
offices in his house. God is graund master in the kings house.
God is great grand master of the kings house, and will take account of every
one that bears rule therein, for the executing of their offices, Whether they
have (...) and truly served the king in their offices or no. Yea god looks
upon the king him self, if he work well or not. Every king is subject unto
god, and al other men are subjects un to yt king. In a king god requires
faith, not excess of hor ses. Horses for a king be good and necessary, if they
be well used. But horses are not to be preferred above pore men. I was ones
offended with the kings horses, and therefore took occasion to speak in the
presence of the kings majesty that dead is, when (...) stood. Abbeis were
(...) ned for the comfort of the poor, Wherefore I said it was not decent that
the kings horses should be kept in them (as ma ny were at yt time) the living
of poor me^ thereby minished and taken a way: But afterward a certain noble man
said to me what have thou to do with the kings horses? I answered, and said, I
spoke my conscience as gods word directed me. He said horses be the
maintenances and part of a kings honor, and also of his realm, wherefore in
speakinge against them ye are against the kings honor. I answered. God
teaches what honor is decent for the king and An answer de claring the true
honor of a king
for all other men according unto their vocations. God apoynteth every king a
sufficient living for his state and de gree both by lands and other customs.
And it is lawful for every king to enjoy the same goods and possessions. But
to extort and take away the right of the poor, is against the honor of the
king. And you do move the king to do after that manner, then you speak
against the honor of the king. For I full certify you, extortioners, violent
oppressers, in grossers of tename^ts and lands, through He describes the
dishonors of a king plainly and most truly.
whose couetusnes, villages decay and fall down, the kings leig people for lack
of susten a^ce are famished and decayed. They be those which speak a gaynste
the honor of the king. God requires in the king and al magistrates a good
heart, to walk directly in his ways. And in all subjects, an obedience dew
unto a king. Therefore I pray god both the god requires a good heart.
king and also we his people may endeuer diligently to walk in his ways, to
his great honor and our profit. Let him not prepare unto him self to many
wives. etc. All The. iii. part of his sermen.
though we read hear that the kings amongst the Jews had liberty to take
more wives then one, we may not therefore Kings of the Jews had a dispensation
to have mo wives then one.
attempt to walk in ordinatly and to think that we may take also many wives.

For christ has for bidden this unto us Christians. And let us not impute
(...) unto the Jews because they had many wives. For they had a dispensation
so to do. Christ limiteth unto us one wife only. And it is a great thing for a
man to rule one wife rightly, and ordinatly. For a woman is frail and procliue
unto all euels, a woman is a very weak vessel, and may sone deceive a man, and
bring him unto evil. Many examples we have in holy scripture. One wife is hard
to be well ruled.
Adam had but one wife, called Cue, and how sone had she brought him to consent
unto euilt, and to come to destruc A godly woman (...) to be chose^.
tion, How did wicked Iesabell peruerte king Hachabs heart from god and al
godliness, and finaly unto (...). It is a very hard thing for a man to rule well
one woman Therefore let our king, what time his grace shall be so minded to take a
wife, chose him one which is of god, that is, which is of the household of
faith. Yea let all estates be no less circumspect in chosing her, taking great
deliberacion and then they shall not need diuorsements, and such mischeues to
the evil example and slander of our realm. And that she be such one as the
king can find in his heart to Love which is godly is to be preferred a boue
all earth ly things in marriage.
love and lead his life in pure and chaste espousage, and (...) shall he be the
more prone and ready to advance gods glory punish and extirpe, the great lechery
used in this realm. Therefore we ought to make a continual prayer unto god, for
to grant our kings grace such a mate as may knitte his heart and here is,
according to gods ordinance and law, and not to consider and cleave only to a
politic matter or conjunction, for the enlarginge of dominions, for suerty and
defense of contries, settinge apart the institution and ordinance of god. We
hane now a pretty little shilling, in deed a very pretty one. I have but one I
think in my purse and the last day I had put it away almost for an old grote A
notable say ing.
and so I trust some will take them. The fines of the silver I can not se. But
therein is printed a fine sentence: that is. Timor domini fons vite vel
sapientie. The fear of the Lord is Prouer. xvi.
the fountain of life or wisdom. I would god this sentence were always
printed in the heart of the king in chosing his wife, and in all his officers.
For like as the fear of God is fons sapientie or vite, so the forgetting of
god is fons Policye if it be not of god brings death.
stulticie the fountain of folishnes or of death, although it be never so
politic. for upon such politic matters death does ensue and follow. All their
deuorcementes and other like conditions to the great displeasure of all mighty
god which evils I fear me, is much used at these days in the marriage of noble
men's children, for joining lands to lands, possessions to possessions, neither
the virtuous education, nor living being regarded, but in the infa^cy such
marriages be made, to the displeasure of god and breach ofespousals. Let the
king therefore chose unto him a godly wife, whereby he shall the better live
chaste, and in so living, all godliness shall increase and rightwisenes be
maynteyned. Notwith standing, I know here after, some will come and move your
grace toward wantonness, and to the inclination of the flesh and vain
affections. But I would your grace should A notable histo ry of a French king.
bear in memory, an history of a good king called Jews, that traueled
toward the holy land (which was a great matter in those days) and by the
way sickned, being long absent from his wife. And upon this matter the
physicians The good coun cell of by bishops
did agree, that it was for lack of a woman. And did consult with the bishops
therein, who did conclude that because of the distance of his wife (being in an
other contry) he should take a wench. This good king hearing their couclusyon
would not assent there unto, but said, he had rather be syck even unto death,
then he would break his espousals. Do worth such councellers, bishops, nay
rather bussardes. Nevertheless if the king should have consented to their
conclusyon, and accomplyshed the same, if he had not chau^ sed well, they
would have excused the matter, as I have hard of two that have consulted
together, and according to the advice of his friend, the one of them wroughte
where the succession was not good. The other imputed a piece of reproach to him
for his such counsel given. He exeused the matter saying: that he gave him
none other council, but if it had been his cause, he would have done like
wise.

So I think the bishops would have excused the matter, if the king should
have reproved them for their counsel. I do not read that the king did rebuke
them for their Note.
council, but if he had, I know what would have been their answer. They would
have said, we give you no worse council, then we would have followed our selves,
if we had been in like case. Well sir, this king did well, and had the The king
fearing God avoided euyil.
fear of God before his eyes. He would not walk in by walks, where are many
balkes. Amongst many balkinges, is much stomblinge, and by stomblinge it
chances many times to fall down to the ground. And therefore, let us not take
any by walks, but let Gods word direct us, let us not walk after, nor
lean to our own judgments and procedinges of our forfathers, nor seek not
what they did, but what they should have done, of which thing scripture
admonishes us, saying: Ne inclinemus preceptis and traditionibus patrum neque
faciamus quod videtur rectum in oculis nostris. Let us not Deuteronomy. xii. a
inclyne our selves unto the precepts and traditions of our fathers, nor let us
do that seems right in our eyes. But surely, we will not exchange our
fathers doings and tradityons with scripture, but chefely lean unto them and
to their prescription, and do that seems good in our own eyes. But surely
that is going down the ladder, Scala celi as it was made by the Pope came to be
a mass, but that is a false ladder to bring men to heaven. The true ladder to
bring a man to heaven is the knowledge and following of scripture. Let the king
therefore choose a wife which fears God, let him not seek a proud, wanton, and
one full of The iii. part of thesermon.
rych treasures and worldly pomp. He shall not multiplye unto him self to much
gold and silver. Is there to much think you for a king? God does allow much
unto a king, A king may have much for his expenses are great.
and it is expedyent that he should have much, for he has great expenses, and
many occasyons to spend much for the defense and surety of his realm and
subjects. And necessary it is that a king have a treasure always in a
readiness for that, and such other affairs, as be daily in his hands. The
which tresure, if it be not sufficient, he may lawfullye and with a safe
conscience, take taxis of his subjects. For it were not mete, the tresure should
be in the subjects purses when the money should be occupied, nor it were not
best for them selves, for the lack thereof, it might cause both it, and all the
rest that they have, should not long be theirs. And so for Note when the king
has to much of his co^mens.
a necessary and expedient occasion, it is warranted by gods word to take of
the subjects. But if there be sufficient treasures, and the burdening of
subjects be for a vain thing, so that he will require thus much, or so much of
his subjects, (which perchance are in great necessity, and penury.) The this
covetous intent, and the request thereof is to much, Who shall see this to much.
None that be servants to the king.
which God forbyddeth the king here in this place of scripture to have. But who
shall se this to much, or tell the king of this to much. Think you any of
thelkyngs preuy chamber? No. For fear of loss of fauer. Shall any of his
sworn Corporal eyes cannot se to much.
chaplains? No. They be of the clausset, and keep close such matters. But the
king himself must se this to much and that shall he do by no means with the
corporal eyes: Wherefore, Spiritual eyes are to be had faith and charity.
he must have a pair of spectacles, which shall have two clear sightes in
them, that is, that one is faith, not a seasonable faith, which shall last but a
while, but a faith, which is continuing in God. The second clear sight is
charity, which is fervent toward his christen brother. By them two, must the
king see ever when he has to much. But few there be that uses these
spectables, the more is their dampnation. Not without cause Chrysostom with
admiration Chrisostomes saying.
says. Miror si aliques rectorum potest saluari: I marvel The understanding
of it.
if any ruler can be saved. Which words he speaks not of an impossibility,
but of a great difficultye. For that I fGod will not grant to much unto a king
much less unto the subject.
their charge is marvelous great, and that none about them dare show them the
truth of the thing how it goes. Well: then if God will not allow a king to much.
Whether will he allow a subject to much? no, that he will not. whether have Who
is not fauty in taking to much learn.
any man here in England to much? I doubt most rich men have to much, for
without to much, we ca^ get nothing. As for example. The Physician. Physicians.
If the pore man be diseased, he ca^ have no help without to much: and of ye
lawyer, Lawyers
the pore man can get no counsel, expedicio^, nor help in his matter, except he
give him to much. At marcha^ts hands, no kind of ware can be had, except we
give for it to much. Marchaunts.
You landlords, Landlordes
you re^treisers, Rent raysers
I may say you steplords, steplordes.
you unnatural lords, Unnatural Lords.
you have for your possessions yearly to much. For For that here before went
for xx. or xl. pound by year (which is an honest portien to be had gratis in
one Lordshyp, of an other man's sweat and labor) now is it let for l. or an C.
pound by year. Of this to much comes this monsterous Of this to much comes
al dearth and scarcitye.
and portentious dearth is made by man, notwithstanding God does send us
plentifully the fruits of the earth mercifully, contrary unto our deserts.
Notwithstanding to much, which these rich men have, causes such dearth, that
pore men (which live of their labor) cannot with the sweat of their face have a
living, all kind of victuals is so dear, pigges, gese, Capons, Chickens, eggs
etc. These things with other are so vnreasonablye enhansed. And I think Note
the covetous men.
verily, that if it this continue: we shall at length be constrained to pay for
a pigge a pound. I will tell you my Lords and masters, this is not for the
kings honor: yet some will This to much is not for the kings honor
say, know thou what belongs unto the kings honor better then we? I
answer, that the true honor of a king, is most perfectly mentioned and
painted forth in the scriptures, of which, if ye be ignorant, for lack of time
that ye cannot read it, albeit, that your counsel be never so polytike, yet is
it not for the kings honor. What his honor means ye cannot tell. It is the
kings honor that his A descriptyon of the kings honor.
subjects be led in the true religion. That all his prelates and clergy be
set about their work in preaching and studying, and not to be interrupted from
their charge. Also it First in true religyon.
is the (...) honor that the common wealth be auaunsed that the dearth of these
forsaide things be provided for, and the commodities of this realm so
employed, as it may Secondly a well thy cominaltye.
be to the setting his subjects on work, and keeping them from idleness. And
herein reasteth the kings honor and his office. So doing, his account before
God shall be allowed, and rewarded. Furthermore, if the kings honor (as
Thirdlye the kings honor stands in the multitude of people.
some men say) stands in the great multitude of people. Then these grasiers,
inclosers, and rentrearers, are hynderers of the kings honor. For where as
have been a great many of householders and inhabitauntes, there is now but a
shepherd and his dog, so they hinder the kings honor This to much will make
(...) ry slauerye, and the shauery (...).
most of all. My Lords and masters, I say also, that al such procedings which
are against the kings honor (as I have a part declared before) and as far as I
can perceive, do intend plainly, to make the yomanry slavery, and the clergy
shauery. For such works are al singular, private wealth and commodity. (...)
of the cleargye had to much, but that Clergy had to much, but (...) to little.
is taken away, and now we have to little. But for mine own part, I have no
cause to complain, for I thank God and the king. I have suffycient, and God
is my judge I came not to crave of any man, any thing, but I know them that
have to little. There lies a great matter by these appropriations, An example
of the clergy.
great reformation is to be had in them. I know wheris a great market town with
diverse hamelets and inhabitants, where do rise yearly of their labors to the va
lue of l. pound, and the vicar that serves (being so great a cure) has but
xii. or xiiii. marks by year, so that of this pensyon he is not able to bie
him books, nor give his neigh bor drink, all the great gain goes another way.
My father was a (...), and had no lands of his own, only he had An example of
the yomanry.
a farm of iii. or iiii. pound by year at the vttermooste, and here upon he
tilled so much as kept half a dosen men. He had walk for a hundred sheep, and
my mother milked xxx. kyne. He was able and did find the king a harness, with
himself, and his horse, while he came to the place that he should receive the
kings wages. I can remember, that I buckled his harness, when he went unto
Black heathe field. He kept me to schole, or else I had not been able to have
preached before the kings majesty now. He married my systers with v. pound, or
xx. nobles a piece, so that he brought them up in god linesse, and fear of God.
He kept hospitality for his pore neighbors. And some alms he gave to the
pore, and al this did he of the said farm. Where he that now has it, pays
xvi. pound by year or more, and is not able to do any thing for his prince, for
him self, nor for his children, or give a cup of drink to the pore. Thus al
then hansyng and rearing goth to your private commodity and wealth. So yt where
ye had a single to much, you have that: and sins the same, ye have enhansed the
rent, and so have encresed an other to much. So now ye have double to much,
No preaching can help (...) evil.
which is to to much. But let the precher preach til his to^g be worn to yt
stomps, nothing is amended. We have good statutes made for the common wealth as
touching comme many statutes but (...).
ners, enclosers, many metings and (...), but in the (...) of the matter, there
comes nothing forth. Well, well, this is one thing I will say unto you, from
whence it comes The (...) is authoure of to much.
I know, even from the devil. I know his (...) in it. For if ye bring it to
pass, that the yomanry be not able to put their sons to schole (as in deed
universities do wonderously decay al ready) and that they be not able to marrye
To decay of learning and purity of life.
their daughters to the auoidynge of whoredom, I say ye pluck salvation from
the people, and utterly destroy the Saluatyon rests in them. Yomens (...) be
teachers of God.
realm. For by yemans sons, the faith of Christ is, and has been
maintained (...). Is this realm taught (...) rich men's sons? No, no, read
the chronicles ye shall find sometime noble menues sons, which have beue
unpreaching bishops and prelates, but ye shall find none of them learned men.
But verily, they that should look to the redress A notable thing
of these things, be the greatest against them. In this realm are a great
many of folks, and amongst many, I know but one of tender zeal, at the
motyon of his pore tenauntes, has let down his lands to the old rentes for
their relief. For gods love, let not him be a Phoenix, let him not be alone, let
him not be an hermit closed in a wall some good man follow him, and do as he
gives example. Surueyers there be, that gredely gorge up their covetous
Surueyers be handmakers.
goods, handmakers I mean, (honest men I touch not) but al such as survey
they make up their mouths, but the commens be utterly undone by them. Whose
bitter cry ascending up to the ears of the God of Sabbath, the gredy The cry
of the poor.
pit of hell burning fire (without great repentance) do ta ry and look for them.
A redress God grant. For furelye, surely, but that two things do comfort
me, I would despair of the redress in these matters. One is, that the kings
majesty when he comes to age: will se a redress of these things so out of
frame. (...) example by (...) down his own lands first, and then enioyn his
fubiects to follow him. The second hope I have is, I believe that the general
accompting day is at hand, the dreadful day of (...) I mean, which shall make an
end of all these (...) and miseries. For as the scriptures be. Cu^ dixerint pax
pax, when they shall say peace, peace: Omnia tura, all things are sure: Then is
the day at hand, a merry day I say, for all such as do in this world study to
serve and please God, and continue in his faith, fear and love: and a dreadful
horrible day for them that decline from God, walkinge in their own ways, to
whom as it is written in the xxv. of Matthew is said: Ite The reward of wicked
men.
maledicti in ignem eternum. Go ye cursed into eueriasting pu nyshment. Where
shall be wailinge and gnashing of teethe. But unto the other he shall say: Venite
benedicti. Come ye bles The bless of the godly.
sed children of my Father, possess ye the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world, of the which God make us al partakers.

Amen.
The second Sermon of Master Hughe Latimer, which be preached before king
Edward.
QVecunque scripta sunt: ad nostram doctrinam. etc. Al things that are written
in Gods book, in the holy Bible, they were written before our time, but yet to
co^tynue from age to age as long as the world does stand.

In this book is contained doctrine for all estates, even for kings. A king
herein may learn how to In gods book is (...) tryne for all estates.
guide himself, I told you in my last sermon, much of the duty of a king. And
there is one place behind yet, and it follow eth in the text. Postquam autem
sederit in solio regni sui. etc.

And when the king is set in the seat of his kingdom, he shall write him out
a book, and take a copye of the priests or Deuteronomy. xvii
Levites. He shall have the book with him, and why? to read in it all the days
of his life, to learn to fear god, and learn his laws, and other things, as
it follows in the text with the appurtenances and hangings on, that he turn
not from God, ne there to the right hand, nor to the left. And wherefore shall he
do this? that he may live long, he and his children. Hitherto goes the text.
That I may declare this the better to the edifying of your souls and the glory
of God, I shall desire you to pray etc. Et postqua^. etc. Before I enter into
this place (right honorable audience) to furnish it accordingly, which by ye
grace of god I shall do at lesure, I would repete yt place I was in last, and
furnish it with an history or two, which I left out in my last sermon. I was in a
matter concerning ye (...) of the Jews, a (...) and (...) kind of people, like
our English men now a days, that in the minoritye The (...) Jews and our
Englysh men compared together.
of a king, take upon them to break laws, and to go by walls. For when God had
promised them a king, when it came to the point they refused him. These men
walked by (...), and the saying is, many by walks, many balkes, many balkes
much stumbling, and where much stumbling is, (...) English (...), (...) called
an old said saw.
there is sometime a fall, how be it there were some good wall (...) among them,
that walked in the kings high way ordinarily, uprightly, plain Dunstable
way, and for this purpose, I would show you an history which is written in
the third of the kings.

King David being in his chyldhode, an old man, in his iii. of the kings the
first chap.
second childhode, for all old men are twice children, as the Proverb is.
Senex bis puer. (...) old man, twice a child, it hap pened with him, as it does
oftentimes, when wicked men of a (...) childhode take occasyon of evil.

This king David being weak of nature and impotent, in so much that when he was
covered with clothes, he could take no heat, was counseled of his servants
to take a fair young maid to nourishe him, and to keep him warm in his body, I
suppose she was his wife. How be it he had no bodilye company with her, and
well she might be his wife. For though the scripture do the say. Non cognouit
eam. He knew her not, he had no carnal copulation with her, yet it says not:
Non duxit eam vxorem. He married her not. And I cannot think that king David
would have her to warm his bosom in bed, except she had been his wife, having
a dispensation of God to have as many wives as he would. For god had dispensed
with them to have many (...) iii. of kings the first
wives. Well: what happened to king David in his childhode, by the child of
the devil? Ye shall hear. King David had a proud son, whose name was Adonias,
a man full of ambition, desirous of honor, always climbing, clymyng. Now,
whiles the time was of his fathers childhod, he would depose his father, not
(...) of his fathers mind, saying. Ego regnabo. I will reign, I will be king,
he was a stout stomacked child; a bywalker, of an ambitious mind, he would
not consent to his fathers friends, but gat him a charret, and men to run
before it, and diverse other adherentes to help him forward, worldly wise men,
such as had been before of his fathers counsel, great men in the world, and
some no dout of it, came of good will thinking no harm, for they would not
think, that he did it without his fathers will, having such great men to set
him forth, for every man can not have access at all times to the king, to
know his pleasure: well, algates he would be king. He makes a great feast, and
thither he called Ioab the ringleader of his fathers army, a worldly wise man,
a Ioab captain general of (...) army.
by walker, that would not walk the kings hye way, and one (...) the high
priest. For it is maruayle if any michief be in hand, if a Priest be not at
some end of it, they took him as king, and cried, Viuat Rex Adonias. God save
king (...), David suffered al this, and let him alone, for he was in his
childhod a bedred man. But see how God or dered the matter. Nathan the Prophet
and Sadoc a Priest: and (...), and Crethytes, and (...) the Kings guard, they
were not called to the feast.

These were good men, and would not walk by ways, therefore it was folly to
break the matter to them, they were not called to counsel. Therefore Nathan
when he hard of this, he comes to Bethsabe, Salomons mother, and says. Hear
ye not how Adonias the sone of Ageth, reigns king, David not knowing? And he
bad her put the king in mind of his oath that he swear that her son Solomon
should be king after him, this was wise counsel according to the proverb.
Qui vadit plane, vadit sane.

He that walks in the hye plainway, walks safely. Bethsabesueth to David
for Solomon.
Upon this she went and brake the matter to David, and desired him to show who
should raygne after him in Jerusalem, adding that if Adonias were king, she
and her son after his death should be destroyed, saying: Nos erimus peccatores.
We shall be sinners, we shall be taken for traitors, for though we meant no harm,
but walked uprightly, yet because we went not the by way with him, he being in
authority will destroy us. And by and by comes in Natha^, and takes her
tale by the end, and shows him how Adonias was saluted king, and that he had
bid to dinner the kings servants, all saving him and Sadoc, and Banaiah and
all his brethren the Kings sons save Solomon. King David remembryng
himself, swore, as sure as God lives, Solomon my son shall raygne after me
and by and by commanded Nathan and Sadoc and his guard the Cerites and
Phelites, to take Solomon his son and set him upon his mule, and anoynte him
King. And so they did crying. Viuat Solomon Rex. Thus was Solomon throned, by
the advice and will of his father, and though he were a child, yet was his
will to be obeyed and fulfilled, and they ought to have known his pleasure.

Whylse this was a doing there was such a joy and outcry The joy of the
people for their new king.
of the people, for their new king, and blowing of trom pettes, that Ioab and
the other company being in their io lytie, and keeping good cheer: Heard it,
and suddenly asked what is this ado? And when they perceived, that Solomon, by
the advice of his father was anointed king, by and by there was all whisht,
all their good chere was don, and all that were with Adonias, went away, and
let him raygne alone: if he would, and why? He walked a by way and God would
not prosper it.

God will not work with private authority, nor with any thing done
inordinatly. When Adonias saw this that God is against (...) authority and in
ordinate doings.
he was left alone, he took sanctuary, and held by the horns of the altar, and
swear that he would not depart thence, till Solomon would swear that he
should not lease his life. Here is to be noted the notable sentence, and great
mercy of king Solomon.

Let him (says he) order him self like a quiet man, and Salamon is merciful.
there shall not one hear fall from his head. Sed si inuentum fuerit, malum in
(...). But if there shall be any evil found in him, if he has gone about any
mischyef, he shall dye for it. Upon this he was brought into Solomon, and as
the book says, he did homage unto him, and Solomon said to him. Vade in domum
tuam.

Get thee into thy house, by like he meant to ward, and there to see his
wearing, as if he should say, show thy self without gall of ambicion, to be a
quiet subject, and I will (...) tries traitors from the trusty.
pardon thee for this time. But I will see the wearing of the. Here we may see
the wonderful great mercy of Solomon for this notoryous treason, that Adonias
had committed, it was a plain matter, for he suffered him self to be called
king, it hung not of vehement suspicion or conjecture nor sequel or
consequent, yet notwithstanding Solomon for that present, forgave him, saying I
will not forget it utterly, but I will keep it in suspece, I will take no
advantage of thee at this time. This Adonias and Absolon were brethren, and
came both of a straung mother, and Absolo^ likewise was a traitor and made an
insurrection against his father. Beware therefore these mothers, and let kings
take heed how they mary, in what houses, in what (...). For Note of what force
education is.
strange bringing up brings strange manners. No we gives David an
exhortation to Solomon, and teaches him the duty of a king, and gives him a
lesson, as it follows at large in the book, and he that list to read it, may
se it there at full. But what does Adonias all this while? He must yet clime
again, the gall of ambition was not out Adonias schrinks in the wetyng and
proves naught in the wearing.
of his heart. He will now mary Abisaak the young Queen that warmed king Dauides
bosom, as I told you, and comes me to Bethsabe, desiering her to be a mean
to Solomon her son that he might obtain his purpose. And brings me out a
couple of lies at a clappe, and commits me two unlawful acts. For first he
would have been king without his fathers consent, and now he will marye his
fathers wife, and the. ii. lies are these. First, said (...) to Bethsabe, thou
know that the kingdom belongs to me, for I am the elder. The kingdom was
mine, he lied Adoniasa liar.
falsely, it was none of his. Then said he all the eyes of Israel were cast
upon me, that is to say: all Israll consented to it, and there he lied falslye.
For Nathan, Sadoc, and other wise men, never agreed to it. Here was a great
enterprise of Adonias: he will be climbing still. Well Bethsabe went at his
request to her son Solomon, and asked aboune, and be granted her what soever
she did ask. Notwithstanding he brake his promis afterward and that rightwell,
When promises may not be performed.
for all promises are not to be kept, specially if they be against the word
of God. Or not standing with a commune profyt, and therefore, as soon as Solomon
hard that Adonias would have (...) the young Queen (...), nay then let him be
king to, said he. I perceive now that he is a naughty man, a proud hearted
fellow, the gall of ambition is not yet out of his heart, and so commanded him
to be put to death. Thus was Adonias put to execution, Adonias put to death.
where as if he had kept his house and not broken his (...). King. ii.
iniunction, he might have lived still. Abiathar, what became Abiathar deposed
and made (...) quondam.
of him? The king (because he had served his father be fore him) would not put
him to death, but made him as it were a quondam. Because thou have ben with my
father iii. King. ii
(said he) and did carry the ark before him, I will not kill thee. But I will
promise thee, thou shall never minister any more. Vade in agrum tuum. Bet thee
to thy land, and live there. A great matter of pity and compassion, so God
grant us all such mercy. And here was the end of Elies stock, according to
the promise and threatening of God. As for the Phelethites we do not read that
they were punished. Mary, Semey transgressed his Iniunction: for he kept not
his house, but went out, of Jerusalem to seek two seruau^ts of his, that had
run from him: and when it came to Salomons ear, it cost him his life. I have
ripped the matter now to the pill, and have told you of plain walkers, and of
by walkers, and how a king in his childhod is a king, as well, as in any other
age. We read in scripture of such as (...) was but vii. years old when he was
made king.
were but xii. or viii. years old, and yet the word of the ho ly Ghost called
them kings, saying: Cepit regnare He began to raygne, or he began to be king.
Here is of bywalkers. iiii. King. xii.
This history would be remembered, the proverb is: Faelix Josias was viii.
quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Happy is he that can beware by an other
man's ieoperdy. For if we offend not as iiii. king. xxii.
other do, it is not our own deserts. If we fall not, it is Gods
preservation. We are all offenders. For either we may do, or have don, or shall
do (except God preserve us) as evil as the worst of them. I pray God we may
all amend and repent. But we will all amend now I trust. We must needs a mende
our lives every man.

The holy Communion is at hand, and we may not receive kings, though they be
children yet they are, kings.
it unworthily. Well, to return to my historye. King David (I say) was a king
in his second childhod. And so, young kings though they be Children, yet are
they kings notwithstanding, and though it be written in scripture: Ve tibi O
terra (...) puer est Rex. Woe to thee, O Land, where the king is a child: it
follows in an other place. Beata terra vbi rex nobilis Blessed is the land,
where there is a noble king. Where kings be no banketers, no players, and
where they spend not their time in hauking, and hunting: And when had the
kings majesty a Council that The kings honorable (...) cell (...)
commended.
took more pain both night and day for the setting forth of gods word, and
profit of the commune wealth? And yet there be some wicked people that will
say. Tush, this gear The comune saying of the Popish hope days.
will not tarry, it is but my Lord Protectours, and my lord of Canterburies
doing: The king is a child, he knows not of it. Jesus mercy, how like ar we
English men to ye Jews ever stubburn, stifnecked, and walking in bye ways.
Yea, English men worse then the Jews.
I think no Jew would at at any time say: this gear will not tarry. I never
heard nor red at any time that they said. These laws were made in such a
kings days, when he was but a child. Let us alter them. O Lord what pytie is
this, that we should be worse then the Jews?

Blessed be the land says the word of God, where the king is noble. What
people are they that say, the king is but a child? have not we a noble king?
Was there ever king so noble? so Godly? brought up with so noble counselors?
so excellent, and well learned Scholemaisters? I will tell you this, and I
speak it even as I think. His (...) A true and and hearty report of M. La
(...) by the kings (...).
has more Godly wit and understanding, more learning and knowledge at this
age, then xx. of his progenitors, that I could name, had at any time of their
life.

I told you in my last sermon of ministers, of the kings people, and had
occasion to show you, how few noble men were good preachers, and I left out an
history then which I will now tell you.

There was a Bishop of Wynchester in king Henry the The history of a bishop of
Winchester in king Henrythe vi. time.
vi. days, which king was but a child, and yet were there many good Acts
made in his childehod, and I do not read that they were broken. This Bishop was
a great man borne, and did bear such a stroke, that he was able to shoulder
the Lord Protector. Well, it chanced that the lord Protector and he fell
out, and the Bishop would bear nothing at all with him, but played me the
Satrapa, so that the Regent of France was feign to be sent for, from beyond
the seas, to set them at one, and to go between them. For the Bishop was as
able and ready to buccle with the Lord Protectoure, as he was with him.

Was not this a good prelate? he should have been at home a preaching in his
Dioces in a waniant. This Protector was so noble and Godly a man, that he was
called of every The good duke Humfrey.
man the good Duke Humfrey. He kept such a house, as ne uer was kept since in
England, without any enhaunsyng of rentes. I warrant you, or any such matter.
And the bishop for standing so stiffly by the matter, and bearyng up the order
of our mother the holy church, was made Cardinal Atyburne tippet would a
become him better.
at Calice, and thither the bishop of Rome sent him a cardinals hat. He should
have had a tiburne tippet, a halpeny halter, and all such proud prelates.
These Romish hattes never brought good into England.

Upon this the bishop goes me to the queen Katherin the kings wife, a proud
woman and a stout, and persuaded her, that if the duke were in such authority
still, and lived, the people would honor him, more the^ they did the king. And
the king should not be set by, and so between them, I can not tell how it came
to pas, but at Sent Edmundsbury (...) Humfrey smothered.
in a parliament, the good Duke Humfrey was smothered.

But now to return to my text, and to make further re hearsall of the same,
the matter begins thus. Et post qua^ sederit Rex. And when the king is set
in the seat of his kingdom, The office of a king newly chosen.
what shall he do? shall he dance, and dally? banquet? hawk and hunte? No
forsooth sir. For as God set an order in the kings stable as I told you in my
last Sermon, so will he appoint what pastime a king shall have.

What must he do then? He must be a student. He must write Gods book him
self. Not thinking because he is a king, he has license to do what he will,
as these worldly flatterers are wont to say. Yea, trouble not your self sir, ye
may hawk and hunt, and take your pleasure. As for the guiding Flattering
clawbackers.
of your kingdom and people, let us alone with it.

These flattering clawbacks ar original rotes of all mischief, and yet a King
may take his pastime in hauking or A kings pastime
hunting or such like pleasures But he must use them for recreation when he is
weary of waightye affairs, that he may return to them the more lustye: and
this is called pastime with good company. He must write out a book him self.
He speaks of writing because printing was not used The king must write the
book of Deutero. him self.
at that time. And shall the king write it out him self? He means he shall
see it written, and rather then he should be without it, write it him self.
Jesus mercy is God so cha ry with a king to have him well brought up and
instructed? Deuteronomy. xviii.
yea forsooth. For if the king be well ordered, the realm is well ordered.
Where shall he have a copy of this book? of the Levites. And why? Because it
shall be a true copy, not falsified. Moses left the book in an old chest,
and the (...) had it in keeping. And because there should be no error, no
addition, nor taking away from it, he bids him fetch the copy of the
Levites. And was not here a great miracle of God, how this book was preserved?
It had lain hid many years and the Jews knew not of it. Therefore at length
when they had found it and knew it: they lamented for their ignorance, that
had so long been without it, and rent their clothes, repenting their
unfaithfulness. And the holy bible Gods book, that we have among us, it Gods
book has, ben preser ued hitherto by a wonderful mi racle.
has been preserved hitherto by wonderful miracle of god though the kepers of
it were never so malicious. First ever sith the bishop of Rome was first in
authority, they have gone about to destroy it, but God works wonder fully,
he has preserved it mauger their beartes, and yet ar we unthankful that we
can not consider it. I will tell you, what a bishop of this realm said once to
me, he sent for me and meruayled that I would not consent to such traditions,
as were then set out. And I answered him, that I would be ruled by Gods book,
and rather then I would dissent one jot from it, I would be torn with wild
horses. And I chanced in our communication, to name the Lords supper. (...)
says the bishop. What do ye call the Lords Mark a (...) Prelate.
supper? What new term is that? There stood by him a dubber, one doctor
Dubber he dubbed him by and by and said that this term was seldom red in the
doctors. And I made answer, that I would rather follow Paul in S. Paul's
terms ought to be followed.
vsyng his terms, then them, though they had all the doctors on their side.
Why, said the bishop, ca^ not we with out scriptures order the people? how did
they before the scripture was fist written and copied out? But God knows, A
bishop that asked whether the people might not be ordered without scriptures.
full ill yet would they have ordered them. For seeing that having it, they have
deceived us, in what case should we have been now without it? But thanks be to
God, that by so wonderful a miracle has preserved the book still. It follows
in the text. Habebit secum. etc. He shall have it with him in his progress, he
must have a man to carye it, The byblemust not be forgotten in time of
progress and (...).
that when he is haukyng and hunting or in any pastime, may always commune
with them of it. He shall read in it not once a year. for a time, or for his
recreation, when he is weary of haukyng or hunting, but cunctis diebus vita
suae All the days of his life. Where ar those worldlyngs now? These bledder
puffed up wyly men? Woe worth them that ever they were about any king. But how
shall he read this book, as the Homilies are read? Some call them homlies, How
homely they handle the the godly Homylies.
and in deed so they may be well called, for they are homely handled. For
though the priest read them never so well, yet if the parish like them not,
there is such talking and babbling in the church, that nothing can be heard:
And if the parysh be good, and the priest naught, he will so hacke it, and chop
it, that it were as good for them to be without it, for any word that shall be
understand. And yet (the morepitie) this is suffered of your graces bishops in
their dioces unpunished. But I will be a suter to your grace, that ye will give
your Bishops charge ere they goo home, upon their A request to the kings grace.
allegiaunce, to look better to their flock, and to see your majesty's
injunctions better kept, and send your visitours in theirtailes. And if they be
found negligent, or fautye in their Negligent bishops.
deutyes, out with the^. I require it in Gods behalf, make them quondams all
the pack of them. But peradventure ye will say. Where shall we have any to put
in their rowmes? In deed I were a presumptuous fellow to move your grace to put
them out, if there were not other to put in their places. But your majesty
has diverse of your chaplaynes, well learned men, and of good knowledge, and
yet ye have some that be badde inoughe, hangers on of the court, I mean not
those. But if your majesty's chaplains Hangers of the court.
and my Lord Protectors be not able to furnishe their places, there is in this
realm, thanks be to God, a great sight of lay men, well learned in the
scriptures, and of virtuous and godly conversation, better learned then a great
syghte of us, of the clergy.

I can name a number of them that are able, and would be glad (I dare say) to
minyster the function if they be called to it. I move it of conscience to your
grace, let them be called to it orderly, let them have institution, and give
the^ Learned laymen to furnish the (...) of bishops.
the names of the clergy. I mean not the name only, but let them do the
function of a bishop, and live of the same. Not as it is in many places, that
one should have the name, and viii. other the profyt. For what an enormity is
this in a christian realm to serve in a ciuility, having the profyt of a
Prouostship and a Deanrye, and a Personage? But I The clargy is like to be
brought into slavery.
will tell you what is like to come of it. It will bring the cler gy shortly into
a very slavery. I may not forgette here my Scala celi that I spoke of in my
last sermon. I will repeat it now again, desyring your grace in gods behalf
that ye (...) remember it. The bishop of Rome had a Scala celi, but his was a
Mass matter. This Scala celi, is the true ladder that brings a man to
heaven, the top of the ladder or first greese, is this.

Who so ever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be The (...) ly and his.
(...) steps.
saved. The second step. How shall they call upon him, in whom they have no
believe? The third stayr is this. How shall they believe in him, of whom they
never heard? The fourth step. How shall they hear without a preacher? Now the
nether end of the ladder is. How shall they preach, except they be sent?
This is the foot of the ladder, so that we may goo backward now, and use the
(...) argument. A primo ad vltimum. Take away preaching, (...) away salvation.
But I fear one thiug, and it is, (...) for a safety of The fear is (...) for
it is (...) all (...).
a little money, you will put in (...) priests (...) save (...). But I will tell
you, Christ boughte (...) with his blood, and will ye sell them for gold or
silver? I would not that ye should do with chauntrye Priests, as ye did
with the Abbottes, when abbeyes were put down. For when their enormities
were first read in the parliament house, they were so great and abominable,
that there was Now bishops of old a bbots.
nothing but down with them. But within a while after, the same Abbottes were
made Bishops, as there be some of them yet a live to save and redeem their
pensions. O Lord: think ye that God is a fool? and sees it not? and if he se
it, will he not punish it? And so now for safety of mo nigh, I would not that ye
should put in chauntrye priests, I speak not now against such chauntry
priests as are able to preach, but those that are not able, I will not have
them put in, for if ye do this, ye shall answer for it.

It is in the text, that a king ought to fear God, he shall have the dread of
God before his eyes, work not by world ly policy, for worldly policy fears
not God. Take heed of Wordly poliey fears not god
these claubackes, these venomous people that will come to you, that will follow
like Gnatoes and Parasites, if you follow them, you are out of your book. If
it be not according to Gods word that they counsel you, do it not for any
worldly policy, for then ye fear not God. It follows Smell feasts or
flatterers.
in the text. Vt non eleuetur cor eius. That he be not proud above his
brethren. A king must not be proud, for God might have made him a
shephearde, when he made him a king, and done him no wrong. There be many
exam ples of proud kings in scripture. As Pharao that would not hear the
message of God. Herod also, that put Ihon Mharao Exodus vii. viii.
Baptiste to death, and would not hear him, he told him, that it was not
lawful for him to mary his brothers wife. Jeroboam also was a proud king. An
other king (...). iii. king. xii.
there was that worshipped strange Gods and Idols, of those men whom he had
overcome before in battle: And when a Prophet told him of it: What said he.
Who made you one of my council? These were proud kings, their examples are not
to be followed.

But wherefore shall a king fear God, and tourn neither to the right hand,
nor to the left.

Wherefore shall he do all this? vt longo tempore regnet ipse, and filij eius.
That he may reign long, he and his children. Re member this I beseech your
grace. And when these flatterers, and flibbergibbes another day shall come and
clawe you by the back and say.

Sir trouble not your self. What should you study? Such an answer would
cut his comb.
Why should you do this or that? Your grace may answer them thus, and say. What
sir? I perceive you are weary of us, and our posterity. Does not God say in
such a place. That a king should write out a book of gods law, and read it?
Learn to fear God. And why? That he and his, might reign long, I perceive now
thou art a traitor.

Tell him this tale once, and I warrant you he will come A charm to chase away
claubackes.
no more to you, neither he, nor any other after such a sort.

And thus shall your grace drive these flatterers and claubackes away. And I
am afraid I have troubled you to long.

Therefore I will furnish the text now with an history or two, and then I will
leave you to God. Ye have heard how a king ought to pass the time. He must
read the book of God, and it is not inongh for him to read, but he must be
acquanted with all scripture, he must study, and he must pray: And how shall he
do both these.

He may learn at Solomon, God spoke unto Solomon, iii. of king. iii.
when he was made a king, and badde him ask of ii. of Chronicles. i. b
him what he would, and he should have it. Make thy petition, said God, and
thou shalt obtain. Now mark Salomons prayer: Domine, o Domine deus, said
he: O Lord Solomon is a president of pra yer for kings.
God, it is thou that have caused me to raygne, and haste set me in my fathers
seat, for thou God only do make kings. Thus should kings praise God, and
thank god as Solomon did. But what was his petition? Lord, said he: Da mihi
cor docile. He asked a docyble heart, a wise heart, Solomon asks wisdom.
and wisdom to goo in, and to goo out, that is to begin all mine affairs
well, and to bring them to good effect and purpose, that I may learn to guide
and govern my people. When he had made his petition, it pleased god well that
Solomon asked wisdom, and neither rytchesse nor long life, and therefore god
made him this answer. Because you haste chosen wisdom above al things. I will
give thee it, and thou the wysest king that ever was before thee, and so he
was, and the wisest in all kinds of knowledge that ever was (...)
sithe. And though he did not ask ritchesse, yet God gave him both richesse
and honor, more then ever any of his auncetors had. So your grace must learn
how to do, of Sa lomon, Ye must make your petition, now study, now pray. They
must be yoked together, and this is called pastyme with good company.

Now when God had given Solomon wisdom, he sent him by and by occasyon to
occupye his wit. For God gave never a gift, but he sent occasyon at one time
or an other to show it to Gods glory. As if he sent richesse, he sends God
(...) occasyon to use his gifts.
poor men to be healped with it. But no we must men occupy their goods
otherwise. They will not look on the poor, they must healpe their children,
and purchase them more land then ever their gran^dfathers had before them. But
I shall tell you what Christ said. He that loves his child better then me,
is not worthy to be my disciple. I cannot see how ye shall stand before God at
the later day, when this sentence shall be laid against you.

But to return to my purpose, there were two pore women came before Solomon to
complain. They were two harlottes, and dwelled together in one house, and it
chanced iii. of king iii.
within two days they childed both. The one of these women by chance in the
night, had killed her child, and The complaint of two (...) to (...).
rose priuelye and went to the other woman, and took her live child away,
and left her dead child in his place. Upon that they came both before
Solomon to have the matter judged, whose the child was. And the one said: it
is my child. Nay says the other, it is mine. So there was yea and nay
between them, and they healde up the matter with skoldynge after a womanlike
fashion. At the length Solomon repeated their tale as a good judge ought to
do, and said to the one woman. Thou say ye child is thine, yea said she.
And thou say, it is thine to the other. Well, fetch me a swearde, said he.
For there was no way now to try, which was the true mother, but by natural
inclination. And so he said to one of his servant. Fetch me a sweard and
deuyde the child between them. When the mother of the child that accused
the other heard him say so. Nay for Gods sake said she, let her have the
whole child, and kill it not. Nay, quod the other, neither thine nor mine,
bet let it be divided. Then said Solomon. Give this woman the child, this is
the mother of the child. What come of this? Audiuit omnes Israel. When all
Israel heard of this judgment, they feared the king. It is wisdom and godly
knowledge that cau Wisdom causes a king to be fcared.
seth a king to be feared. One word note here for gods sake and I will trouble
you no longer. Would Solomon being so noble a king hear two poor women? They
were pore, for as the scripture says. They were together alone in a house,
they had not so much as one servant between them both. Would king Solomon, I
say, hear them in his own person? Yea forsothe. And yet I hear of many
matters before my Lord Protector, and my Lord Chaunceloure A (...) to the
Lord Protectoure.
that can not be heard. I must desire my Lord protectoures grace to hear me in
this matter, that your grace would hear poor men's suits your self. Put
them to none other to hear, let them not be delayed. The saying is now, that
money is heard every where, if he be rich, he shall so one have an end of his
matter. Other are feign to goo home with weping tears, for any help they can
obtain at any judges hand. Hear men's suits your self, I require you in
Gods behalf, and put it not to the hearing of these velvet cotes, these
vpskippes. Now a man U ellet cotes and (...) Master Latimer troubled with
pore men's suits.
can skarse know them from an ancient knight of the cou^ fry. I can not go to
my book for pore folks come unto me, desiring me that I will speak that their
matters may be hard. I trouble my Lord of Caunterbury, and being at his house
now and then I walk in the garden lokinge in my book, as I can do but little
good at it. But some thing I must neades do to satisfy this place. I am no
sooner in the garden and have red a while, but (...) and by comes there some
one or other knocking at the gate. (...) comes my man and says Sir, there is
one at the gate would speak with you. When I come there, then is it some one
or other that desires me that I will speak that his matter might be hard, and
that he has lain this long at great costs and charges, and can not once
have his matter come to the hearing, but among all other, one specially
(...) at this time to speak. This it is sir.

A gentle woman came to me and told me, that a great The gentle woe man's
complaint.
man keeps certain lands of hers from her, and will be her tenaunte in the
spite of her tethe. And that in a whole twelve monthe. she could not get but
one day for the hearing of her matter, and the same day when the matter
(...) are like Switcheners that serve where they have most money.
should be heard, the great manne brought on his side a great syghte of
lawyers for his counsel, the gentle woman had but one man of law: and the
great man shakes him so, that he can not tell what to do, so that when the
matter came to the point, the judge was a mean to the gentle woman, that she
would let the great manne have a quietness in her land. I beseech your
grace that ye will look to these matters. Hear them your self. Uewe your
judges? And hear poor men's causes. And you proud judges harken what God
says in his holy book: Audite illos, ita paruum vt magnum. Hear them says
he, the small as well as the great, the poor as well as the rich. Regard no
person, fear no man. Why? (...) domini iudicium est. The judgment is
Gods. Mark this saying, thou proud judge. The Devil will bring this
sentence at the day of Dome. Hell will be full of these judges, if they
repent not and amend. They are worse then the wicked judge that Christ
speaks of, that neither (...), xviii.
feared God, nor the world.

There was a certain wyddowe that was a suter to a judge, and she met him in
every corner of the streate, cryinge: I pray you hear me, I beseech you
hear me, I ask nothing but right.

When the judge saw her so importunate, though I fear neither God, says
he, nor the world, yet because of her importunatnesse I will grant her
request. But our judges are worse then this judge was. For they will neither
Except before, except that is to say except it before monye.
hear men for Gods sake, nor fear of the world, nor importunatnesse, nor
any thing elsse. (...) some of the^ will command them to ward, if they be
importunate. I heard say, that when a suter came to one of them, he said:
What fellow is it that gives these folk counsel to be so importunate? he
would be punished and committed to ward. Marye sir, punyshe me then, it is
even I that gave them counsel, I would gladly be punished in such a cause.
And if (...) amend not, I will cause them to cry out upon you still: even as
long as I live. I will do it in deed, but I have troubled you long. As I
began with this sentence. Quecunque scripta sunt. etc. So will I end no we with
this text. Beati qui audiunt verbum Dei, and custodiunt illud: Blessed are
they that hear the word of God and keeps it. There was an other suit, and I
had almooste forgotten it.

There is a poor woman that lies in the (...), and The poor woman lyinge in
the Flete.
can not come by any means that she can make to her answer, and would saine
be bailled, offeringe to put in suretyes worth a thousand (...), and yet she
cannot be hard. Me think this is a reasonable cause, it is great pitye that
such things should so be. I beseech God, that he will grant that all that
is amiss may be amended, that we may hear his word and keep it, that we
may come to the eternal bliss, to the which bliss I (...) God to bring both
you and me.

Amen.
The third Sermon of Master Hughe Latymer, which he preached before the
king, within his graces Palayce at Westminster, the xxii. day of March.
QVecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. All things that
are written, are written to be our doctrine. All things that be written in
gods (...) book, the bible, were written to be our doctrine long before our
time, to serve from time to time, and so forth to the worlds end.

Ye shall have in remembrance, most benign and gracious A precher has two
offices.
audience, that a preacher has two offices, and the one to be used orderly
after an other.

The (...) is Exhortari (...) sanam doctrinam. To teach true i. To teach true
doctrine.
doctrine He shall have also occasyon oftentimes to use an other, and that is.
Contradicentes conuincere.

To reprehend, to convince, to confute gainsayers and spur ii. To confute
gainsayers and (...) against the (...).
ners against the truth. Why? you will say, will any body gain say true
doctrine, and sound doctrine? Well, let a pre cher be sure, that his doctrine be
true, and it is not to be thought, that any body will gain say it. If S. Paul
had not forsene that there should be gainsayers, he had not neade to have
appointed the confutation of gain saying. Was there ever yet prechers, but
there were gainsayers? that spur Preachers have ever hadd gainsayers. ex. vii.
viii. ix. x
ned? that winst? that whimpered against him? that blasphemed, that gaynesayed
it? When Moses came to Egipte with sound doctrine, he had Pharao to gain say
him. Ieremye was the minyster of the true word of God, he had gainsayers the
priests, and the false Prophets. Ely had al (...) priests supported by
Iesabel to speak against him. Ihon iii. king. xviii
Baptist and our savior Jesus Christ, had the Phariseis, Ma. xii. xv. xvi
(...). xxviii
the Scribes, and the priests gain sayers to them. The Apostles, had gain
sayers also, for it was said to S. Paul at Rome: Notum est nobis quod vbique
(...) huic contradicitur.

We know that every man does gain say this learning. Eusebius de (...).
After the Apostles time the truth was gain said with tyrauntes, as Nero.
Maxentius, Domicianus, and such Hystoria ecclesiastica.
like, and also by the doctrine of wicked heretics. In the po pyshe mass
time, there was no gayn saying, all things Antonius Sabellicus.
seemed to be in peace, in a concord, in a quiet agremente. So long as we had
in adoration, in admiratyon, the Popyshe We were then at a peace with the
devil, and at debate with God.
mass, we were then without gaynsayinge. What was that? The same that Christ
speaks of. Cum fortis armatus custodieritatrium. etc. When Satan the Devil
has the guidinge of the house, he keeps al in peace that is in his
possessyon: when Satan rules, and bears dominion in open religyon, as he
did with us when we prea ched pardon matters, purgatory matters, and pilgrimage
matters, all was quiet. He is ware enough, he is wilye, and circumspect for
stirring up any sedition. When he keeps his territory all is in peace. If
there were any man that preached in England in times past, in the popes times
(as peradventure there was. ii. or iii) straight ways he was taken and niped
in the head with the title of an heretic. When he has the religion in pos
session, he sturreth up no sedicyon, I warrant you.

How many discentions have we hard of in Turkey? But a few I warrant you. He
busyeth him self there with no The devil makes no dissension in Tur kye.
discention. For he has there dominion in the open Relygion, and neadeth not
to trouble him self any further.

The Jews like ronnagates where so ever they dwell) for they be dispersed and
be tributaryes in all contreyes where they enhabite) look wheather ye hear of
any heresies among No (...) amongst the Jews.
them? But when fortis superuenerit, when one stronger then the Devil, comes
in place, which is our Savior Jesus Christ, and reueleth his word, then the
devil roa When the devil bestirreth him and plaieth his part.
reth, then he bestirreth him, then he rayseth diversity of opinions to
sclaunder gods word. And if ever concord should have been in religion. When
should it have been but when (...) was here? ye find fault with preachers, and
say, they Preachers are noted to be the cause of (...).
cause sedition. We are noted to be rash, and indiscreet in our preaching. Yet
as discrete as Christ was there was diversity, (...). xvi. of Math. Mark.
viii. Luke. ix.
yea, what he was himself. For when he asked, what men called him. His Apostles
answered him. Some say, you are John Baptist, some say, you are Helias, and
some say, you are one of the prophets, and these were they that spoke best of
him. For some said, he was a Samaritane, that he had a devil within him, a
glosser, a drincker, a (...) companion. There was never Prophet to be compared
to There was ne uer so great (...) as (...) Christ preached.
him, and yet was there never more dissension then when he was, and preached
him self. If it were contraryed then, will ye think it shall not be contraryed
now, when charity is so cold and iniquity so strong? Thus these backebyters,
and sclaunderers must be convinced. Saint Paul said: ii. Timo. iii.
There shall be intractabiles, that will whimpe and whine, there shall be also,
Vaniloqui, vayn speakers. For the which S. Paul appoints the preacher to
stop their mouths and it is a preachers office to be a mouth stopper. A
preachers of fice is to be amouth (...).


This day I must somewhat do in the second office, I must be again sayer, and I
must stop their mouths, convince, refell, and confute that they speak
sclaunderously of me.

There be some gainesaiers gainsayers, for there be some sclaunderous people,
vain speakers, and intractabiles which I must needs speak against. But first
I will make a short rehersall to put you in memory of that, that I spoke in my
last Sermon. And that done, I (...) confute one that sclau^dereth me. For one
there is that I must needs answer un to, for he sclaundreth me for my
preachring before (...) kings (...). There be some to blame, that when a
preacher is weary, yet they will have him speak all at once.

Ye must tarry till ye hear more. Ye must not be offended till ye here the
rest. Here all and then judge all. What ye ar very hasty, very quick with your
preachers? But before I enter further into this matter I shall desire you to
pray. etc,

Frst of all as touching my first (...), I will run it, over cursorie,
rypping alitle the matter. I brought in an history The Epiloge, or reh ersall
of the first sermon
of the Bible, exciting my audience to beware of by walkings, to walk
ordinatly, plainly, the kings high way and a gre to that, which stands with
the order of a Realm. I showed you how we were under the blessing of God, for
our king is Nobilis, I showed you we have a noble king. True inheritour to the
crown with out doubt. I showed furthermore of his godly education. He has
such scholemasters as can not be gotten in all the Realm again. The (...)
Scholemasters


Wherefore we may be sure that God blessed this realm, all though he curssed the
realm, whose ruler is a child, under whom the officers be climing, and
gleyyng, sturyng, scratching, and scraping, and volupteously set on banketyng
and for the maintenance of their volupteousnes, go by walks The counsayll of
England have their conding and worthyprayse.
And althoughh he be young he has as good, and as sage acounsayle, as ever was
in England, which we may well know by their godly procedinges, and setting
fourth of the word of God: Therefore let us not be worse? then the stiff
necked Jews. In king Josias time, (who being young The people did not repine
against king To (...) in his mynorite.
did alter, change and correct wonderfully the religion (it was never heard in
Iewry that the people repyned or said, The king is a child. This gear will not
last long. It is but (...) or two men's doings. It will not but for a time.

The king knows it not. Woe worth that ever such men were borne. Take heed
lest for our rebellion. God take his blessing a way from us. I entered into the
place of the kings What is a Princelike pastime.
pastime. I told you how he must pass his time in readinge the book of God
(for that is the kings pastime by Gods appointmente) in the which book he
shall learn to fear God. Oh how careful God is to set in an order all God
is careful for a kings house.
things that belong to a king in his chaumber, in his stable in his treasure
house.

These peuish people in this realm have nothing but the king, the king in
their mouths, when it makes for their The king is in every man's mouth when
it makes for (...) purpose.
purpose. As there was a doctor that preached, the kings majesty has his
holy water, he crepeth to the cross, and then they have nothing but the king
the king. in their mouths. These be my good people that must have their
mouths stopte, but if a man tell them of the kings proceadinges, Mayn for
shifts and put offes.
now they have their shifts, and their putofs say ing, we may not go before a
law, we may break no order. These be ye wicked preachers, their mouths must be
stopped, these be the gainsaiers. (...) other thing there is that I told A (...)
must not be proud.
you of Ne eleuetur cor regis. etc. The king must not be proud over his
brethren. He must order his people with brotherly love and charity. Here I
brought in examples of proud iii. (...) of pride in a king.
kings. It is a great pride in kings and matestrates when they will not hear,
nor be conformable to the sound doctrine of God. It is an other kind of pride
in kings when they think them selves so high, so lofty, that they disdain
and think it not for their honor to hear poor men's causes themselves. They
have claubackes that say unto them. Kings have clawe backs (...) docter pick
mote and his fellow.
What sir? what need you to trouble your self? take you your pleasure, hunt
hawk, dance, and dally, let us a lone: we will govern and order the commune
weal matters (...). Woe worth them, they have been the root of al Clawbackes
counsel.
mischief and destruction in this realm. A king ought not only for to read
and study, but also to pray. Let him borow A king must pray as well as read.
example at Srlomon, who pleased God highly with his peticion, desiring no
worldly things, but wisdom which god did not only grant him, but because he
asked wisdom, he gave him many mo things. (...) riches, honor and such like.
Solomon pray co for wisdom;
Oh how it pleased God that he asked wisdom? And after he had given him this
wisdom he sent him also occasion to use yt same by a couple of stru^pets. Here
I told an example of a meke king, who, so continued, until he came into the
company of strange women. He heard them not by means, Solomon hard the causes
and complaints of his people.
or by any other, but in his own person, and I think verily the natural mother
had never had her own child if he had not herd the cause him self. They were
Meritrises. Hoores al though some excuses the matter, and say they were but
tipplers, such as keep alehouses. But it is but folly to excuse them, seeing the
Jews were such, and not unlike, but they had their stews and the
maintenance of whordome as they had of other vices. One thing I must here
desire you to reform my Lords, you have put down the stews. M. Latimers
request to the Lords for the abolishement of whordom.
But I pray you what is the matter a mended? what a vayleth that? ye have but
changed the place, and not taken the whordom away. God should be honored
euerywhere. For the scripture says. Domini est terra et plenitudo eius. The
earth and the land is the Lords. What place should be then within a
christian realm left, for to dishonor God. I must needs show you such news
as I here. For though I see it not my self, not withstanding it comes faster
to me then I would wish. I do as S. Paul does to the Corinthians Auditur
interuus stuprum. There is such a wordom among you as is not among the gentiles.
So likewise. Auditur. I here say that there is such whordom in England as
never was seen the like. He charged all the Corinthians (...) the Corinthians
charged for one man's (...).
for one man's offense saying. They were all gilty for one man's sin, if they
would not correct and redress it, but wink at it. Lo, here may you see how
that one man's sin poluted all Corinth. A little leaven as S. Paul says,
corrupts a great deal of dough. This is, Communicare alienis peccatis, to
be partaker of other me^ sines I advertise (...) in gods name look to it. There
say, there is now more whor dom in London, then ever there was on the bancke.
These More whordo^ in London the^ ever there was on the bank.
be the news I have to tell you. I fear they be true. Ye ought to hear of
it, and redres it. I here of it, and as Paul says. Aliqua ex part credo.
There is more open whordom more stued whordo^ the^ ever was before. For gods
sake let it be looked upon. It is your office to see unto it. Now to my
confutacion. There is a certain man that shortly after my first sermon, being
asked if he had been at the sermon that day, answered yea: I pray you said he
how liked you him? mary said he even as I liked him always, a sedicious
fellow. Oh Lord Of one that re ported M. (...) to be (...) fellow.
he pinched me there in deed. Nay he had rather a full bit at me. Yet I comfort
my self with that, that Christ him self was noted to be a sturrer up of the
people against the Emperor, Christ was no ted for a sebicious stirrer of the
people.
and was contented to be called sedicious. It be comes me to take it in good
worth, I am not better then he was. In the kings days that dead is, a meany
of us were called together before him to say our minds in certain matters.
In the end, one kneleth me down, and accuses me How M. Latimer was accused to
king Henry the. viii,
of sedicion, that I had preached sedicious doctrine. A (...), and a hard point
of such a man's doing, as if I should name him, ye would not think it. The king
turned to me and said. What say you to that sir? Then I kne led down, and
turned me first to mine accuser, and required him. Sir what form of preaching
would you appoint me to preach before a king? Would you have me for to
preach nothing as concerning a king, in the kings sermon? Have you any
commission to a point me what I shall preach? Besides this, I asked him diverse
other questions, and he would make no answer to none of the^ all. He had nothing
to say. Then I turned me to the king, and submitted my self to his grace and
said, I never thought my self worthy, nor I never sued to be a preacher before
your grace, but I was called to it, and would be willing (if you mislike me)
His (...) to the king.
to (...) place to my betters. For I grant there be a great meany more worthy
of the room then I am. And if it be your graces pleasure so to allow the^ for
preachers, I could be content to bear their books after them. But if your
grace allow me for a preacher. I would desire your grace to give me leave to
discharge my conscience. Give me leave to frame my doctrine according to mine
audience. I had been a very dolt to have preached so, at yt borders of your
realm, A preacher must have respect to the place and to the persons.
as I preach before your grace. And I thank almightye God, which has always
ben my remedy, that my sainges were well accepted of the king, for like a
gracious Lord he turned into a another communication, it is even as the
scripture says. Cor Regis in manu domini, the Lord directed the kings heart.
Certain of my friends came to me with tears in their eyes, and told me, they
looked I should have been in the tower the same night. Thus have I ever more ben
burdened with the word of sedition. I have offended God grievously,
transgressing his law, and but for this remedy and his mercy, I would not look
to be saved. As for sedicion, for ought that I know, me thinks, I should not
need Christ, if I might so say. But if I be clear in any thing, I am clear
in this. So far as I know mine own M. Latimer was ever void of sedicion.
heart, there is no man further from sediciou then I, which I have declared in
all my doings, and yet it has been ever laid to me. Another time, when I gave
over mine office, I should have received a certain duty that they call a
Pentecostall, it came to the su^me of fiftye and five pound. I set my
commissary to gather it, but he could not be suffered. For it was said a
sedicion should rise upon it.

Thus they burdened me ever with sedicion. So this gentilman comes up now
with sedicion. And wot ye what? I chanced in my last Sermon to speak a merry
word of the new shilling (to refresh my auditory) how I was like Of the new
shylling.
to put away my new shilling for an old grote, I was here in noted to speak
sediciously. Yet I comfort my self in one thing, that I am not alone, and that
I have a fellow. For it is, Consolatio miserorum. It is the comfort of the
wretched to have company. When I was in trouble, it was objected and said
unto me that I was singular, that no man M. Latimer noted of a sing (...).
thought as I thought, that I loved a singularity in all that I did, and that I
took away, contrary to the king, and the whole parliamente, and that I was
travailed with them, that had better wits then I, that I was contrary to them
al. Mary sir this was sore thunderbolts. I thought it an irk some thing to be
alone, and to have no fellow. I thought it was possible it might not be true
that they told me. In the. vii. of John the priests sent out certain of the
Jews to bring Christ unto them violentlye. When they came into the temple and
heard him preach, they were so moved with his preaching, that they returned
home again, and said to them that sent them. Nunquam sic locutus est homo vt
hic homo. There was never man spoke like this man. Then answered the Pharyses:
Number et vos seducit estis? What ye brainsick foles, ye hoddy pecks. Ye doddy
poules, A (...) call exposition.
ye huddes, do ye believe him? are you seduced also? Nunquis ex Principibus
credit in eum? Did ye se any great man, or any great officer take his part? do
ye see any boddy follow him, but beggarly fishers, and such as have nothing to
take to? Nunquis (...) Phariseis? Do ye see any holy man? any perfect man? any
learned man take his part? Turba que ignorant legem execrabilis est. This lay
people is (...), it is they that know not the law, that takes his part, and
none else. The bishops (...) led the people ignorant and they were the cause
of it them selves.
Lo here the Pharisees had nothing to (...) yt people, with all, but ignorance.
They did as our bishops of England, who (...) the people always with
ignorance where they were the cause of it themselves. There were says S.
John. Multi ex principibus qui crediderunt in eum. Many of the chief men
believed in him, and that was contrary to the Phariseis saying, Oh then by like
they belyed him, he was not alone. So thought I, there be more of mine opinion
M. Latimer has gotten Esaias the prophet to be his compa nion.
then I, thought I was not alone. I have now gotten one fellow more, a companion
of sedition, and wot ye who is my fellow? Esaias the Prophet, I spoke but of a
little preaty shilling. But he speaks to Jerusalem after an other sort and
was so bold to meddle with their coin. Thou proud, thou covetous, thou hautie
city of Jerusalem. Argentum Mark well his terms.
tuum versum est inscoriam. Thy silver is turned into, what? Esai meddled with
the coin of the minte.
into testions? Scoriam, into dross. Ah sedicious wretch, what had he to do
with the minte? Why should not he have left that matter to some master of
policy to reprove? Thy silver is dross, it is not fine, it is counterfeit,
thy silver is turned, thou had good (...). What pertayned that to Esaias.
Mary he espied a piece of divinity in that poli cie, he threateneth them Gods
vengeance for it. Two causes why money in. Esaies time was more (...) and
worse.


He went to the root of the matter, which was covetousness. He espied two
points in it, that either it came of covetousness, which became him to
reprove, or else that it tended to the hurt of the poor people, for the
noughtynes of the silver was the occasyon of dearthe of all things in the
Realm. He imputes it to them as a great crime. He may be called a master of
sedicion in deed. Was not this a sedicious harlot to tell them this to their
beardes? to their face?

This sedicious man goth also forth, saying: Vinum tuum mixtuum est aqua. Thy
wine is mingled with water. Here he medeleth with vinteners, be like there were
bruers in Esaias (...) with vintners.
those days, as there be now. It had been good for our missal priests to have
dwelled in that country, for they might have been sure to have had their wine
well mingled with water. I remember how Scrupulous I was in my time of M.
Latimer was sumthing (...), when he (...) a mass sayer.
blindness and ignorauncie, when I should say mass, I have put in water twice
or thrice for failing, in so much when I have been at my Memento, I have had a
grudg in my consyence, fearing that I had not put in water enough, (...) that
which is here spoken of wine, he means it of al arts, in the city, of all
kinds of faculties, for they have all their medles and minglings. That he
speaks of one thing, he Esaias spoke of one vice but he (...) it of mo.
means generally of all. I must tell you more news yet.

I here say there is a certain conning come up in mixing of wares. How say you,
were it no wonder to hear that cloth makers should become poticaries. Yea and
as I hear Cloth makers are become poticaries.
say, in such a place, where as they have professed the Gospel, and the word
of God most earnestly of a long time. Se how busy the Devil is to sclaunder
the word of God? Thus the pore gospel goes to wrack. If his cloth be. xviii
yeardes long, he will set him on a rack, and slretch him out with ropes, and
rack him till the senewes shrinck a gain, whiles he has brought him to.
xxvii. yardes. When they A pretty kind of multiplying.
have brought him to that perfection, they have a pretty feat to thick him
again. He makes me a powther for it, and plais the poticary, they call it floke
pouther they do so in corporate Floke powther.
it to the cloth, that it is wonderful to consider, truly a goodly invention.
Oh that so goodly wits should be so ill applied, they may well deceive the
people but they can not deceive God. They, were wont to make beds of flocks and
it was a good bed to. Now they have turned their flocks into pouther to play
the false thieves with it. O wicked devil what can he not invent to (...) Gods
word? These mixtures come of covetousness. They are plain theft. Woe worth that
these flocks should so slander the word of God. As he said to the Jews, thy
wine (...) mingled with water, so might he have said to us of this land. Thy
These (...) and (...) are theft.
clothe is mingled with (...) powder. He goes yet on. This seditious man
reproves this honorable city, and says: Principes tui infideles. Thou
land of Jerusalem, thy magistrates, thy judges are unfaithful, they keep no
touch they will talk of many gay things, they will pretend this and that, but
they keep no promise. They be worse the^ unfaithful, he was not afraid to call
the officers unfaithful. Et (...) furum. Fellows of thieves: for (...) and
thieves fellows, be all of one sort. They were wont to say. Ask my fellow if I
be a these. He calls princes thieves? What? Esaias calls the magistrates (...)
and (...) of thieves.
Princes thieves? What a seditions harlot was this! was he worthy to live in a
common wealth that would call princes on this wise, fellows of thieves; Had
they a standing at shoters hill, or Stangat hole to take a purse. Why? did they
stand by the high way side? Did they rob? or (...) open any man's house or
door? No, no. That is a gross kind of theuing. They were princes, they had a
(...) kind of theuing. Omnes diligunt munera. They al love bribes. There are
two kind of theuynges. Bribe ry is a kind of theuynge.
Bribery is a princelye kind of theuinge. They will be waged by the rich,
either to give sentence against the pore, or to put of the pore man's causes.
This is the noble theft of princes, and of magistrates. They are bribetakers.
Now a days they call them gentle rewards: let them leave their coloring, and
call them by their christian name Bribes, Bribes have gotten a new name.
Omnes diligunt munera. All the princes, all the judges, all the priests, al yt
rulers are bribers. What? were all the magistrates in Jerusalem, all bribe
takers, none good? No dout there were some good. This word omnes, signifies
the most part, and so there be some good I doubt not of it, in England. But
yet we be far worse then those stifnecked Jews. For we read of none of them
that winsed, nor kicked We are worse then the (...) ked Jews.
against Esais preching, or said that he was a seditious fellow. It behooves the
magistrates to be in credit, and therefore it might seem that Esaias was to blame
to speak openly against the magistrates. It is very sure that they that be
good will bear, and not spurn at the preachers, they that be faulty they must
amend, and (...) spurn, nor wynse, nor whine. He that finds him self touched
or galled, he decla reth him self not to be vprighte. Woe worth these gifts,
So it (...) by a galled horse.
they subucrt justice every where. Sequuntur retributiones. They follow bribes.
Somewhat was given to them before and they must neades give somewhat a gain,
for giffe gaffe was a good fellow, this giffe gaffe led them clean from justice.
They follow gifts. Giffe gaffe was a good fellow.


A good fellow on a time bad an other of his friends to a breakfast, and said:
If you will come, you shall be welcome, but I tell you before hand, you shall have
but fle^der fare, one dish and that is al, what is that said he? A pudding and
nothing A good fellow was bydden to breakfaste to a pudding.
else. Mary said he, you can not please me better, of al meats, that is for mine
own toth, you may draw me (...) about the town with a pudding. These bribing
maiestrates, and judges follow gifts faster, then the fellow would follow the
pudding. They follow bribes as fast, as the fellow did the poding.


I am content to bear the title of sedition with (...). Thanks be to God, I
am not alone, I am in no singularity. This same man that laid sedition (...) to
my charge, was asked an other time, whether he were at the Sermon at Paul's
cross, he answered that he was there, and being asked what news there. Mary
quod he wonderful news, A gentleman which said that he and his (...) had full
absolution at Paul's cross.
we were there clean absolved, my Mule and all had full absolution, ye may see
by this, that he was such a one that rode on a Mule, and that he was a
gentleman. In deed his mule was wiser then he, for I dare say, the Mule never
slaundered the preacher. Oh what an unhappy chance had this Mule to carry such
an Ass upon his back. I was there at the sermon my self. In the end of his
sermon, he gave a general absolution, and as far as I remember these, or
such other like words, but at the (...) I am sure, this was his meaning, as
many as do knowledge your selves to be sinners, and confess the same, and
stand not in defense of it, and heartily abhors it, and will (...) The
prechers words in his absolution. Mule.
(...) in the death of Christ, and be conformable thereunto, Ego absoluo vos,
quod he. Now says this gentleman, his mule was absolved. The precher
absolved but such as (...) sorry, and did repent, Be like then she did (...) her
(...) his mule was wiser then he a great deal. I speak not of worldly
wisdom, for therein he is to wise, yea he is so wise that wise men meruail, how
he came truly by yt tenth part of that he has. But in wisdom which
consists In rebus The misreporter of M. (...) mer, is (...) wise, but in
godly matters as blind as a betel.
(...), (...) rebus salutis, in godly matters, and appertaininge to our
salvation, in this wisdom he is as blind as a beatle. Tanquam equus and Mulus,
in quibus no^ est intellectus. Like hor ses and mules, that have no
understanding. If it were true that the mule repented her of her stumbling, I
think she was better absolved then he. I pray God stop his mouth; or else to
open it, to speak better, and more to his (...): A charitable wish.
An other man quickened with a word I spoke (as he said opprobriously against
the nobility, that their children did not setforth Gods word, but were
vnprcaching prelates) Tender and dain tie eared me^ of these days, had rather
commit xx faults, the^ hear tell of one
was offended with me. I did not mean so, but that some noble men's children
had setforth Gods word, how be it the poor men's sons have done it
always for the most part. Johannes (...) was here a great learned man, and as
they say a noble man in his country, and is gone his way again, if it be for
lack of intertainme^t, the more pity. I would wish such men as he to be in the
realm, for ye realm Poor men's sons for the most part have cuer traueled a
bout the (...) for the of gods word.
should prosper in receiving of the^. Qui vos recipit, me recipit. Who receives
you receives me (said Christ) and it should be for the kings honor to receive
them and keep the^. I heard say master (...), that great clark, should come
hither. I would wish him, and such as he is to have (...). pound a year. (...).
Alasco-
The king should never want it in his coffers at the years end. There is yet
among us ii. great learned men, Petrus Martyr, and Bernard (...), which have a
C. marks a piece. It is honorable for the king to be beneficyal toward the
(...) ned.
I would the king would (...) we a thousand pound on that sort.

Now I will to my place again. In the latter end of my sermon, I exhorted
judges to hear the small as well as the great. (...) quod iustum est iudicare.
You must not only do (...) martyr, and Bernardin (...)
justice, but do it iustlye. You must observe all circumstances. You must give
justice, and minister just judgment in time.

For the delaying of matters of the pore folk, is as sinful before the face
of God as wrong judgment. I rehearsed here a parable of a wicked judge, which
for importunities The parable of (...) wyck. d judge
sake hard the poor woman's cause. etc.

Here is a comfortable place, for all you that cry out and are oppressed. For
you have not a wicked judge, but a merciful judge to call unto: I am not now
so full offolish pity, but I can consider well inoughe, that some of you
complain without a cause. They weep, they wayle, they mourn, I am sure some
not without a cause. I did not here reprove all judges, and find fault with
all. I think we have some as painful magistrates, as ever was Some as pain full
magistrates in England as cuer was.
in England: but I will not swear they be all so: and they that be not of the
best, must be content to be taught, and not disdain to be reprehended. David
says. Erudimini A good (...) for such as are magistrates but noue of the best
qui iudicatis terram. I refer it to your conscience. Vos (...) iu dicatis
terram. Ye that be judges on the earth, whether ye have heard pore men's
causes with expedition or no: if ye have not, then erudimini, be content to be
touched, to be told. You widows, you Orphans, you poor people, here is a
confortable place for you. Though these judges of the world will not hear you,
there is one will be content with your importunity, he will remeady you, if you
come after a right fort unto him. Ye say. The (...) does blame you for your
importunity, it is (...) unto him. He entered into this parable to teach you to
be importune in your petition. Non defatigari. Not to be weary. Here he teaches
you, how How and (...) what means (...) should resort to god in (...).
to come to God in adversity, and by what means, which is by prayer. I do not
speak of the merit of Christ: for he says: Ego sum via, I am the way, Qui
credit in (...) habet vitam aeternam. Who so believes in me, has everlasting
life. But when we are come to Christ, what is our way to (...) adversity? in
anguish? in tribulations? in our necessities? in our injuries? The way is
prayer. We are taught by the commandment of God. Inuoca me in die
tribulationis and ego eripiam te. Thou widow, thou orphane, thou fatherless
child, I speak to thee that haste no friends (...) healpe thee, call upon me
in the day of thy tribulatyon, call upon me. (...) eripiam te. I will pluck
thee a way, I will deliver thee, I will take thee away, I will relieve thee,
thou shall have thy hearts desire.

Here is the promise, here is the comfort, Glorificabis me. Thank me, accept
me for the author of it, and thank not this creature or that for it. Here is
the judge of all judges, come unto him, and he will hear you. For he says:
Quicquid petieritis patrem in nomine meo. etc. What so ever ye (...) my father
in my name, shall be given you thoroughe my merits. You miserable people (...)
are (...) in the world, ask of my father in your distresses, but put (...)
before, The order of our (...) and asking.
(...) you come not with bragges of your own merits, but come in my name, and
by my merit. He has not the (...) of this stout judge, he will bear your
(...), he will not be angry at your cryinge and calling. The Prophet says:
Sperauerunt in te patres nostri and exaudiuisti illos. Thou God, thou God, our
fathers did cry upon thee, and thou hardest them. Art not thou our God as well
as theirs? There is nothing more pleasant to God, then for to put him in
remembrance of his goodness What God (...) hear of us and wherein he (...).
showed unto our forefathers. It is a pleasant thing to tell God of the
benefits that he has done before our time. Go to Moses, who had the guiding
of Gods people, se how he used prayer as an instrument to be delivered Moses
used prayer as an in (...) in (...) uersity.
out of adversity, when he had great rough mountains on every side of him, and
before him the red sea, Pharaos host behind him, pearill of death round about
him. What did he? despaired he? no. Whether went he? He repaired to God with
this prayer, and said nothing. Yet with a great ardency of spirit, he pearsed
Gods ears. Now help or never good Lord, no help, but in thy hand quod he.
Though he never moved his lips, yet the scripture says: he cried out, and
the Lord heard him, and said: quid clamas ad me? Why criest thou out so loud?
The people hard him say nothing, and yet God said. Why crycst Exodus xiiii.
thou out? Straight ways he stroke the water with his rod, and divided it,
and it stood up like two walls on either side, between ye which gods people
passed, and the (...) were drowned. Iosue was in anguish, and like di (...) was
in anguish and (...) and prayed.
stresse at Jericho, that true captain, yt faithful judge, no follower of
retributions, no (...), he was no money who made his petition to almighty God
to show him the cause of his wrath toward him, when his army was plaged after
the (...) of Jericho. So he obtained his (...) and learned, that for one man's
fault, all the reaste were For A chans (...) many a thousand punished. Iosue.
vii
punished. For Achans covetousness many a thousand were in agony, and fear of
death, who hid his money, as he thought from god. But god saw it well inoughe,
and brought it to light. This Acan was a bywalker. Well, it came to pass,
when Joshua (...) it, straight ways he purged (...) army, and took away Malum
de Israel, that is wickedness from the people. For Joshua called him before the
people, Iosue put (...) to death.
and said, Dagloriam Deo, give praise to god, tell truth (...) vii.
man, and forth with he told it. And then he and all his house suffered
death. A (...) ensample for all Magystrates to follow. Here was the execution
of a true judge, he was no gift taker, he was no wincker, he was no (...)
(...). xx.
walker. Also when the Assirians with an innumerable po were of men in
Iosaphates time (...) the land of Israel. Iosaphat that good (...) goes me
strait to god, and made his prayer. Non est in nostra fortitudine, (said he)
buic populo (...), it is not in our strength, O Lord, to resyste this
people, and after his prayer god delivered him, and at the same time x. M. were
destroyed. So ye miserable people, you must (...) to god in anguishes, and make
your prayer to him.

Arm your selves with prayer in your adversities. Many Many begin to pray,
(...) and continue in prayer.
begin to pray, and suddenly cast away prayer, the devil puts such
fantasyes in their heads, as though God could not entend them, or had
somewhat else to do.

But you must be importune and not weary, nor cast away prayer. Nay you must
cast away (...). God will hear Cast away sin, and then pray.
your prayer, albeit, you be sinners, I send you a judge that will be glad to
hear you. You that are oppressed, I speak to you. Christ in this parable does
paynte the good will (...) A notable (...) for (...) which (...).
god toward you, o miserable people, he that is not received, let him not
despair, nor think that god had forsaken him. For god tarieth til he sees a
time, and better can do all things for us, then we our selves can wyshe.
There was a wicked judge, etc. What means it that god (...) this parable
rather of a wicked (...), then of a good? Be like good judges were rare at that
time, and trow ye the devil has been a sleep ever sense? No, no. He is as
busye as ever he was. The common manner of a wicked The common manner of a wic
ked judge.
judge is, neither to fear God nor man. He (...) what a man he is, and therefore
he cares not for man, because of his pride. He looks hie (...) the pore, he
will be had in admiration, in adoration. He seems to be in a protection. Well,
shall he escape? Ho, ho, est Deus in celo. There is a god in heaven, he
accepts no persons, he will punyshe them. There was a pore woman came to this
judge, and said: Vindica me de aduersario. Se that mine aduersarye do me no
wrong. He would not hear her, but drove her of. She had no money to wage
either him, either them that were about Whether (...) stian people may seek to
be avenged
him. Did this woman well to be avenged of her aduer sary? may christian people
seek vengauuce? The Lord says: Mihi vindictam et ego retribuam. When ye
reueuge. ye take mine office upon you. This is to be vnderstaude of private
vengaunce. It is lawful for Gods flock to use means to put away (...), to
resort to judges, to require to have sentence given of right. Saint Paul
sent to Lisias the tribune, to have this ordinary remedy. and christ Acts. xxii
also said. Si male locutus sum. etc. If I have spoken evil rebuke me. Christ
here answered for him self. Note here my (...) Math. xxvi.
and masters what case pore widows and orphans be in, I will tell you my lord
judges, if ye consider this matter (...), ye should be more afraid of the pore
widow, (...) of a noble man (...) the friends and power that he can make. But
now a dais the judges be a fraid to hear a pore man against ye rich, The manner
of (...) now a days (...) against the rych.
in so much they will either pronounce against him, or so drive of the pore ma^s
suit, that he shall not be able to go through with it. The greatest man in a realm
cannot so hurt a judge as the pore widow, such a shreud turn she ca^do him. And
with what armor I pray you? She ca^ bring the judges skin over his ears, and
never lay hands upon him. And how is that? Lachrime How God (...) dreth and
regardes the (...) of the wy dow and the pore
miseroru^ (...) ad maxillas. The tears of the pore fall down upon their chekes,
and asce^du^t ad celu^, and go up to heaven and cry for ve^ga^ce before god,
the judge of widows, the father of widows and orphans. Pore people be
oppressed even by laws. Ve ijs qui co^du^t leges iniquas. Woe worth to them
that make evil laws against the poor, what shall be to them that hinder and
(...) good laws? Quid facietis in die vltionis. What will ye do in the day
of great vengaunce, When God shall vilit you? he says, he will hear the tears
of pore women, when he goes on visitation. For their sake he will hurt the
judge, be he never so high, Deus trans fert regna. He will for widows sakes
chang realms, bring the^ into temptation, pluck the judges skins over their
heds Cambises.
La^bises was a great Emperor, such another as our master is, he had many lord
deputies, lord presidentes and lieue tena^ts under him. It is a great while a
goo sith I red the history. It cha^ced he had under him in one of his dominions
a briber, a gifttaker, a gratifier of rich men, he follow ed gifts, as fast as
he yt followed the pudding, a ha^dmaker An old soth say, but though the saying
be none of the newest I fear me yet it is one of the truest.
in his office, to make his son a great man, as thold laying is. Happy is the
child, whose father goth to the devil. The cry of the pore widow came to them
perors ear, and caused him to flay the judge quick, and laid his skin in his
chair of judgment, that al judges, that should give judgment The bribing judge
was flayed quick.
afterward, should sit in the same skin. Surely it was a goodly sign, a goodly
monument, the sign of the judges skin, I pray God we may once se the sign of
the (...) in A men, or else I (...) god we may have such incorruptible judges
which will not deserve it.
England. Ye will say peradventure that this is cruelly and un charitably
spoken, no, no, I do it charitablye for a love I bear to my country. God
says. Ego visitabo. I will visyte. God has ii. visitatio^s. The first is
when he reueleth his word by prechers, and where the first is accepted; the
second God has two visitations.
comes not. The second visitation is vengance. He went a visitation, when he
brought the judges skin over his ears. If his word be despised, he comes
with his second vi sitation with vengance. Noe preached gods word an (...). years
Noe preached gods word an. C, years
and was laughed to skorn, and called an old doting fool, because they would not
accept this first visitation, God visited the second time he poured down shours
of rain, til all the world was drowned. (...) was a visitor of Sodom and
Gomorre, Gene. xix.
but because they regarded not his preaching, God visyted them the second time,
and brent them al up with brimston, saving Loath. Moses came first a visitation
into Egypt with Exodus vii.
Gods word, and because they would not hear him, God visited them again, and
drowned them in the red Sea, GOD likewise with his first visitation visited
the Israelites by his prophets, but because they would not hear his Prophets,
he visited them the second time, and disper sed them in Assiria and Babylon.
John Baptist likewise and our Savior Christ visited them, afterward declaring
Germany made a mingle (...), of their (...)
to them Gods will: and because they despised these vysitours, he destroyed
Jerusalem by Titus and Uespasianus. Germany was visited. xx. years with
Gods word, but they did not earnestly embrace it, and in life follow it, but
made a mingle mangle and a hotchpotch of it.

I can not tell what, partly popery, partly true religion mingled together.
They say in my country, when they call their hogs to the swyne trough. Come
to thy mingle mangle come pyr, come pyr, even so they made mingle (...) cloked
under a color of (...).
mangle of it. They could clatter and prate of the Gospel, but when al comes
to all, they joined popery so with it, that they marde all together, they
scratched and scraped all the liuinges of the church, and under a color of
religyon, turned it to their own proper gain and lucre. God seeing that they
would not come unto his word, now he visits them in the second time of his
visitacion with his wrath. For the taking away of Gods word, is a manifest
token of his wrath. We have now a first visitation in England, let us beware of
the second. We have the minisiracion of his word, we are yet well, but the
house is not clean swept yet. God has sent us a noble king in this his Godly
(...).
visitacio^, let us not provoke him against us, let us beware let us not
displease him, let us not be unthankful, and unkind, let us beware of
bywalkyng and contemnyng of Gods word, let us pray diligently for our king, let
us receive with all obedience and prayer the word of God. A word or two more
and I commit you to God. I will monish you of a thing, I hear say ye walk in
ordinately, ye talk unseemly otherways then it becomes Christian subjects.
Ye take upon you to Judge the judgments of Judges.

I will not make the king a Pope, for the Pope will have all things that he
does, taken for an Article of our says.

I will not say but that the King, and his council may err, the Parliamente
houses, both the high and low may err. I pray daily that they may not err.
It becomes us what soever they decree to stand unto Let us learn our duty
toward the king the laws and ordinances of the realm.
it and receive it obediently, as far forth as it is not manifest wicked, and
directly against the word of God. It pertains unto us to think the best,
though we can not reder a cause for yt doing of every thing. For Charitas omnia
credit, omnia sperat. Charity does believe and trust all things. We ought to
expound to the best all things, although we can not yield a reason. Therefore I
exhort you, good people, pronounce in good part all the factes and deeds of
the magistrates and judges. Charity judges the best of all men, and
specially of magistrates S. Paul says, Nolite iudicare ante tempus donec
Dominus aduenerit. Judge not before the time of the Lords coming. Prauum cor
hominis. Man's heart is unsearchable, it is a ragged piece of work, no man know
eth his own heart, and therefore David prays and says Ab occultis meis munda
me. Deliver me from my unknown Psalm. (...).
faults. I am a further offe^der then I can see. A man shall be blinded in love
of himself, and cannot see so much in (...) self as in other men: let us not
therefore judge judges. We are comptable to God, and so be they. Let them alone,
they have their countes to make. If we have charity in us, we shall do this.
For Charitas operatur. Charity works.

What works it? mary Omnia credere, omnia sperare. To accept all thiugs in
good part. Nolite iudicare ante tempus.

Judge not before the Lords coming. In this we learn (...) is known
to know Antichrist, which doothe eleuate him self in the church, and
judges at his pleasure, before the time. His canonizations and judging of men
before the Lords judgment, be a manifest token of Antichrist. How can he know
Saints? He knows not his own heart, and he can not know them by miracles.
For some miracle workers shall go to the devil. I will tell you what I
remembered yesternight in my bed. A meruaylous tale to perceive, how
inscrutable a man's heart is. I was once at Oxford (for I had occasyon to come
that way, when I was in my office) they What he saw and hard once at (...).
told me it was a gainer way, and a fayrer way, and by that occasion I lay
there a night. Being there, I hard of an ex ecution that was done upon one
that suffered for (...). It was as (ye know) a dangerous world: for it
might sone cost a man his life for aworde speaking.

I cannot tell what the matter was, but the judge set it so out that the man
was condemned. The. xii. men came in, and said giltye, and upon that, he was
judged to be hanged, drawn, and quartred. When the rope was about his neck,
no man could persuade him that he was in any fault, and stood there a great
while in the protestation of his innocen cy. They hanged him and cut him down
somewhat to sone Note this ye wicked that will not (...) faults.
before he was clean dead: then they drew him to the fire, and he revived, and
then he coming to his remembrance, co^sessed his fault and said he was
giltye. O a wonderful example: it may well be said: Prauum cor hominis et
inscrutabile A crabbed peace of work and unsearchable. I will leave here, for I
think you know what I mean well enough. I shall not need to apply this
example any further. As I began ever with this saying. Quoecunque scripta sunt,
like a trouant and so I have a commune place to the end, if my memory fail
me, Beati qui audiunt verbum dei et custodiunt illud, Blessed be they that
hear the word of God, and keep it. It must be kept in memory, in living, and
in our conversation. And if we so do, we shall come to ye blessedness, which god
prepared for us tho row his son Jesus Christ, to the which he bring us al. Ame^.

The fourth Sermon of Master Hugh Latimer which he preached before King
Edward, the. xxix. day of March.
QVaecunque scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. All things that
are written, ar written to be our (...). The parable that I took to begin with
(most honorable audience) is written in the. xviii. chapter of Saint Luke, and
there is a certain remnaunt of it behind yet. (...) parable is this: There was
a certain judge in a city, that feared neither God nor man. And in the same
city there was a widow, that required justice at his hands: but he would not
hear her, but put her of, and delayed the matter: In process the Judge seeing
her importunity, said, though I fear neither God nor man, yet for the
importunity of the woman, I will hear her, least she rail upon me, and molest
me with exclamations, and out cries I will hear her matter. I will make an
end of it. Our Savior (...) added more unto this and said. Audite quid iudex
dicat, etc. Hear you said Christ, what the wicked judge said. And shall not God
revenge his elect, that cry upon him day and night? Although he tarry and
differ them, I say unto you, he will revenge them, and that shortly. But when
the son of man shall come, shall he find faith in the earth?

That I may have grace so to open the remnaunte of this parable, that it may be
to the glory of God, and edifying of your souls, I shall desire you to pray.
In the which prayer etc. I showed you the last day (most honorable Audience)
the cause why our Savior Christ, rather used the example of a wicked Judge
the^ of a good. And the cause was Why Christ used the example of a wicked
Judge.
for that in those days there was great plentye of (...) Judges, so that he
might borow an example among them well enough. For there was much scarcity of
good judges. I did excuse the widdowe also, for coming to the Judge against
her aduersarye, because she did it not of malice: she did it not for appetite
of vengeance. A (...) of (...) touched and spo ken of, in his third sermon.


And I told you that it was good and lawful, for honest vertuons (...), for
gods people, to use the laws of the realm, as an ordinary help against
their adversaries, and ought to take them as Gods holy ordinances, for the
remedies of their iniuryes and wrongs, when they are distressed. So that they
do it charitably, lovingly, not of malice, not vengeablie, not couetously. He
means that A (...). for this (...) one of their (...) and (...).


I should have told you here of a certain sect of heritikes that speak
against this order and doctrine, they will have no magistrates nor Judges on
the earth.

Here I have to tell you, what I hard of (...) by the relation of a credible
person, and a worshipful manne, of a town in this (...) of England, that
has above. v. (...) Heritykes of this erroneous opinion in it, as he said.
How busy the (...) to (...) the word and sclaunder the Gospel.


Oh so busy the Devil is now to hinder the word coming out, and to
sclaunder the Gospel.

(...) sure argument and an evident demonstration, that the light of Gods
word is abroad, and that this is a true doctrine that we are taught now:
else he would not rore and stir about as he does when he has the upper
The (...) busy (...), (...) an (...) argument that this doctrine is true.
hand. He will keep his possession quietly as he did in the popish days, when
he bare a rule of supremacye in peaceable possession. If he reigned now in open
religion, in open doctrine as he did then, he would not stir up erroneous
opinions, he would have kept us without contention, without dissension. There
is no such diversity of opinions among the Turks, nor among the Jews. And
why: For there he raygneth peaceably in the hole religion. Christ says. Cum
fortis armatus custodierit atrium, etc. When the strong armed man keeps his
house, those things that he has in possession, are in a quyetnes, he does
enjoy them peaceably. Sed cum fortior eo (...). But when a stronger then he
(...) upon him, when the light of Gods word is once reveled, then he is busy,
then he rores then he (...) abroad, and (...) up erroneous opinions, to
sclau^der Gods word. And this is an argument that we have the true doctrine.
I beseech God continue us and (...) us in it. The devil deciareth the same, and
therefore he rores thus and goes about to stir up these wanton headdes and busy
brains. And will you know where this town is? I will not tell you directly.
I will put you to muse a little. I will utter the matter by circumloqution.
Where is it? Where the bishop of the dioces is an unpreaching prelate. Who is
that? If there be but one such in all England, it is easy to guess. And if
there were no mo but one, yet it were to many by one. And if there be more, they
have the more to au^swer for, that they suffer in this realm an vnpreachyng
prealate unreformed. I remember well what.S. Paul says to a bishop. And
though he (...) it to Timothe being a bishop, yet I may say it now to the
magistrates, for all is one case, (...) Timoth. (...)
al is one matter. Non co^municabis (...) alienis. Thou shall not be (...) of
other men's faults. Lay not thy hands rashely upon any, be not hastye in making
of Curates, in re ceyuing men to have cure of Souls, that are not worthy of
the office, that either can not or will not do their duty. Do it not. Why:
Quia communicabis peccatis alienis.

Thou shall be partaker of other men's sins. Now me think it needs not to
be partaker of other men's sins we shall find enough of our own. And what
is Communicare peccatis alienis. To be partaker of other men's evils, if this
be not, to make unpreaching prealats, and to suffer them to continue still in
their unpreaching prelacye:

If the king and his council should suffer (...) Judges Kings and ru lars
must wake and not wink, and leave (...) through their (...).
of this Realm to take brybes, to defeat justice and suffer the great to
ouergoo the poor, and should look through his fyngers, and wink at it,
should not the king be partaker of their noughtines: And why: Is he not supreme
head of the church? what: is the supremacy a dignity and nothing else? is it
not comptable? I think it will be a chargeable A dignity with a charge.
dignity when account shall be asked of it. Oh what a vauntage has the
Devil? what entrye has the wolf when the sheparde tends not his flock,
and (...); (...) not to good pasture? S. Paul does say. Qui been (...)
(...). Timoth. v
praesoyteri duplici honor digni (...). What is this praesse? It is as much to
say as to take charge and cure of souls. we say ille prae est, he is set over
the flock. He has taken charge upon To rule well what that is.
him. And what is. Been prae esse? To discharge the cure. To rule well, to
feed the flock with pure food, and good eram ple of life. Well then, Qui been
praesunt duplici honor digni su^t What is (...) honor.
They that discharge their cure well, are worthy double ho nour. What is this
double honor? The first is to be reuerensed, to be had in estimation and
reputacio^ with the people, and to be regarded as good (...). Another honor
is, to have all things necessary for their state, ministered un to them. This is
the double honor that they ought to have Qui praesunt Been, that discharge the
cure, if they do it, Been.

There was a merry monk in Cambridge in the College The merry monk of Came
bridge.
that I was in, and it chanced a great company of us to be together,
entending to make good cheer, and to be me rye (as scholars will be merry when
they are disposed) One of the company brought out this sentence. Nil melius
quam (...) et facere been. There is nothing better then to be merry and to do
well. A vengeance of that (...) (quod ye Monk) I would that Been had been
banished beyond the sea: and that Been were out, it were well. For I could be
merye, and I could do, but I love not to do well. That, Been (...) al
together. I would Been were out, quod the merry Monk, for it imports many
things, to live well, to discharge the cure. In (...) it were better for them
if it were out. And it were as good to be out as to be ordered as it is. It
will be a heavy Been, to some of them, when they shall come to their account.
But perauenture you will say. What and they preach not at al? Yet praesunt.
Are they not worthy double honor? is it not an honorable order they be in?
Where the (...) cher does not his duty, there the order is not honorable, but
horrible.
Nay an horrible misorder, it is an horror rather then an ho nour, and horrible
rather, then honorable, if the preacher be naught, and do not his duty. And
thus goo these prelates about to wrestle for honor that the Devil may take
his pleasure in sclaunderyng the realm, and that it may be reported abroad
that we bread (...) our (...). It is to be thought that some of them would
have it so, to bring in popery again.

This I fear me is their intent, and it shall be blowe^ The entente of
unpreaching (...).
abroad to our holy father of Romes ears, and he shall (...) forth his
thonderboltes upon these brutes, and all this does come to pass through their
vnpreachyng prelacye.

Are they not worthy double honor? Nay rather double disshonour, not to be
regarded, not to be esteemed among the people, and to have no living at their
hands? For as good preachers be worthy double honor: so unpreaching prelates
be worthy double dishonor. They must be at their In arguments of congruence
Marh. v.
doublets. But now these. ii. dishonours what be they?

Our Savior Christ does show. Si sal infatuatus fuerit ad nihil vltra valet
nisi vt proijciatur for as. If the salt be vnsaue, rye, it is good for no thing,
but to be cast out and trodden of men. By this salt, is understand Preachers,
and such as have cure of souls. What be they worthy then? Wherefore serve
they: For nothing else but to be cast out.

Make them quondams, out with them, cast the^ out of their office, what should
they do with cure that will not look to them: An other dishonor is this Vt
conculcentur ab (...). To be trodden under men's feet, not to be regarded, not
to be esteemed: They (...) at their doublets still. S. Paul in his epistle,
qualifieth a Bishop, and says that he must be. Aptus ad docendum, ad
refellendum apt. To teach and to confute all manner of false doctrine. But
what shall a man do with (...), if he do not use it? It were as good for us
to be with out it. (...) bishop came to (...) bishop angry with M. Latimer.
me the last day, and was angry with me for a certain Sermon that I made in
this place. His chaplayn had complained against me, because I had spoken
against vnpreachyng prelates. Nay quod the bishop, he made so indifferente a
Sermon the first day, that I thought he would mar all the second day. He will
have every man a quo^dam as he is. As for my quondamship I thank God that he
gave me the grace to come by it, by so honest a means as I did. I tha^k him
for mine own quondamship, and as for them, I will not have them made quondams,
if they discharge their office, I would have them do their duty. I would have
no more (...) as God healpe me. I owe them no other malice then this, and that
is none at all.

This bishop answered his chaplayne: well (says he) well (...) bishops answer
to his chaplayn.
I did wisely to day, for as I was going to his Sermon, I remembered me that I
had neither said mass, nor matte^s. And homeward I (...) as fast as I could,
and I thank god I have said both, and let his unfruitful Sermon alone.
Unfruitefull says one, an other says sediciouse. Well, unfruitful is the
best, and whether it be unfruitful or no, I can not tell, it lies not in me
to make it fruitful. And God work not in your hearts, my preaching can do
you but little good. I am Gods instrument but for a time. Preachers are Gods
instruments.
It is he that must give the increase, and yet preaching is necessary. For
take away preaching, and take a way salvation. I told you of Scala coeli and I
made it a preaching matter, not a massyng matter. Christ is the preacher of all
preachers, the patron and the exemplar, that al preachers ought to follow. For
it was he by whom the father of heaven said, Hic est filius (...) dilectus,
ipsum audite. This is my well-beloved son, hear him, Even he when he was here
(...) of Christ's doc (...) fell in unfruitful (...).
on the earth, as wisely, as learnedly, as circumspectly as he preached, yet
his sede fell in three parts, so that the fourth part only was fruitful. And
if he had no better luck that was preacher of all preachers, what shall we
look for? Yet was there no lack in him, but in the ground: And so now there
is no fault in preaching: the lack is in the people that have stony hearts,
and thorny hearts. A (...) God to amend the^. And as for these folk that
speak against me I never (...) to have (...) good word as long as I (...). Yet
will I speak of their wickedness, as long as I shall be permitted to (...) as long
as I live, I (...) be an enemy to it. No preachers can pass it over with
silence. It is the original root of al myschife. As for me I owe them no
other ill will, but I pray God amend them, when it pleases him. Now to the
parable. What did the wicked Judge (...) end of the (...)? The love of God
moved him not, the law of God was this, and it is writ in the first of
Deuteronomy: audite eos hear them. These two words will be heavy words to
wicked judges another day. But some of them (...) will say: I will hear such as
will give bribes, and those that will do me good tournes. Nay, ye be hedged out
of that liberty. Justice must be mi (...) delays.
He says it a paruum vt magnum. The small as well as great. Ye must do iustum,
deal iustlye, minister justice, and that to al men, and you must do it just,
in time convenient, without any delays, or driving of, with expedition. Well, I
say, neither this law, nor the word and commandment of What mo ued the wic
ked Judge, to hear the complainte of (...) widow
God moved this wicked Judge, nor the misery of this wyddow, nor the vpryghtnes
of her cause, nor the wrong which she took, moved him: but to avoid
importunity, and clamor, and (...), he gave her the hearing, he gave her
final sentence, and so she had her request.

This place of judgment it has been ever imperfect, it was never seen that
al Judges did their duty, that they would All Judges have not (...) duty at al
times.
hear the small as well as the great. I will not prove this by the wytnes of
any private maiestrate, but by yt wisest kings saying that ever was: (...)
sub sole (says Solomon) in loco iusticie, impietatem, et in (...) equitatis
iniquitatem. I have seen under the sun, that is to say, over all, in every
place where What Solomon did (...) in his time in (...) ges.
right judgment should have been, wickedness, as who would say bribes taking,
defeating of justice, oppressing of the poor. Men sent away with weepyng
tears, without (...) hearing of their causes, and in yt place of equitye says
he, I have seen iniquity. No equity, No justice, asore word for (...) to
pronounce (...) sallye, (...). And if Solomon said it, there is a matter in it.
I wene he said it not only for his own time, but he saw it both in those
that (...) before him, and also that were to come after him. Now comes Esaias and
he affirms the same, speaking of the (...) done in his time in the common
place, as it might be Westminster Hall, the Gylde Hall, the Judges Hall, the
Praetor house. Call it what you will. In the open place. For Judges at that time
Judges sat in (...) gates of the (...) in the hye (...)
(according to the manner) sat in the gates of the City in the hye way. A
goodly and godly order for to sit, so that the poor people may (...) come to
them. But what says Esaias that seditious fellow? He says of his Country this:
(...) faceret iudicium, and fecit iniquitatem. I looked the Judges should do
their duty, and I saw them work iniquity. There was bribes walkyng, money
making, making of hands Bribes and bribers.
(quod the Prophet, or rather almighty God by the Prophet) such is their
partiality, affection, and bribes. They be such money makers, inhauncers, and
promoters of them selves. Esaias knew this by the crying of the people, ecce
clamor populi says he. And though some among them be unreasonable people (as
many be now adays) yet no doubt of it, some cried The tears of the oppre
ssed, cry for (...) to God.
not without a cause. And why? Their matters are not heard, they are feign to
go home with weepyng tears, that fall down by their cheeks, and ascend up
to heaven, and cry for vengeance. Let Judges look about them, for surely God
will revenge his elect one day.

And surely me think, if a Judge would follow but a world ly reason, and wey
the matter politikly, without these exam And aduertisment to our Judges
ples of scripture, he should fear more the hurt that may be done (...) by a
poor widow, or a miserable man, then by the greatest Gentleman of them al.
God has pulled the Judges skyns over their heads, for the poor man's sake. Yea
the poor widow may do him more hurt with her poor (...) noster in her mouth,
then any other weapon. And with two or (...) The wyddowes wea (...).
words shall bring him down to the ground, and destroy his (...), and cause
him to loose more in one day, then he gat in seven years. For God will revenge
these miserable folks that can not help them selves. He says: ego in die
(...) nis. etc. In the day of visitation I will revenge them. An non ulciscetur
anima mea: Shall not my soul be (...): As who should say: I must needs take
their part: Veniens (...), et non tardabo. Yes, though I tarry, and though I
(...) to linger never so long, yet I will come at the length, and that (...).
And if God spoke this, he will perform his promise. He has for their sakes
(as I told you) pulled the (...) over the Judges ears ere this. King David
trusted some in (...) in (...) trust in his Judges, (...) he (...) old him
self.
his old age, that did him no very good service. Now, if in the people of God,
there were some folks that fell to (...), then what was there among the
Heathen? Absolon (...) son was a bywalker, and made disturbaunce among the
people in his fathers time. And though he were a wicked man, and a bywalker,
yet some there were in that time that were good, and walked uprightly. I speak
not this against (...) was a by walker.
the Judges seat. I speak not as though all Judges were naught, and as
though I did not hold with the Judges, maiestrates, and officers, as the
Anabaptists these false hererikes do. But I judge them honorable, necessary,
and Gods Judges are honorable, necessary, and Gods ordinances (...) their
offices
ordinance. I speak it as scripture speaks, to give a (...), and a warning
to al (...), to cause them to look to their offices. For the devil the great
magistrate, is very busy now, he is ever doing, he never cease to go about
to make them like him self. The proverb is Simile gaudet simili Like would
have like. If the Judge be good and upright, he will assaye to deceive him,
either by the (...) suggestion of craftye Lawyers, or else by false witness,
and subtyle vtteryng The craft of the (...)
of a wrong matter. He goes about as much as he can to corrupt the men of
law, to make them fall to (...), to lay burdens on poor men's backs, and to
make them fall to perjury, and to bring into the place of judgment all
corruption, iniquity, and impietye,

I have spoken thus much, to occasion at Judges and Magistrates to look to
their offices. They had need to look about them. This gear moved Saint (...)
to speak this sententence: Miror si aliquis rectorum potest saluari. I A
notable and bold (...) ing of (...).
maruayle (said this Doctor) if any of these Rulers or great Magistrates can
be saved. He spoke it not for the impossibilitye of the thing (God forbid that
all the Magistrates and Judges should be condemned) but for the difficultye.

Oh that a man might have the contemplacion of hell, that the Devil would allow a
man to look into hell, to see the state of it, as he showed all the world when
he tempted Christ in the wyldernes. Common strat illi omnia regna mundi, he
showed Math. 4.
him all the kingdoms of the world, and al their iollity, and told him that he
would give him al, if he would knele down and worship him. He lied like a
faulse harlot, he could not give them, he was not able to give so much as a
Goose wing, for they were none of his to give. The other that he promised them
unto: had more right to them then he. But I say if one were admitted to view
hell thus, and behold it thorowelye, Unpreaching prelates are (...) the devil
(...) hell and brybynge Judges are with them for company. He turns to his
former matter
the devil would say: On yonder side are punished unpreaching prelates. I think
a man should se as far as a kenning and se nothing but unpreaching Prelates. He
might look as far as Calice I warrant you. And than if he would go one yt
other side, and show where that bribyng Judges were, I think he should se so
many, that there were scant room for any other. Our Lord amend it. Well to our
matter. This Judge I speak of, said: Though I fear neither God, nor man (...).
And did he think thus: Is it the manner of wicked Judges to confess, their
faults, nay he thought not so. And a man had come to him, and called him
wicked, he would forth with have commanded him to ward, he would have
defended him self Why the Judge was forced then to confess his fautes.
stoutly. It was God that spoke in his conscience. God puteth him to utter
such things as he saw in his heart. and were hyd to him self. And there be
like things in the scripture, as Dixit insipiens in cord (...) est deus. The
unwise man said in his heart, there is no God. And yet if he should have been
asked the question, he would have denied it.

Esaias the Prophet says also: Mendatio protecti sumus, we are defended with
lies. We have put our trust in lies. And in an other place he says: ambulabo
in prauitate cordis mei, I will walk in the wyckednes of my heart. He utters
what lies in his heart, not known to him self, but to God. It was not for
naught that Jeremy describes ma^s heart in his colors. Jeremy de scribed the
heart of man. Ieremi. 17.
Paruum cor hominis et inscrutabile. The heart of man is noughty, a crooked and
froward piece of work. Let every man humble himself, and acknowledge his
fault, and do as S. Paul did. When the people to whom he had preached, had
said many Paul durst not iustifye him self.
things in his commendation, yet he durst not justify him self. Paul would
not praise him self, to his own justification, and therefore when they had
spoken those things by him: I pass not at al says he, what ye say by me, I
will not stand to your report, and yet he was not froward that when he herd the
truth reported of him, he would say it to be false, but he said, I will neither
stand to your report, though it be good and just, neither yet I will say that
it is untrue. He was Bonus Pastor. A good shepeheard. He was one of them, qui
been presunt that discharged his cure, and yet he thought that there might be a
farther thing in him self, then he saw in him self. And therefore he said:
The Lord shall judge me. I will stand only to the Judgment of the Lord. For
look whom he judges to be good, he is sure he is safe, he is cock sure. I
spoke of this gear the last day, and of some I had little thank for my
labor. I smelled some folks that were grieved with me The truth gets hatred
for it, because I speak against temerarious judgment. What has he to do
with judgment (say they?) I went about to keep you from arrogant judgment.
This is no good argument my friends. A man seems not to fear death, there fore
his cause is good. This is a deceauable argument. He went to his death boldly,
Ergo he stands in a just quarrel.

The Anabaptists that were brent here in diverse towns The Anabaptists how
they took their death.
in England (as I heard of credible men, I saw them not my self) went to their
death, even Intrepide: as ye will say without any fear in the world cherefully.
Well, let them go. There was in the old doctors times an other kind of poisoned
heretics, that were called Donatistes. And these heretics The Dona tistes and
how they dyed.
went to their execution as though they should have gone to some iollye
recreacionor banquet, to some beally chere, or to a play. And will ye argu then:
He goes to his death boldly, or cherefully, ergo he dies in a just cause.
Nay that sequel follows no more then this. A man semes to be afraid of death,
ergo he dies evil. And yet our Savior Christ was afraid Judge not them in
authority (...).
of death him self. I warn you therefore, and charge you not to judge the^
that be in authority, but to pray for the^. It becomes as not to judge great
maiestrates, nor to condemn their doings, unless their deeds be openly and
apparently wicked. Charity requires the same, for charity judges no man
Charyty is the cognysaunce and badge of a Christen man.
but well of every body. And thus we may try whether we have charity or no,
and if we have not charity we are not gods disciples, for they are known by
that badge. He that is his disciple, has the work of charity in his breast.
It is a worthy saying of a clarke, Charitas si est operatur, si non operatur,
non est, If there be charity it works omnia credere, omnia (...). To believe
al things, to hope all, to say the best of the maiestrates, and not to stand
to the defending of a wicked matter. I will go farther with you now. I was
travailed in yt Tower my self (with the kings commandment, and the
counsel) and there was sir Robert Cunstable, the (...) Hussy, the Lord Darsy.
And the Lord Darsy, was tellyng me What the Lord Darsy said to master La timer
in yt Tower.
of the faithful service that he had don the Kings majesty that dead is. And
I had seen my Soueraign Lord in the fyeld (said he) and I had seen his grace
com against us, I would have lyghted from my horse and taken my sword by the
point and yielded it into his graces hands. Mary (quod I) but in the mean
season ye played not the part of a faithful subject in holding with the
people in a commotion and a disturbau^ce. The commune cast of al traitors.
It has been the cast of al traitors to pretend nothing against the Kings
person, they never pretend the matter to the king, but to other. Subjects may
not resist any magistrates, nor ought to do nothing contrary to the Kings
laws. The office and duty of subjects. A thing yt happened at Oxford.
And therefore these words, the King and so fourth, are of small effect. I
heard once a tale of a thing that was done at Oxford. xx. years a go, and the
like has been since in this realm as I was informed of credible persons, and
some of them that saw it be a live yet. There was a priest that was robbed of a
great sum of money, and there were. ii. or. iii. attached for the A Priest
robbed of a great sum of money.
same robbery and to be brief were condemned and brought to the place of
execution. The first man, when he was upon the ladder denied yt matter utterly,
and took his death upon it yt he never consented to the robbery of the pressed,
nor never knew of it. When he was dead, the second fellow comes and makes his
protestation and acknoweledged the faut, saying: that among other grievous
offenses yt he dad done he was accessory to this robbery, and says he, I had
my part of it, I cry God mercy, so had this fellow that dyed before me his
part. Now who can judge whether this fellow dyed well or no? Who can judge a
man's heart? The one denied the matter, and the the other confessed It is hard to
Judge a man's heart
it, there is no judging of such matters. I have heard much wickedness of this
man, and I thought often, Jesus, what will worth, what will be the end of this man.
When I was with the Bishop of Chichestre in ward (I was not so with the bishops
besturred them so the^ that some of the^ were never dilligent, since.
him, but my friends might come to me, and talk with me) I was desirous to
hear of execution done (as there was every weke, some in one place of the City
or other) for there was three wekes sessions at Newgate, and fourthnight
Sessions at the Marshalsey, and so fourth. I was desirous I say to hear of
execution, by cause I looked that my part should have been therein, I looked
every day to be called to it my self. Among The whore yt committed robbery.
al other I heard of a wanton woman, a naughty liver. A whore, a vain body,
was led from Newgate to the place of execution for a certain robbery that she
had committed, and M. Latimer exhorts yt kings grace, yt learned me^ might
be appointed to such as shall suffer and are convict persons.
she had a wicked communication by the way. Here I will take occasion to move
your grace that such men as shall be put to death may have learned men to give
them instruction and exhortacion.

For the reverence of God when they be put to execution, let them have
instructours, for many of them are cast away for lack of instruction, and die
miserably for lack of good preaching This woman (I say) as she went by the
way, had wanton and folysh talk, as this, that if good fellows had kept touch
with her she had not been at this time in that case. Christ says: Memores
estote vxoris Loath. Remember Lothes wife. She was a woman that would not be
content with her good Lots wife is our exam ple to content our sell ues with our
state.
state, but wrestled with Gods calling, and she was for that cause turned into
a salt stone, and therefore the scripture does name her as an example for us to
take heed by. Ye shall se also in the second Chapter, how yt God almighty spared
not a number of his Angels, which had sinned against him to make them examples
to us to beware by. He drowned the whole world The (...) drowned, (...) and Go
morbrent.
in the time of Noe and destroyed for sin yt Cities of Sodom and Gomor. And
why? fecit cos exemplum its qui impi forent acturi He made them an example to
them that would do wyckedly in time to come. If God would not spare them,
think ye he will favor us? I will go on a word or two, in the application of
the parable and then I will make an end. To what end, and to what purpose,
brought Christ this parable of yt wicked Judge? The end is, that we should be
continually in prayer. Prayer is never interrupte but by wyckednes. We must
To what end the pacable of the (...) Judge tends.
therefore walk orderly, vpryghtly, calling upon God in all our troubles, and
aduersityes, and for this purpose there is not a more comfortable lesson in all
yt scripture, the^ here now in the lappynge up of the matter. Therefore I will
open it unto you. You miserable people, if there be any here a (...) you, that
are oppressed with great men and can get no (...), I speak for your comfort, I
will open unto you, whyther To whom in distress and oppression we shall resort.
ye shall resort, when ye be in any distres. His good will is ready, always at
hand, when so ever we shall call for it. And therefore he calls us to him
self. We shall not doubt if we come to him. Mark what he says to cause us
believe that our prayers shall be heard: Et deus non faciet vindictam, he reasons
after this fashion: Will not GOD (says he) revenge his elect, and hear them?
seeing the wicked Judge heard the wydowe? He seems to go plainly to work,
he wills us to pray to God, and to none but to god. We have a manner of
reasonynge in the scooles, and it is called A minore ad maius from the less to
the more, and that may be used here. The indge was a tirant, a wicked man, God
is a patron, a defe^der An argument from the less to the more.
father unto us. If the judge then, being a tirant would hear the poor widow,
much more god will hear us in all distresses He being a father unto us, he will
hear us sooner, then the other being no father having no fatherly affection.
Moreover, God is naturally merciful. The Judge was cruel, and yet he healped
the wyddowe, much more then will God help us at our need. He says by the
oppressed: Cum ipso sum in tribulatione. I am with him in his trouble. His
tribulation is mine. I am touched with this trouble. If yt Judge the^ being a
cruel manne heard the wyddow, much more GOD will healpe us, being touched
with our affliction. Furthermore, this Judge gave the wyddowe no commandment
to come to him, we have a commandment to resort to God, for he We have a
commandment to resort to God
says: Inuoca me in die tribulationis, call upon me in the day of thy
tribulacions, which is as well a commandment, as Non furaberis, thou shall
not steal. He that spoke the one, spoke the other, and what soever he be that
is in trouble, and calls not upon God, breaks his commandment. Take heed
therefore, the Judge did not promise the wyddow help, God promised us help,
and will he not perform it? He will, he will. The Judge (J say) did not promise
the widow help, God will give us both hearing and helpyng. He has promised it
us with a double oath, Amen, amen, says he, verily, verily, he doubles it.
Quecunque pecieritis. etc. what so ever ye shall ask in my name, ye shall have
it. And though he put of some sinner for (...), and suffer him to byte on the
bridle, to prove him (for there be many begynners, but few continuers in
prayer) yet we may not think that he has forgotten us, and will not help us.
Veniens veniet, non tardabit. When the help is most nedeful, then he will come
and not tarry. He knows when it shall be best for us to have help, though he
tarry, he will come at the last. I will trouble you but half a quarter of an
hour, in the application of the parable, and so commit you to God.

What should it mean that God would have us so diligent Why God would (...) us
to be (...) gent and earnest in prayer.
and earnest in prayer? Has he such pleasure in our works? Many talk of
prayer, and make it a lyp labouryng. Praying is not bablyng, nor praying is not
monkery. It is to miserable folk that are oppressed, a comfort, solace, and a
remedy. But what makes our prayer to be acceptable to God? It lies not in
our power, we must have it by an other mean. Remember what God said of his
son: (...) est filius meus dilectus, in quo mibi been complacui. This is my
dear son, in whom I delight. He has pleasure in nothing but in him. Why
(...) prayer is (...) ceptable to God.
How comes it to pass that our prayer pleases God? Our prayer pleases God,
because Christ pleases God. When we pray, we come unto him, in the
confidence of Christ's merits, and thus offering up our prayers, they shall be
heard for Christ's sake. Yea, Christ will offer them up for us, that offered up
once his Sacrifice to God, which was acceptable, and he that comes with any
other mean then this, God knows him not. This is not the (...), the Popyshe
Sacrifice to stand at the altar, and offer up Christ again. Dute upon it
that ever it was used. I will not say nay, but that ye shall (...) in the old
Doctors this word Sacrificium, but there is one general solution for all the
doctors that Saint Augustine shows us. The sign of a thing has often times
the name of the thing that it signifies. As One solucion for all.
the Supper of the Lord is the Sacrament of an other thing, it is a
commemoration of his death which suffered once for us, and because it is a
sign of Christ's offering up, therefore he bears the name thereof. And this
Sacrifice a woman ca^ offer as well as a man. Yea, a poor woman in the belfry
has as good authority to offer up this sacrifice, as has the bishop in his
pontificalibus, with his myter on his head, his (...) on his (...), and
Sandales on his feet. And whosoever comes asking the father remedy in his
necessity for Christ's sake, he offers up as acceptable a sacrisice as any by
shop can do. And so to make an end. This must be done with a constaunt
faith, and a sure confidence in Christ. Faith fayeth, fayeth, We are undone
for lack of fayeth. Christ names Faith is altogether.
Faith here, Faith is altogether. When the son of man shall come, shall he
synde Faith on the earth? Why speaks he so much of Faith? because it is
hard to find a true faith. He speaks not of a political faith, a faith
set up for a time, but a constant a permanent, a durable faith as durable as
Gods word. He came many times. First in the time of Noe, when he preached, but
he found little faith. He came also when Let preached, when he destroyed Sodoms
Gomora, but he found no faith. And to be short he shall come at the later day,
but he shall (...) a little faith. And I wene the day be not far of. When he
was here carnallye, did he synde any faith? Many speak of faith, but few there
be that has it. Christ mourns the lack of it. He complayneth that when he
came, he found no faith.

This Faith is a great State, a Lady, a Duchess, a great Faith is a (...) state
(...) a duchess
woman, and she has ever a great company and train about her (as a noble
Estate ought to have.) First she has a Gentleman (...) that goes before her,
and where he is not, there is not Lady Faith. This Gentleman Usher is Knowledge
of syn is ge^tlema^ usher to Lady Faith.
called Agnitio peccatorum, knowledge of sin, when we enter (...) our heart,
and acknowledge our faults, and stand not about to defend them. He is none of
these wynckers, he kyckes not when he hears his fault. Now as the Gentleman
Usher goes before her, so she has a train that comes behind her, and yet
though they come behind, they be al of Faythes company, they are all with
her, as Christ when he counter faited a State going to Jerusalem, some went
before him, and some after, yet all were of his company. So al these wait upon
Faith, she has a great train after her, besides her Gentleman Usher, her
whole household, and those be the works of our vocation, when every man
(...) what vocation he is in, what calling he is in, and does the works of
the same, as to be good to his neighbor, to obey God. etc.

This is the train that follows Lady Faith, as for an example: A faithful
Judge has first an heavy reckonyng of his fault, repenting him self of his
wyckednes, and then for saketh his iniquity, his impietye, fears no man,
walks vpryght, and he that does not thus, has not Lady Faith, but rather a
boldness of sin, and abusing of Christ's passion. Lady Faith is no (...).
Lady Faith is never without her Gentleman Usher, nor without her train, she
is no Anckres, she dwells not alone, she is never a private woman, she is never
alone. And yet many there be that boast them selves that they have Faith, and
that when Christ shall come, they shall do well enough. Nay, nay, these that be
faithful shall be so few, that Christ's shall scarce see them. Many there be
that runs (says Saint Paul,) but there is but one that receives the
reward. It shall be with the multitude when Christ shall come, as it was in
the time of Noe, and as it was in the time of Lot.

In the time of Noe, they were eating and drynkyng, buyldyng and plantyng, and
sodaynely the water came upon them, and drowned them. In the time of Lot also,
they were eating and drynckyng. etc. And sodaynlye the (...) camme upon them,
and denoured them. And now we are eating and drinking. There was never such
buylding then, as is now, plantyng, nor marying. And thus it shall be even when
Christ shall come, at judgment. Is eating and drincking and mariyng, reproved
in scripture? Is it not? (...) he reproves not al kind of eating and drinking,
he must be other wise under standed. If the scripture be not truly expounded,
what is more erroneous? And though there be co^play What eating and drinking is
allowed, and what is discommended.
(...) of some eating or drinking in the scripture, yet he speaks not as
though al were naught. They may be well ordered, they are Gods allowaunce, but
to eat and drink as they did in Noes (...), and as they did in Lothes (...):
This eating and drinking, and marying is spoken against. To eat and drink in
the forgetfulness of Gods commandment, voluptuously, in excess and glotonnie,
this (...) of What kind of marying is reproved worthily. Stealing of wards, nay
rather of lands.
eating and drinking is naught, when it is not done moderatly, soberly, and
with all circumspection. And like wise to marry, for fleshly lust, and for their
own fantasy. There (...) never such marriyng in England, as is now. I hear
telof stealyng of wards to mary their children to. This is a strange kind of
stealing, but it is not the wards, it is the lands that they steal. And some
there be that knyt up maryages to gether not for any love or Godliness in the
parties, but to get An other kind of ma riage.
frendshyp, and make them strong in the realm, to increase their possessions
and to (...) land to land. And other (...) be that enuegle men's daughters, in
the contempt of their The inueglers of men's daughters are noted. The parents
which forese their children to mar ry who^ they love not.
Fathers, and go about to marry them without their consent. This marriyng is
ungodly. And many parents constrayne their sons and daughters to marry where
they love not, and some are beaten and compulsed. And they that marry thus,
marry in a forgetfulness and (...) of Gods commandments. But as in the time
of No, suddenly a clap fell in their bosoms: so shall it be with us at the
latter day when Christ shall come. We have as (...) conscience as may be, and
when he shall come, he shall lack Lady Faith, well is them that shall be of
that little A day will (...) shall (...) for all.
flock, that shall be set on the right hand. etc.

I have troubled you long, partly being out of my matter, partelye being in.
But (...) I (...) make an end. I began with this text Quecunque scripta sunt.
et c. So will I end now for (...) own ease, as an old truant with this
sentence. Beati qui audiunt verbum dei. et c. Blessed are they that hear the
word of God, and keeps it. I told you in the (...) blessedness com meth of
(...) keeping.
beginning of this parable of Been. Nil melius quam letari et fatere. If I had
ceased there, all had been well (quod the merye Monk) so blessed are they that
hear the word of God. But what follows? and keep it. Our blessedness comes
of the keeping. It hanges all on the end of the tale, in crediting and
assenting to the word, and followyng of it. And thus we shall begin our
bessednes here, and at the length we shall come to the blessyng that never shall
have end, which God grant both you and me.

Amen.
The fyft Sermon of Master Hugh (...), which he preached before King Edward,
the. v. day of April.
Quecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Romans xiiii.

A (...) things that are written, they are written to be our doctrine. What
doctrine is written for us in the parable of the Judge, and the wid dowe, I
have opened it to you (most honorable audience) Something as concerning the
Judge I would wyshe and pray, that it might be a little better kept in
memory, that in the seat of Justyce, no more iniquity and vnryghtousnes
might raygne. Better a little well kept, then a great deal forgotten, I would
the Judges would take forth their lesson, that there might be Let up (...).
no more miquitye used, nor brybe taking, for if there shall be brybing, they
know the peril of it, they know what shall follow. I would also they should
take an era^ple of this Judge that did say, not that that he thought him
self, but our savior Christ puttes him to say that thing, that (...) hid
unto (...) self. Wherefore I would ye should keep in memory, how vnscarcheable
a man's heart is: I would ye should remember the fall of the Angles, and beware
thereby, the fall of the old world, and beware thereby, the fall of Sodom and
Gomora, and beware thereby. The fall of Lothes wife, and beware thereby. I would
not that miserable folk should forget The argument of the (...) judge should
induce us to prayer.
the argument of the wicked Judge, to induce them to prayer, which argument is
this. If the Judge being a tyrant, a cruel man, a wicked man, which did not
call her to him, made her no promise nor in herying nor helpyng of her cause,
yet in the end of the matter for the importunities sake did helps her: muchmore
almighty God which is a Father who bears a fatherlye affection, as the Father
does to the child, and is naturally merciful, and calls us to him with his
promise that he will hear them that call upon him, that (...) in distres and
burdened with adversity. Remember this. You What may be wrought by prayer.
know where to have your remedy. You by your prayer can work great effycacy,
and your prayer with tears is an instrument of great efficacy. It can bring
many things to pass. But what thing is that that makes our prayer acceptable
What makes our prayers acceptable to God.
to God? is it our babbling: No, no, It is not our babbling nor our long prayer.
There is an other thing the^ it. The dignyty and worthynes of our words, is of
no such virtue. For whosoever (...) unto God, not in the confidence of his own
merits, but in the sure. trust of the deserving of our Savior Jesus Christ,
and in his passion. Whosoever does inuocat Our prayer pleseth god for christ's
sake.
the father of heaven, in the trust of Christ's merits, which offering is the
most comfortable and acceptable offering to yt Father. Whosoever I say offers
up Christ which is a perfect offering, he can not be denied the thing he
desires, so that it be expedient, for him to have it. It is not the babbling of
our lyppes, nor dignity of our words, but yt prayer of the heart, is the
offering that pleases, through the only means of his son. For our prayer
profits us because we offer Christ to his Father. Whosoever resorteth to God
with out Christ, he resorteth in vain. Our prayer pleases, because Faith is
al.
of Jesus Christ, whom we offer. So that it is faith, faith, faith is the
matter. It is no prayer that is without faith it is but a lip laboring, and
mockery without faith. It is but alytle bablyng. I speak also of lack of
faith and upon (...) of the (...) of (...) world.
that also I said, the end of the world is near at hand. For there is lack of
faith now. Also the defection is come and swaruing from the faith. Antichrist
the man of sin the son of iniquity is (...), (...) latter dai is at hand.
Let us not think his coming is far of. But when so ever he comes he shall
find iniquity enough, let him come when he will. What is As much wyckednes
used in our time, as ever was in the time of Noe.
now behind? we be eating and drincking as they were in Nocs (...), and
mariyng I think as wyckedly as ever was. We be building, purchasing, planting
in the contempt of Gods word. He may come shortly when he will, for there is so
much mischife and swaruing from the faith (rayning now in (...) days) as ever
was in any age. It is a good warning to us al to make ready against his
coming. This little rehearsal I have made of the things I spoke in my last
sermon. I (...) Master Latimer retur neth to his former que stion, and to yt
dissolucion of the same Whether Gods people may be governed by a king or no.
now for this day return to my question and dissolve it, whether Gods people
may be governed by a governor that bears the name of a king or no. The Jews
had a law yt when they should have a king they should have him according to
the election of God, he would not leave the election of a king to their own
brains. There be some busy brains, wanton wits, yt say, the name of a king
is an odious name and wrieth this text of the scripture: where God seems to be
angry and displesed with the Israelites for asking a king (...) it very evil
and odiously. As who would say a King were an odious thing. I coming riding
in my way, and calling to remembrance wherefore I was sent, that I must
preach; and preach before the Kings Majesty: I thought it mete to i. Reg.
viif.
frame my preaching according to a King. Musyng of this, I remembered my self
of a book that came from Cardinal Dur preching must be accordig to yt (...)
before who^ we preach.
(...), Master. Poole the Kings traitor, which he sent to the Kings Majesty
I never remember that man, me think, but I remember him with a heavy heart, a
wytty man, a learned man, a man of a noble house, so in favor that if he had
tarried in the Reame, and would have (...) him self to the Kings proceedinges,
I heard say, and I believe it verily, that he had been Bishop of (...) at this
day. To be a bidden by, he would have done much good in that part of the
Realm. For those quarters have all ways had great need of a learned man, and
a preaching prelat. A thing to be much lamented that such a man should take
such a way. I hear say he reads much Saint Ieromes works, and is well seen
in them. But I would he would follow saint (...), where he expounds this
place of scripture. Exite de illa popule meus. Almighty God says: Get you from
it, get you from Rome, he calls it, the purple whore of Babylon. It had Rome is
ca led of (...) ye purple whore of Babylon
been more commendable to go from it, then to come to it. What his sayings be
in his book, I donot well remember, it is in the farthest end of my memory. He
declares him self in it, to have a corrupt judgment, I have but a glymmering,
of it, yet in gencrally I remember the scope of it. He (...) about to dissuade
the king from his supremicy. In his persuasions The scope or state of the
book, tendes to diswade yt king from his supremacy.
he is very homely, very quick and sharp with the King as these Cardinals will
take well upon them. He says that a King is an odious word, and touched the
place how God was offended with the Israelites for calling for a King. Uerye
lightly he seems to set forth the title of a king. As though he should mean:
what is a King? What should a King take upon him to redress matters of
religion? It pertayncth to our holy father of Rome. A King is a name and a
title rather suffered of God as an evil thing, the^ allowed as a good thing.
Calling this to remembrance it was an occasion that I spoke altogether before.
Now I will answer to this. For the answcr I must somewhat ryppe the eyghte
chapter of the first book of the Kings. And that I may have grace. etc.

TO com to the opening of this matter. I must begin at yt chapter. That the
unlearned (although I am sure, here be a great many well learned) may the better
com to the understanding of the matter: Factum est cum senuisset Samuel (...).
Reg. (...)
fecit filios suos iudices populo. etc. It came to pass when Samuel was
strycken in age, he made his sons Judges over Israel. Of Samuel, I might
fetch a process a far of, of the Such as use unlawful diuorcementes.
storye of Elcana, who was his Father, and who was his Mother. Elcana his
Father had two wives, Anna and Phenenna, and did not put them away, as men do
now a days. There was debate between these two wives. Phenenna in yt doing of
sacrifice, embrayded Anna by cause she was barren, and not fruitful. I might
take here occasion to entreat of the duty between manne and wife, which is a
holy relygyon, but (...) of ba ren made frutful, and mother to Samuel.
not religiously kept. But I will not cnter into that matter at this time.
Well, in process of time, God made (...) fruitful through her devout prayer.
She brought forth Samuel, who by the ordinance of God, was made the high
priest. Father Samuel a good man, a singular example, and singular patcon, a
man alone, few such men as father Samuel was. To be Samuel be yng aged chose
to him two Suffra ganes, to as (...) him in (...) office.
short he was now come to age, he was an old man an impotent man, not able to
go from place to place to minister justice, (...) elected and chose two
suffragans, two coadiutours, two cohelpers, I mean not hallowers of belles, nor
Christiners of belles (that is a popish (...)) he made them to healp him, to
discharge his office, he chose his two sons rather the^ other, because he
knew them to be well brought up in virtue, and Why (...) chose his own. 2. sons
rather then any other. Samuel te^ dred yt ease of his people A third lord
President would do well.
learning. It was not for any carnal affection, he cared not for (...)
renown, or revenues, but he appointed the^ for the case of the people, the
one for to supply his place in Bethsabe, and the other in Bethlem. As (...)
have now in England, for the wealth of the Realm, two Lords presidentes.
Surely, it is weldone, and a goodly order, I would there were a third in an
other place. For the ease of his people, good Father Samuel, and to discharge
his office in places where he could not come him self, he set his two sons
in office with him, as his suffragaynes, and as his Coadiutours. Here I might
take occasion to treat what old and impotent Bishops should do what old
preachers should do, when they come to impotency, What the impotent and old
bishops should do.
to join with them preachers preachers, not Belhalowers, and to depart, part
of their living with them. I might have dilated this matter at large. But I am
honestely prevented of this commune place, and I am very glad of it. It was
very well There ar to many such (...) feders.
handeled the last Sunday. They that will not for the office sake receive other,
regard more the flese then the flock. Father Samuel, regarded not his
revenues. Our Lord give the^ grace to be affected as he was, and to follow him.
etc. Though I say (...).
that I would wysh mo Lord presidentes. I mean not that I would have prelates
Lords presidentes, nor that Lord Bishops should be Lord presydentes. As
touching that, I said my (...) M. (...) would not have Bishops and prelates
Lord presidentes The office of a president ship is a civil office.
and (...) the last year. And although it is said, (...), it is not meant that
they should be Lord presidentes, the (...) of a presidentship is a (...)
office, and it can not be, that one man shall discharge both well. It follows
in the text Non (...) filii eius in (...) eius. etc. His sons walked not in his
ways, hear is the matter, here ye se the goodness of Samuel, how, when he was
not able to take the pains him self, for their own ease, he appointed them
Judges nere unto them, as it were in the further parts of his Realm, to have
Justice ryghtly ministered. But what followed? Though Samuel were good, and his
children well brought up, look what the world can do? Ah crafty The world will
corrupt and deceive us or we be ware.
world. Whom shall not this world corrupt and deceive at one time or other?
Samuel thought his sons should have (...) well, but yet Samuels sons walked
not in their Fathers way. Why? what then? Is the son always bound to walk
in the fathers way? No ye must not take it for a general rule. The son is not
always bound to walk in the Fathers ways.
Al sons are not to be blamed, for not walking in their Fathers ways.
Ezechias did not follow the steps of his Father Ahaz, and was well allowed in
it. Josias the best king that ever was in Iewry, reformed his fathers ways,
who walked in worldly (...). In his youth, he took away all Idolatry, and 4.
Reg. 18.
purdged his Realm of it, and set a good order in all his Dominions, wrestled
with Idolatry. And although his Father or 4. Reg. 22. and. 23.
his grand Father Manasses (it makes no matter whether) repented him in the
end, he had no time to refourm things, he He was but eight years old when he
began to (...).
left it to his son to be done. Josias began and made an alteracion in his
chyldhood, he turned al vpsydowne, he would suffer no Idolatry to stand.
Therefore, you must not take it for a general rule, yt the son must ever walk
in his fathers wales. Here I will rcnew, that which I said before of the (...)
Jews, the rebellyouse people (that is their title) they never We are more
styfnecked mor rebellious and sturdier the^ the Ielves. This is no rule to
reckon upon.
spoke so rebelliouslye, as to say, they would not receive any alteracion, till
their King came to age. Much less we Englysh men (if there be any such in
England) may be ashamed. I wonder with what consience (...) can bear such
things, and allow it. This Josias made an notable alteracion, and therefore
take it not for a general rule, that the (...) shall always walk in his
Fathers ways. Think not because he was slain (...) battle, that God was
displeased with him. For herein God Josias was slain in (...) tail of Pharao
(...) king of Egypt at Ma (...).
showed his goodness to him wonderfully, who would not suffer him to se the
captivity that he would bring upon the (...) He would not him to have yt sight,
the feelyng, and the beholding of his plage, he suffered him to be taken a may
before, and to be slain of the King of Egypt. Wherefore a just man must be glad
when he is taken from misery, (...) si morte preoccupatus fuerit in retrigerio
erit. If a just man be prevented with death, it shall 4. Reg (...).
be to his relief. He mustthynke that he is one of those, whom the world is
not worthy to (...), it came of a singular goodness of God, that he was by
death delivered from the sight of that captivity. Therefore take it not for a
general rule, that the sons he always bound to walk in the Fathers ways.
Nolite in pre ceptis patrum uestrorum incedere. Walk not in the
commandments of your fathers. For so it is said in an other place of
scripture. It is spoken to the reproach of Samuels sons that they walked not
in his way, for he was a good man. A wonderful thing that these children being
so well brought up should so fall and be corrupt. If the devil can prevail and
has power Authority and office tries what a man is.
against them, that had so Godly education, what vauntage has he at them that
be brought up in iniquity and covetousness? It is a Proverb that magistratus
virum commonstrat. Office and authority shows what a man is. A man knows
not him This has been often times vere fied and seen in prechers before they
were Bysho pes (...) been ficed.
self, till he be tried. Many there be that being with out office, can rebuke
magistrates, and find fault with men that be in office and preeminence. After
when it comes to their chance to come to office them selves, then they have
taken out a new lession, eum essem peruulus sapiebam vt paruulus. When I was a
child, I sauered as a child. They will do then, as other men do, they are
come too have experience, too be practisioners.

The maids child is cuer best taught, for he that stands vpryght Do as the
most do and the fewest shall wonder at them.
in office, he is the fellow. Samuel would never (...) thought that his (...)
should have been so corrupted. It is a perilous thing, a dangerous state to be
a Judge. They felt the smaker of this world, a perilous thing. And therefore
Chrisostom says. Miror si aliquis rectorum saluabitur. I maruayle The state of
a Judge is (...)-rous.
(says he) that any ruler can be saved. If the peril were well considered,
men would not be so desirous as they be: The world the world has many subtle
sleightes, it is a cratly thing and very deceitful, a corrupter, and who is it
whom the world does not corrupt and blind at one time or other? What was the
way they walked Declinauerunt post auaritiam. That is one. They stouped after
gaynes, turned aside after lucre. What followed Acceperunt munera. They took
rewards, gifts, They call them (...) but bryhes they are. The (...) genealogy
the (...) of (...).
(...) (I should call them) for that is their right name. Per nerterunt
iudicium. They turned Justice vpsedown. Either they would give wrong judgment,
or else put of and delay poor men's matters. These were their ways, here is the
Deuilles genealogye. Agradacion of the Deuitles making. This, scala inferni.
The ladder of hell. I told you before of, scala celi. The ladder of heaven, I
would yon should not forget it. The steps (...), are set forth in the tenth
to ye Romans. The (...) is preaching, then hearing, then believing, and last of
al Salvation. Scala celi Preaching Hearing Beleuyng and salvation.
is a preachinge matter I tell you, and not a massyng matter, Gods instrument
of salvation, is preaching. Here I move you my Lords, not to be greed ye and
outragiouse in enhaunsyng, and caysing of your centes, to the minishyng of the
office of salvation. It would pyty a man's heart to hear that, that I hear The
study of (...) decayed in Cambrige.
of the state of Cambrige, what it is in Drford I can not tell. There be few do
study divinity, but so many as of necessity must furnysh the Colleges. For
their liuinges be so small, and victayles so dear, that they tarry not there,
but go other where to seek liuinges and so they go about. Now there be a few
gentylmen and they study a little divinity. Alas what is that? Englysh (...). A
reasonable (...).
it will com to pass that we shall have nothing but a little Englysh divinity,
that will bring the Realm into a very barbarousnes, and utter decay of
learning, It is not that (...), that will keep out the supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome. Here I will make a supplycation, that ye would bestow so much to the
finding of scholars, of good wits, of poor men's sons, to exercise the
office of salvation, in reliuing of scholars, as ye were Where up pon we may be
stow our goods well and please God well.
wont to (...) in pilgrimage matters, in trentals, in masses, in pardons, in
purgatory matters. Ye bestowed that lyberally, bountefully, but this was not
well spent. You had a zeal, but not secundum scientiam, not according to
knowledge. You may be sure if you (...), your goods on this wise, ye shall (...)
it well to support and uphold gods word, wherein ye shall please God. I require no
more, but that ye bestow so much Godly, as (...) were (...) to bestow ungodly.
It is a reasonable peticion, for Gods sake, look upon it, I say no more. There
be none now They (...) have least need (...) most help.
but great men's sons in Colleges, and their Fathers look not to have them
preachers, so every way this office of preaching is pinched at. I (...) speak
no more of scala celi. But I am sure this is (...) inferni, the right way to
hell, to be covetous, to take brybes, and pervert justice. If a judge should
ask me yt The (...) way down to the (...) in hell.
way to hell, I would show him this way. First let him be a couetouse man, let
(...) heart be poisoned with covetousness. Then let (...) go a little further and
take brybes, and last peruerte judgment. Loo, here is the mother and the
daughter, and the daughters daughter. Avarice is the mother, she brynges (...)
taking, and bribetaking, peruertyng of iugment. A tiburn tipit for bribe takers
and peruerters of judgment.
There lackes a fourth thing to make up yt mess, which so God help me (...) I
were judge should be Hangum tuum, a tiburne typpet to take with him, and it
where the Judge of the Kings (...), my Lord chief Judge of England, yea, and
it The wydow that was inprise^ There should be curates of prisons.
were my Lord Chancelour him self, to tiburne with him. There was with in
these. xxx. years a certain widow which, suddenly was attached, had to
prison, (...), (...), (...) there were certain learned men that visited her in
the prison. Oh I would ye would resort to Prisons. A co^ntendable thing in a
(...) Realm, I would wyshe there were Curates for prisons, that we might say,
the Curat of Newgate, the Curat A holy day work to vpsit the prisoners.
of the Flete, and I would have them well waged for their labor. At is a holy
day work to vyset the prisoners, for they be kept from sermons. There was
that resorted to this woman, who, when she came to prison, was all on her
beads, and nothing The woman trurned from papistry by the dilligent resort of
yt learned frequenting the prison.
else, a popish woman, and sauered not of Jesus Christ. In process she was so
applied that she (...) Quam suauis est dominus. She had such a savior, such a
swetenes and felyng that she thought it long to the day of execusion. She was
with Christ already, as touching faith. She had such a desire that she said
with saint Paul, Cupio dissolui et esse cum (...). I desire to be ryd, and to
be with Christ. The word of God had so wrought in her. When she was brought to
punishment, she desired to confess her fault, she took of her death, that she
was giltlesse in that thing she suffered for, and her neighbors would have
(...) her wytnes in the same. She was always an bonest (...) woman, her
neighbors would have gone on her purgacion a great way. They would needs have
her confess, then says she. I am not gylty, would ye have (...) to make me
gilty, where I am not? (...) for all this, she was a trespasser, she had von a
great oftence. But before I go forward with this, I must first tell you a tale.
I heard a good while ago, a tale of one (I saw the man that told me the tale
not long ago in this auditory.) A rich mar chaunt cast into the Ca (...)
He has traueiled in (...) countries then one. He told me that there was once
a pretour in Rome, Lord (...) of Rome, a Rych man one of the richest
merchants in all the Cyty, and sodaynely he was cast in the castle Aungel. It
was heard of, and every man, whispered in an others ear. What has he done?
Has he killed any man? No. Has he meddled with (...), (...) holy fathers
marchaundice? No. Has he counterfayted our holy Fathers Bulls? No. For these
were hye treasons. (...) an other in the ear and sayid: Erat Dives. He was a
rych man, A great fault. Here was a goodly pray for that holy Father. It was in
Pope Julius time, he was a great warrior. This pray would help him to
maintain his wars, a jolly pray for our holy Father. So this woman was
Diuet. A Gentleman of a (...) nose.
She was a rych woman, she had her lands by the (...). He was a Gentelman of
along nose. Such a cup, such a cover. She would not depart from her own. This
Shyriffe was a couetuouse man, a worldly man. The Judge at the enpanelyng of
the quest, had his grane looks, and charged them with this. It was the Kings
matter, look well upon it. (...) (...) of the (...).
it makes for their purpose, they have the King yt King in their mouths. Well,
somewhat there was, there was walkyng of angels between them. I would wish
that of such a Judge in (...) now, we might have yt skin hanged up. It were a
goodly sign yt sign of the judges skin. It should be Lots wife, to all
Judges that should follow after. By this ye may perceive, it is possible for a
man to answer for him self, and be arrained at A (...), and (...) have (...),
and be (...), (...).
the (...), and nevertheless to have wrong. Yea, ye shall have it in form of
law, and yet have wrong to. So it is possible, in a case, for a man that has
in his absence ataintement, to have right, and no wrong. I will not say nay,
but it is a good law for a man to answer for him self, this is reasonable,
alowable and good. And yet such an urgent cause may be, such a (...) to a
commune wealth, that a man may rightly (...) (...) in (...) absence. There be
such causes that a man (...) in his absence be condemned, but not often, except
they be such cases that the reason of the general law may be kept. I am
(...) of some to (...) this law, but I am not able, so it be but for a time,
and upon wayghty consideracions, so yt it be used rarely, seldomly, for
avoiding distrubaunce in the commune wealth, such an epiky and moderacion may
be used in it. And nevertheless it is very mete and cequisite that a man should
answer for him self. We must cs^ider the ground The (...) of yt law is the
soul of the (...).
of the law: for Ratio legis, anima legis, the reason of the law is the soul
of the law. Why? what is the reason and end of the law? It is this, that no
man should be injured. A man may in his attayntment have no more wrong done
him, then if he answered for him self. Ah then I am not able to say, that in
no wise, an arrainement may be (...) into attaintement. A man may have wrong
(and that in open judgment) and in form of law, and yet allowed to answer for
him self, and even so is possible he may have (...), though he (...) answer
for him self. I will not say but that the parliament houses both How we must
take yt doings of the parliament.
hye and low may err, and yet they may (...) well, and christen subjects
must take al things to the best, and expound their doings well, al though
they can not yield, a reason for it, except their proceedinges be manifestly
wicked. For though they can not attain to se for what purpose things he don,
it is no good (...) that they (...) called euel don therefore. And is this a An
(...) argument.
good argument, he is not allowed to answer for him self in this place or yt
place, where he (...) apoint: Ergo, he is not allowed to answer for him self?
No. He might have answered yt best he could for him self before a great many,
and have had mo to if he had required the^. Yea, and was comau^ded upon his
allegia^ce to speak for himself and to make answer, but he would not, needs he
would (...) out to judgment, and appointed yt place him self. A man yt answers
for himself at yt bar, is not allowed his man of law to answer for him, but he
must answer him self. Yet in the parliament, although he were not there him
self, any friend he Fre liberty is granted to speak in the Parlia meant (...)
bad, had liberty to answer for him, frank, and fre, I know of the old manner.
The tenoure of the writtes is this. Every man to spoke the best he knows of
his conscience, for the (...) Majesty's honor, and the wealth of the (...).

There were in the Parliament in both houses, a great many learned men,
conscionable men, wise men. When that man was attainted there, and they had
liberty, there to say nay, to his attayntment if they would. Sure I am the most
allowed it, or else it could not have gone forward. These premises considered,
I would have you to bear such a heart, as it becomes Christen (...). I know
what men say of me well enough, I could purge my (...). There is that prouokes
me to speak against this law of attaintment, they say I am not indifferent.
Surely I would have it to be done rarely upon some great respect to the common
wealth, for avoiding of greater tumult and peril. Saint Paul was allowed to
answer for him self, if Li (...) the tribune had not (...) him away from
showing ofhys Paul was a lowed to an swer for hiselfe.
matter, it had cost him his life. Where he was saved by (...) Magistrate,
being but a private man. Will ye not allow that some thing be done as well for
saving of the Magistrates life? It behoues them of the Parliament to look well
upon the matter. Acts. xix.
And I for my part think not but they did well, else I should not yield the duty
of a (...). Some liken me to (...) Shaw M. Latimer likned to doctor Shaw.
that preached at Paul's cross, that king Edwards sons were Bastardes. An easy
matter for one of the counsel to do as doctor Shaw did. Me think you being
the Kings servant and his officer, should think better on the King and his
Counsel, though I were light of belief. If he had been a true man to his
master, he would never have spoken it. The Counsel needs not my lie, for the
defense of that, that they do. I can bear it of my self. Concerning my
self, that which I have spoken, has done some good. You will say this: the
Parliament house are wiser then I am, you might leave them to yt defense of
them selves. Although the men of the Parliament house ca^ defend them selves,
yet have I spoken this of a good zeal, and a good (...), I take God to witness.
Use therefore your judgment and languages as it becomes Christian subjects.
I will now leave the honorable counsayl to answer for them selves.

He confessed one fact, he would have had the governance One fact co^ fessed
of the Admiral he would not have yt king brought up like a ward in his mino
rity.
of the Kings Majesty. And wot you why? He said he would not in his minority
have him brought up like a Ward. I am sure he has been brought up so godly,
with such Scoolemaysters, as never King was in England, and so has prospered
under them, as never none did. I wot not what he (...) by (...) bringing up
like a Ward, unless he would have him not to go to his book, and learn as he
does. Now woe woorthe him, yet I will not say so neither, but I pray God amend
him, or else God send him short life, that would have my soueraygne not to be
Kings should (...) learned.
brought up in learning, and would pluck him from his book. I advertise thee
therefore my fellow subject, use thy tongue better, and expound well the doings
of the Magistrates.

Now to the purpose, for these things let me of my matter. Some say Preachers
should not meddle with such matters, but did not our savior Jesus Christ meddle
with matters of judge Lady (...) is a chyldyng woman.
meant, when he spoke of the wicked Judge, to leave example to (...) that follow,
to do the same? Ye se here that Lady Covetousness is a fruitful woman, ever
chyldyng, and ever brynging forth her fruits. It is a true saying, radix
omnium (...) auaritia Covetousness is the root of al wickedness. One will say
(...), you speak unseemly, and (...), so to be against the officers, for
toking of rewards in doing pleasures. He yt (...) dear, must seltherafter
Ye consider not the matter to the bottom. Their offices be bought for great
sums, now how should they receive their money again, but by bribing, ye would
have them undone. Some of them gave. CC. pound, some. v. C. pound, some. (...).
M. pound. And how shall they gather up this money again, but by helping them
selves in their office. And is it so trow ye? Are ciuyl offices bought for
money? Lord God, who would have thought yt? Let us not be to hasty to credit
it. For then we have the old proverb, omnia venalia Rome, althinges are sold
for money at Rome, and Rome is come home to our own doors. If they (...),
they must needs sell, for it is wittely spoken: Vendere iure potest, emerat ille
prius, he may law (...) sell it, he bought it before. God forfend that ever
any such enormity should be in England, that (...) offices should be bought, and
sold, where as men should have them giurn them for their worthiness. I would the
kings Mete men, able and worthi to be put in office.
majesty should (...) through his (...) for mete men and able me^ worthy to be in
office, yea and give the^ liberally for their pains, and rather give them
money to take the office in hand, the^ they to give money for it. This bying of
offices is a making of brybery, It is a bribery to (...) offices.
it is an (...) and (...), and compelling of men to (...) bery. Holy scripture
(...) the officers, and (...) weth what (...) of men they should be and of what
qualities, Viros fortes Some (...) have viros (...). yt (...) translation has
it very well. Men of actiuityc that have stomakes to do their office, they must
not be milksops, nor white liuered kni ghtes, they must be wise, hearty, hardy,
men of a good stomach Secondarely, he qualifieth them (...) the fear of God.
He says they must be (...) deam, fearing God. For if he fear God, he shall be no
briber, no (...) of judgment, faithful. Thirdly they must be chose^ officers
in quibus est ueritas, in who^ is truth if (...) say it, it shall be (...).
Forthly, qui (...) auaritiam, hating (...) of offices for money.
(...), far from it. He will not come nere it yt hates it. It is not he yt will
give. v. C. (...). for an office. With these qualities gods wisdom would have
magistrates to be qualified. (...) comes from the devils consistory to pay. v.
C. li. for one office. If they pay so much, it must needs follow yt they take
bribes, yt they be (...). Such as be mete to bear office, seek them Godly and
meet men for offices, should be sought out, and liberallye (...).
out, hire them, give them co^petent and liberal fees that they shall not need
to take any bribes. And if ye be a selling (...) offices, ye ar as they which
sell their benefices, and so we shall have (...) uenalia, althings bought for
money. I mar (...) the ground gapes not and deuours us, howbeit we ought not to
marvel, surely it is yt great lenity of God yt suffers it. Oh Lord in what case
(...) we. If the great men in Turkey should use in their religion of (...), to
sell as our patrons commonly sell benefices here (yt Sellyng of offices, and sell
ling of been (...) is all one.
office of preaching, the office of salvation) it should be taken as an
intolerable thing, tho Turk would not suffer it in his com mon wealth. Patrons
be charged to se yt office don, and not to seek a lucre and a gayn by his
patronship. There was a patro^ in England (when it was) yt had a benefice fallen
into his hand, and a The Turk would not suffer that we do.
good brother of mine came unto him and brought him. xxx. apls in a dish, and
gave (...) his man to carry them to his master. It is like he gave one to his
man for his labor, to make up yt game and so there was. xxxi. This man comes
to his master and presented The patro^s duty in bestowinge of his (...)
him (...) the dish of apels, saying: Sir such a man has sent you a dish of
fruit, and desires you to be good unto him for such a benefice. (...), tush
(quoth he) this is no aple matter, I will none of his apels, I have as good as
these (or as he has (...)) in (...) own orchard. The man came to the priest
again, and told him A (...) of apls
what his master said. Then quod the (...) desire him yet to prove one of
(...) for my sake, he shall find them much better then they look for. He cut
one of them, and found. x. pieces of gold in it. (...) quod he, this is a good
apple. The priest standing not far of, hearing what the gentleman said, cried
out and (...), they are alone aples I warrant you sir they (...) al on one
(...), and have al one (...). Well, he is a good fellow, let him have it A graft
of gold to get a benefice with all, (...) woorthe a great deal of learning
The error of such as believe not the immortalitye of Souls.
quod yt patron. etc. Get you a (...) of this tree, and I warrant you it shall
stand you in better sted then al S. Paul's learning. Well let patrons take heed,
for they shall answer for all the souls yt perish through their defaut. There is
a saying yt there be a great many in England yt say there is no soul, yt believe
not in yt im mortality of man's soul, yt think it is not eternal, but like a
dogs soul, yt think there is neither heaven nor hell. Oh Lord, what a weighty
matter is this? What a lamentable thing in a Christen common wealth? I cannot
tell what they say, but I (...) their works yt they think so, or else they would
never do as they do. These sellers of offices show, yt they believe that there is
neither hell nor heaven. It is taken for a laughing mat ter, well, I will go on.
Now to the chapter. The children of Israel came to Samuel and said: Senuisti,
thou art grown into age give us a king. Thy sons walk not in thy ways. What a
beuines Samuel was (...) for the swar uing of (...) sons from his ways.
was this to father Samuels heart, to hear yt his sons (who^ he had so well
brought up) should swerve from his ways yt he had walked in. Father Samuel
goes to God to know his will and pleasure in this matter. God answered: let
them have a king. They have not cast the away but me, yt I should not reign
(...) them. This is their ground that say a king is anodious i. Sam. (...)
thing, and not acceptable before yt sace of God. Thus they force and A place
(...) lented and forced to serve for other purpose, the^ it was ever meant.
(...) this place (...) make for their purpose, where no such thing is meant.
Show yt Istaelites (says God) and testify to the^ a kings authority, and what a
hing is, and what a king will do. If yt will not persuade them, I will not hear
the^ hereafter, when they shall cry unto me. I must needs confess yt the Jews
trespassed against God in asking a king: but (...) is the matter, in what thing
their offense stood, whither absolutely in asking a king, Wherein yt intet of
the Jews (...) consist.
or in any other circumstance. It was in a (...). They said not, ask us a king
of God: but make us a king to judge us, as al other nations have. They would
have a king of their own swinge, and of their own (...), as though they past
The jews (...) in three (...)
not of God. In a another point there was pride. They would he like the Heathen,
and judges under kings as they (...). Thirdly, they offended God because they
asked a king to the (...) and wrong of good father Samuel to depose (...), so
(...) was a wrong toward Samuel. It was not with (...) and A comparison between
Samuel and his sons, and Ely and his sons.
his children, (...) and Phinies, like as with Elye and his children They were
cruel who with hokes taking the flesh out of the pottes when that sacrifice was
offered to God, brought yt people into a contempt of Gods word. They were
lecherers. Their sin were manyfestly and notoriously known: but their father
Ely knowing and hearing of it did blame the^, but Elys sons were leacherers
and mani fest offeders
nothing to the purpose, be did not earnestly and substancially chastise them,
and therefore he was (...) deposed of God. The sins of Samuels Sons were not
known, they were not so notorious, wherefore it was not (...) father Samuel as
it was with Elye, his sons fautes were taking of bribes, and perverting
Samuels sons were bribers, and peruerters of (...)
of judgments. Ye know that bribery is a secret faut, and therefore it was not
known. It was done under a (...) and a pretense of justice, hidly and covertly
done. Therefore because it stod in brybes it was not like in Samuel as in Ely.
It is a dangerous thing to be in office for qui attingit picem coinquinabitur
ab ea. He that medleth with pitch is like to be spotted (...) are like pitche.
with it. Bribes may be assembled to pitch, for even as pitch does polute their
hands that (...) with it: so brybes will bring you to perverting of justice.
Beware of pytch, you judges of the world, brybes will make you pervert justice.
Why, you will say. We touch none. No mary. But my Mistres your Anglice a
receiver of his masters bribes.
wife has a fine finger she touches it for you, or else you (...) a servant a
Muneribus, he will say, if you will come to my Master and offer him a yoke of
oxen, you shall speed never the worsse, but I think my Master will take none,
when he has offered them to the Master, then commes a another seruante and
says: If you will bring them to the Clarke of the kitchen, you shall be
remembered the better. This is a (...) fassio^ that will receive no money in their
hands but will have it put upon their A frierly fa shion in refusing of brybes,
a goodly rag of popish re (...).
sleues. A goodly rag of (...) religion. They be like gray friars they will not
be seen to receive no brybes them selves, but have other to receive for the^.
Though Samuels sons were (...) bribers and kept the thing very close, yet yt cry
of yt people brought it to Samuel. It was a hid kind of sin. For me^ in this
point would face it and brace it, and make a show of upright dealing, when they
be most gilty. Nevertheless this gear came out. Oh wicked sons yt brought both
their father to deposicion, and the^ selves to shame. When Samuel heard of
their fault, he went not about to excuse their fautes. He would not bear with
his sons, he would not communicare peccatis alienis, be partaker with his
sons of Samuel would not be partaker of his sons offenses.
fe^ces, he said: ego senui, ecce filii mei uobiscum sunt. As soon as he heard
of it, he delivered his sons to the people to be punished. He went not about
to excuse them, nor said not: this is the first time, bear with them, but
presented them by and by to the people saying: Lo here they be, take them, do
with them according to their deserts. Oh, I would there were no more bearers of
other men's syns, then this good father Samuel was. I heard of late of a notable
boodshed. Audio says S. Paul, and so do I. I know it not, but I hear of it.
There was a searcher in London, which executing his office, displeased a
merchant man, in so much, that when he was doing his office, they were at
words, the mar chant man threatened him, the searcher said, the king should not
lose his custom. The merchant goes me home and sharpes his woodknife, and
comes again and knockes him on the head and kyls him. They that told me the
tale, say it is wyncked at, they look through their fingers and will not se it.
Whether it be taken up with a pardon or no, I cannot tell, but this I am sure,
and if ye bear with such matters, the devil shall bear you away to hell.
Bloodshed and murder would have no bearing. It is a heinous thing bloudshedding
and especially voluntary murder, and (...) murder. For in (...) God says, it
poluteth the whole Bloodshed ding and prete^ sed murder would not be borne
with all.
realm. Poluitur illa terra. etc. et non potest expiari fine sanguine. The
la^d cannot be purged nor cleansed again til his blud be shed yt shed it. It is
the office of a king to see such murderers puni shed with death, non frustra
gest at gladiu^. What will you (...) of a king? he bears a swearde before him,
not a Pecockes fether. I go not about to styr you now to cruelty, but I speak
a against bearing of bloodshed. This bearing must be looked upon. In certain
causes of murder, such great circumstau^ces may be, that the king may pardon a
murder. But if I were worthy to be of counsel, or if I were asked mine advise,
I would not have the king to pardon a velu^tary murder, a pretensed (...)
there. I can tell where one man (...) an other in a townshyp, and was attached
upon the same, (...). men were impaneled, the (...) had friends, the Shriue
labored the bench, the. (...). men stack (...) it and said, except he would
disburs. (...). (...) they would find him gilty. Means were found that the.
(...). crowns was paid. The quest comes in and says not gilty. Here was not
gilty (...). (...). crowns. This is bearing, and some of the bench were hanged,
they were well served. This makes men bold to do murder and slaughter. We should
reserve murdering till we come to our enemies, and the king bid us fight. He
that would bestur him then, were a pretty fellow in deed. Crowns? If their
crowns Shauing of crounes.
were thauen to she shoulders, they were served well enough. I knew where a woman
was got with child, and was a shamed at the matter, and went into a secret
place, where she had no women The history of a woman.
at her travel, and was delivered of three children at a birth. She wroung
their necks, and cast them into a water, and so kylde her children. Suddenly
she was gaunt again, and her neighbors suspecting the matter, caused her to
be examined, and she granted al. Afterward she was rained at the bar for it,
and dispatched and found not gilty, through bearing offrienoes, and bribyng of
yt Judge. Where at the same Sessions another poor woman was hanged for stealing
a few rags of a hedge, yt were not worth a crown. There was a certain
gentleman, a professor of the word of God (he sped never the better for yt,
ye may be sure) The history of a Ge^tilman.
who was accused for murdering of a man, whereupon he was cast into prison. And
by chance as he was in prison, one of his friends came unto him for to visit
him, and he declared to his fre^d yt he was never gilty in the murdering of
the man. So he went his ways, the gentleman was arained and (...), and as he
went to his execution, he saw his friends (...), and said unto him: Commend me
to thy master, and I pray thee tell him, I am yt same man (...), I was when he
was with me. And if thou tarry a while, you shall se me die. There was suit made
for this ma^s par (...) may do somewhat for his fre^d, in a shiere, he may help
to hang up the gyltles.
don, but it could not be gotten. Belike the Shriues or some other bare him no
good will. But he died for it. And afterward I being in the Tower, having leave
to com to the Lieutena^ts table, I heard (...) say that there was a man hanged
afterward, yt killed the same man, for whom this Gentleman was put to death. O
lord what bearing, what bolstering of naughty matters is this in a Christen
realm? I desire your Majesty to reme die the matter, and God grant you to se
redres in this (...) in Au Apostro (...) to the king for rebres of lear ning
and (...) of naughty matters.
your own person. Although my Lord Protector, I dout not, and the rest of the
counsel do in the mean while, al yt lies in them to redres things I would
such as be rulers, noble men and masters should be at this point with their
servant to certify (...) this sort: If any man go about to do you wrong, I
will do my best to help you in your right. But if you break the law, you (...)
have justice. If ye will be ma^quellers, murderers, and transgressors, look
for no bearing at my hands. A strange thing. A godly aduertisment for (...)
men and masters, but I fear me it is to godly to be followed.
What need we in the vengeance to burden our selves with other men's syns? Have
we not syns ynowe of our own? What need have I to burden my self with other men's
syns? I have bur dens and. (...). heaps of syns. One heap of known syns, an
other of unknown (...). I had need to say: Ab occultis meis munda me domine, O
lord deliver me from my hidden and my unknown sins. The^ if I bear with other
men's sins, I must say: Deliver me from (...) men's syns. A strange saying: from
my other men's syns. Who bears with other folks offenses, he co^municateth with
other folks syns. Men have sins enough of their own, although they bear not
and bolster up other men in their noughtines, this bearing, this bolstering and
lookyng through their singers, is naught. What yt (...) hap should I (or any else)
increase my burden. My other men's sins forgive me O Lord. A strange
language, they have hyd syns of their own enough, although they bear not with
giltines of other men's syns. Oh father Samuel would not bear his own sons.
He offered his own sons to punishment, and said: Ecce filij (...) sunt, even at
the first time he said: Lo, here they be, I discharge my self, and take the^
unto you, and as for my part, presto su^ loqui corani domino et Christo eius. I
am here ready to answer for self my before the Lord and his anointed. Behold
here I am, record of me before the Lord, Vtrum cuiusquam bouem. etc. Whether I
have taken any man's Ox, any man's Ass, or whether I have don any man wrong, or
hurt any man, or taken any bribes at any man's hand. I can commend the English
translation yt does interpreate munera bribes, not gifts. They answered: nay
forsooth we know no such things in you. testis est mibi deus, says he, god is
witness, Quod nihil inuenieritis in manu mea, That you have found naught in my
hands. Few such Samuels are in England nor in the world. Why did Samuel this?
mary to purge him self, he was enforeced to it, for he was wrongfully deposed.

Then by this ye may perceive yt faut of the Jews, for they offended not God
in asking of a king, but for asking for a king to the wronging and deposition
of good father Samuel. (...) Samuels death the people had asked of God a king,
they had not faulted, but it is no small faut to put an innocent out of his
office. King David like wise commanded his people to be nambred, and there with
offended God grievously. Why? might he not know the number of his people? Yes,
it was not the (...) of the people that offended God, for a king may number
his people. But he did it of a pride, of an elation of mind, not according to
Gods ordinance, but as having a trust in yt number of his men, this offended
God. Likewise the Jews asked a king, and therewith they offended not God, but
they asked him (...) such circumstaunces, that God was offended with them. It
is no small fault to put a just man out ofhis office, and to depose (...)
unworthily. To choose a king contrarying the ordinance of God, is a casting a
way of God, and not of a king. (...) dout not, but the title of a king is a
lawful thing, is a lawful title, as ofother Magistrates. Only let the kings
take heed yt they do as it becomes kings to do, that they do their office
well. It is a great thing, a chargeable thing. Let them beware yt they do not
communicare peccatis alienis, that they bear not with o. there mcns fautes, for
they shall give a strait account for all that perishes through their negligence.
We perceive now what this text means. It is written in the last of Iudicum:
In diebus illis non erat rex in Israel, In those days there was no king in
Israel, every man did that which seemed right in his own eyes. Men were then
allowed to do what they would. When me^ may be allowed to do what they will, then
it is good to have no king at al. Here is a wonderful matter yt unpreaching
prelates should be suffered so long. They can (...) for them selves. (...). C
years. This while the realm had been as good to have no king. Likewise these
(...) Judges has been suffered of a (...) time, and then it was Quasi non
fuisset re xin Anglia. To suffer this is as much to say: there is no king in
England. It is the duty of a king to have al states set in order to do their
office. I have trobled you to long, I will make an end. Blessed be they that
hear the (...) of God, but so yt they follow it and keep it in credit, in
memory, not to deprave it and sclaunder it, and bring yt Preachers out of
credit, but that follow it in their life, and live after it. He grant you all that blessing yt made both you and me.

Amen.
The syxte Sermon os Master Hugh (...), which he (...) before K. Edward, the
xii. day of (...).
QVecunque scripta sunt ad nostiam doctrinam scripta sunt. Al things that are
written, they (...) to be (...). What doctrine is (...) for (...) in yt 8.
Chap. of the first book of the kings, I (...) partly show unto you (most
honorable audience) this (...) sennight, of that good ma n father Samuel, that
good judge how good a man he was, what helpers, and coadiutours, he took unto
him, to have his office well discharged. I told you also of the wyckednes of
his sons, how they took (...), and lived wickedly, and by that means,
brought both their father, and themselves to deposition. And how the people did
offend God in asking a king in sather Samuels time. And how father Samuel was
put from his office, who deserved it not. I opened to you also, how father
Samuel cleares him self, that he knew not the fautes of his sons: he was no
bearer with his sons, he was sorry for it, when he heard it: but he would not
bear with them in their wickedness, Filii mei vobiscum sunt, my sons are with
you says he. Do with them according to their deserts, I will not maintain them,
nor bear with them. After that he cleares himself at the kin ges feet, that
the people (...) nothing to burden him with all, neither money, nor money
worth. In treating of yt part, I chanced to show you, what I heard of a man
that was slain, and I hear say it was not well taken. Forsooth I entende not
to empayre any man's estimation or honesty, and they that enforce it to that,
enforce it not to my meaning. I said I heard, but of such a thing, and took
occasion by that, that I heard, to speak against yt thing, that I knew to be
naught that no man should bear with any man to yt maintenance of volu^tary and
prepensed murder. And I hear say since, the man was other wise an honest man,
and they that spoke for him, are honest men. I am (...) inoughe to credit it.
I spoke not because I would have any man's honestye impaired. Only I did as
Saint Paul did, who hearing The preachers are occasyo ned (...) to inueye a.
gainstsuch vice as the (...) are infec ted with as Paul to the Cor. they. x,
xi cap.
of the Corinthians, that there should be contencions and mysorder among
them, did write unto them that he heard, and thereupon by occasion of (...) he
set forth very whole some doctrine of the Supper of the Lord. We might not have
lacked that doctrine I tell you. Be it so the Corinthians had no such
contentions among them, as Paul wrote of, Be it so they had not misordred
themselves, it was neither of, nor on, to that that Paul said. The matter lay
in that, that upon hearing he would take occasion to set out the good and true
doctrine. So, I did not affirm it to be true that I heard, I spoke it to
advertise you, to beware of bearing with Why M. Latymer used this example; and
to what end and purpose.
wilful and prepe^sed murder. I would have nothing enforced against any man.
This was mine intent and meaning. I do not know, what ye call chance medly in
the law, it is not for my study. I am a scholar in scripture, in gods book: I
stu die that. I know what voluntary murder is before god. If I shall fall out
with a man, he is angry with me, and I with him, and lacking opportunity and
place, we shall put it of for Chance medly.
that time, in the mean season I prepare my weapon and sharp it against
another tyms, I swell and boil in this passion toward Voluntary murder
mistermed cha^cemed ly.
him, I seek him, we meddle together, it is my chance by reason my weapon is
better then his, and so forth to kill him. I give him his deaths stroke, in my
vengeance and anger. This call I voluntary murder in scripture: what it is in
the He means Austin.
law I cannot tell. It is a great sin, and therefore I call it volu^ tarry. I
remember what a great clearke writes of this. Omne The time of repentance is
here.
peccatum adeo est voluntariu^, vt nisi fit voluntariu^ no^ sit pec catu^.
Every sin (says he) is so voluntary, that if it be not voluntary, it can not
be called sin. Sin is no actual sin, if it be not voluntarye. I would we
would all know our The span: ard (...) killed the English. man.
faults and repent: that that is done, is done, it cannot be called back
(...). God is merciful, the king is merciful, here we may repent, this is
the place of repentance: when we are gone hence, it is to late then to
repent. And let As abominable whore. dome used ia London as (...) was upon
the banck Le tvs fear the one and put no doubt but that the other is to foul
(...) to be a lie There be places in London priuileged where (...) is haunted A
laulesse place of licentious liberty, Dicing houses.
(...) be content with such order as the magistrates shall take But sure it is
a perilous thing to bear with any such matter. I told you what I heard say,
I would have no man's honesty empayred by my tellyng. I heard (...) sense of
another murder, that a Spanyarde should kill an Englyshman and run him
thorough with his sword: they say he was a tall man. But I here it not, that
the Spanyarde was hanged for his labor. If I had, I would have told you
it to. They fell out as the tale goes about a whore. O Lord what whoredom
is used now a days. As I here by the relation of honest men, which tell it not
after a worldly sort, as though they rejoiced at it, but heavily with heavy
hearts. how God is dishonored by whoredom in this city of London. Yea the
bancke, when it stood, was never so common. If it be true that is told, it is
meruail that it does not sink, and that the earth gapeth not and swalloweth it
up. It is wo^ becfull that the city of London does suffer such whoredom
unpunished. God has suffered long of his great lenity, mercy, and benignity,
but he will punish sharply at the length, if we do not repent. There is some
place in London, as they say: Immunitie, impunitie, what should I call it? a
priuileged place for whoredom. The Lord Mayre has nothing to do there, the
(...), they can not meddle with it. And the quest they do not enquire (...), and
there men do bring their whores: Shooting was wo^t to be the old exercise of
Eng land but the pastime is to (...) full (...) dicers.
yea, other men's wives, and there is no reformacio^ of it.

There is such dieyng houses also, they sya, as has not been wont to be,
where young Gentlemen dyse away their thrifte, and where dysyng is, there are
other folyes also. For the love of God let remedy be had, let us wrestle and
strive against sin. Men of England in times past, when they would exercise
themselves (for we must needs have some re creacion, our bodies can not endure
without some exercise) they were wont to go abroad in the fields a shootyng,
but now it is turned into glossing, gulling and whoring (...) the Shooting has
been set by in times past Whoring (...) the tou (...) in (...) af (...) in
(...) fields
house. The art of shooting has (...) in times past much esteemed in this
realm, it is a gift of god yt he has given us to excel al other nations wtal,
it has been gods instrument whereby he has given us many victories against our
enemies. But now we have taken (...) whroing in towns, in stead of shooting in
(...) fields. A wondrous thing that so excellent a gift of god should be so
little (...). I (...) you (...) Lords, even as ye love the honor, (...)
glory of God, and entende to remove his (...), let (...) be sent fourth some
proclama tion, some (...) proclamation to the Justices of peace, for they do
not their duty. Justices now be no justices, there be many good acts made for
this matter already. Charge them (...) their allegiance, that this singular
benefit of god may be practiced and that it be not turned into bolling, (...),
and (...) within the tounes: for they be negligent in executyng (...) taug
(...) the feate of (...) in a (...) bow.
these laws of (...). In my time, my poor father was as (...) to teach me to
shoot, as to learn me any other (...), and so I think other men did their
children. He taught me how to draw, how to lay my body in my bow, and not to
draw with strength of arms as other nations do but with strength of the body,
I had my bows bought me, according to my age and strength: as I increased in
them, so my bows were made bygger, and bigger, for men shall never shote well,
except they be brought up in it. It is a goodly art, a wholesome kind of
exercise, and much commended in phisike.

Marcilius Phicinus in his book de (...) (it is a great Shooting is (...) of
Mar cilius (...) cinus.
while since I red him now) but I remember he commends this kind of
exercise, and says, that it wresteleth against many kinds of diseases. In
the reverence of god, let it be co^ tinued. Let a proclamation go forth,
charging the justices of peace, that they see such acts and statutes kept, as
were made for this purpose. I will to my matter. I intend this day to entreat of
a piece of scripture, written in the beginning of the vcap. of Luke. I am
occasioned to take this place by a book (...) to the Kings Majesty that dead
is, by Master Pole. It is Regnold Poole the Cardinal
a text, that he does greatelye abuse, for the supremacye. He rackes it, and
violentes it, to serve for the maintenance of the bishop of Rome. And as he did
enforce the other place, that I entreated of last, so did he enforce this also,
to serve his matter. The story is this. Our Savior Christ was come now to the
bancke of the water of Genezareth. The people were come to him, and flocked
about him, to here him preach. (...) sat in Simons (...).


And Jesus took a boot that was standing at the poole, it was Simons bote, and
went into it. And sitting in the boot he preached to them that were on the
bancke. And when he had preached and taught them, he spoke to Simon, and bad
him launche out further into the deep, and (...) his (...), to catch fyshe.
And Simon made answer, and said: Master, we have labored al night, but we
(...) nothing: how be it at thy commandment, because thou (...) us, we will
go to it again. And so they did, and caught a great draught, a miraculous
draught, so much that the net brake, and they called to their fellows that were
by, for they had two (...) to come to help them, and they came and filled
both their (...) so full, that they were nighe drounynge. This is the story.
That I (...) declare this text so, that it may be to the honor of god, and
(...) of your souls and mine (...). I shall desire you to help me with your
prayer, in the which. etc.

Factum est autem, (says the (...)) Cum turba irruerct in (...). (...) v.
Saint Luke (...) the story, and it came to pass, when the people preased
upon (...), so that he was in peril to be cast into the pond, they rushed so
fast upon him, and made such throng to him. A wondrous thing, what a desire
the people had in Luc. iiii.
those days to here our Savior Christ preach: and the cause may be gathered
of the later end of the chapter that went before. Our savior Christ had preched
unto them, and healed the sick folks of such diseases and maladies as (...)
had: and therefore the people would have retained him still. But he made them
answer, and said: Et alus (...) me euan (...) in hoc missus su^, I must (...)
yt king dom of god to other cities also, I must show them my fathers will: for
I came for that purpose. I was sent to preach the word of God. Our Savior
Christ said, how he must not ta An exam. (...) of (...) for (...).
ry in one place: for he was sent toyt world to preach every where. Is it not
a marvelous thing, that our vnpreachyng (...) can read this place, and yet
preach no more than they do. I (...) that they can go quictly to bed, and se
how he allureth them with his example, to be diligent in their office Our (...)
glory.
Here is a godly lesson also, how our savior Christ fled (...). If these
ambitious persons, that climb to honor by bywalkes mordinatly, would (...) this
example of Jesus Christ, they should come to more honor then (...) do. for when
they seek honor by such bywalkes, they come to confusion: honor follows them
that (...) from it. Our savior Christ, gat Honor follows them that (...) it.
him away early in the morning, and went unto the wilderness. I would they would
follow this example of Christ, and not seek honor by such bywalkes as they
do. But what did the people? when he had hid himself, they smelled him out in
the wyldernes, and came unto him by flocks, and followed him a great nombre.
But where read you that a great number The common people smelled Christ out in
the wilderness and follow ed him (...) there but so did not the Scribesthe (...)
nor the by (...).
of Scribes and Pharisees, and Bishops followed him. There is a doctor that
writes of this place, his name is (...) Gorrha^, Nycholas Gorrham, I knew him
to be a schole doctor a great while ago, but I never knew him to be an
interpreter of scripture til now of late: he says thus, mayor deuotio in
laicis vetulis qua^ in clericis. etc. There is more devotion says he, in lay
folk, and old, wives these simple folk, the vulgar people, then in ye
clerks: they be better affected to the word of god, then those that be of the
clergy. I meruail not at the sentence, but I meruail to find such a sen tence
in such a doctor. If I should say so much, it would be said to me, that it is an
(...) bird that defiles his own nest, and Nemo leditur nisi a (...), There is
no man hurt, but (...) his own self. There was verified the saying of our
savior Christ which he spoke in another (...). (...) que fuerit cadauer, ibi
(...) aquilae, Whersoeuer a dead carrion is, thither will the Egles gather. Our
savior Christ compares him self to a dead carrion: for where the carrion is,
there will the Egles be, and though it be an evil smell to us, and (...) in a
man's nose, yet it is a sweet smell to the Egles, they will seek Cstrist (...)
him (...) to a dead (...) on.
it out. So the people sought out Christ, they smelt his savor he was a sweet
smell to (...). He is (...) ad (...), the smell of life to life. They flocked
about him like Egles. Christ was the carrion, and the people were the Egles.
They had no pleasure to hear the Scribes, and the Pharisees, they stanke in
their nose, their doctrine was unsavory, it was of Loliones, of decimations, of
Anets seade, and Cummyn and such gere. The Phari sees doctrine was void of
remedy for (...).
There was no comfort in it for sore (...), there was no co^solatio^ for
wounded souls, there was no remedy for sins, as was in Christ's doctrine. His
doctrine eased the burden of yt soul: it was sweet to the common people, and
sower to the Scribes. It was such comfort and pleasure (...) them, yt they came
flocking about him: wherefore came they? Vt (...) verbum dei, it was a good
coming. They came to here ye word of god. It was not to be thought that they
came all of one mind to here ye word of (...) It is likely that in so great a
(...) We can not be saved without hea ring of the (...) of god.
some came of curiosity, to heresom nouelles, and some came smell ling a sweet
savor, to have consolation and comfort of gods word: for we cannot be saved
without hering of the word. It is a ne cessary way to salvation. We (...) not
be (...) without faith and faith comes by hearing of the word. Fides ex
(...). And how shall they hear without a preacher? I tell you it is The foot
(...) of the ladder of salvation
the footesteps of ye ladder of heaven, of our salvation. There must be
preachers if we look to be saved. I told you of this gradation before in the
tenth to the Romans. Consider it well. I had rather ye should come of a naughty
mind, to hear the word of god, for novelty, or for (...) to hear some M.
(...) them to resort to the hea (...) of (...) mons not withstan ding the
purpose of (...) com ming is not all of the best. S. Augu stine (...) of
curiosi tie to Mil lane to (...) Am brose. (...). Augustine (...) came of a
Maniche a (...).
pastime, then to be away. I had rather ye should come as the tale is, by ye
gentlewoman of London. One of her neighbors met her in the streate, and said
mistres, whether go ye: Mary said she, I am going to s. Thomas of Acres to the
Sermon, I could not sleep all this last night and I am going now thither, I
neuersayled of a good nap there. And so I had rather ye should go a nappyng to
ye sermons, tha^ not to go at all. For with what mind soever ye come, though ye
come for an ill purpose, yet peradventure ye may chance to be cought or ye go,
the prea cher may chance to catch you on his hoke. Rather then ye should not
come at al. I would have you come of curiosity, as S. Augustine came to hear
S. Ambrose. When S. Augustine came to Millane, (he tells the story himself, in
the end of his book of confessions) he was very desirous to hear S. Ambrose,
not for any love he had to the doctrine ye he taught but to here his eloquence,
whether it was so great, as yt (...) was, and as the brute went. Well, before he
departed S. Am brose caught him on his hoke, and converted him so, that he
became of a Maniche, and of a Platonist a good christen, a defender of Christ's
religion, and of the faith afterward. So I would have you to come to sermons: it
is declared in many mo places of scripture, how necessary preaching is, as
this: (...), (...) est (...), ad (...) omni (...) The (...) the (...).
(...) of the (...), is the power of God to every man (...) does (...). He
(...) gods word (...), it is the (...), and the thing (...) by we are (...).
(...) ware, beware, ye (...) not this office: for if ye do, (...) power to
(...) that do believe. Christ says (...) to the same, Nisi quis (...) e (...),
no^ potest videre (...) de, Except a man be borne again from above, he cannot
(...) the kingdom of God. He must have a (...): and what What is (...), (...),
or (...) be born (...) above.
is this regeneration? It is not to be christened in (...) (as these (...)
brandes expound it) and nothing else. How is it to be expounded then? Saint
Peter shows, That one place of Scripture declares an other. It is the
circumstance, and collation of places, that make scripture plain. Regeneremur
autem, One (...) of (...) an (...).
(says S. Peter) and we be borne again. How? Non ex semine (...), sed immortal
Not by a mortal sede, but by an immortal. What is this immortal sede? (...)
sermone^ (...) viuentis, By the word of the living God, by the word of god How
necessary the office of preaching is to our salvation.
preached and opened. Thus comes in our new birth. Here you may se how
necessary this office is to our salvation. This is the thing that the devil
wrastleth most against. It has been all his study to (...) this office. He
works against it as much as he can, he has prevailed to much, to much in it.
The devil is (...) to decay preaching
He has set up a state of unpreaching prelacie in this (...) this. vii. C.
year: A state of unpreaching prelacie. He has made vnpreching prelates: he
has stired up by heaps to per secute this office in yt title of heresy: He
(...) stirred up (...) maiestrates to persecute it in yt title of (...). And he
has stirred up the people to persecute it with (...) and (...). (...) words:
as by the name of ne (...), strange preaching: and with impropriations he has
turned preaching in to private masses. If a (...) left mass vndoneon a sunday
within these x. years, all England should have wo^dred at it: but they might
have left of the sermon. xx. sondays Note the (...) meant of the (...).
and never have been blamed. And thus by these (...) private Masses were set up,
and preparing of gods word (...) den under fute. But what does he now? what
does he now? he (...) up to ou tragious rearing of rents, that pore The devil
(...).
men shall not be able to find their children at the schole to be (...). What an
unreasonable (...) is this? he prouides a great (...) before (...) for the time
that is to come. He has brought up now of late the (...) monstrous kind of
covetousness that ever was heard of. He has (...) see fermyng The fee (...)
mynge of (...).
of (...), and all (...) this (...) of preaching: in so much that when any man
(...) shall (...) a benefice, he may go where he will, for any house he shall
have to dwell upon, or any glebe land to keep hospitality withal: but he
must take up a chamber in an alehouse, and there sit and play at the tables all the day. A goodly curate. He has cau The devil goth to the vniuer (...) to tea
che, but (...)
sed also through this monstrous kind of covetousness, patrons to sell their
benefices. Yea what does he more? He gettes him to the (...), and causes great
men, and (...) ers to send their sons thither, and put out poor scholars
that should be divines: for their parents (...) not they shall be preachers: but
that they may have a show of lerning. But it were to long to declare unto you,
what (...) and means the devil has found to decay the office of salvation,
this office of regeneration. But to return to my (...). The people came to
here the word of god: (...) heard him with silence. I remember now a saying of
(...), and (...) it might (...) hereafter in better place: but yet I will take
it, whiles it co neth to mind. The saying is this. Et loquentem eum (...) in
(...) interru^pentes, (...) him (says he) in silence, not interrupting the
order of his (...). He means, they herd him The mysorder of vvalkers (...)
. quietly, without any (...) of (...), or walking up and down. Surely it is an
ill misorder yt folk shall be walking up and down in the sermon time (as I have
seen in this place this Lent: and there shall be such (...) and (...) in the
preachers To what end the Kings grace (...) the banketing place.
ear, that it makes him oftentimes to forget his matter. O let us consider
the kings (...) goodness: This place was prepared for (...) of the body: and his
(...) has made it a place for the (...) of the soul, and to have the word of
god preched in it, showing herby, that he (...) have (...) his (...) at it, if
it might be possible. (...) what the kings (...) has done for you, he
allows you all to hear with him. Consider where ye be. First ye ought to
have a reverence to gods word: and though it be preached by poor men, yet it
is the same word that our savior spoke. Consider also the presence of the
kings (...), gods high vycare in earth, having a respect to his personage,
ye ought to have reverence to it, and consider that he is gods high minister,
and yet allows you al to be partakers with him, of the hering of gods word.
This benefit of his, would be thankfully taken, and it would be highly esteemed.
Hear in silence as (...), it may chance that some in the company may fall
sick, or be diseased. If there be any such, let them go away with silence,
let them leave their salutations till they come in the court, let them depart
with silence. I took occasion of Chrisostomes words to (...) you of this
thing.

What should be the cause, that our Savior Christ went into the boat? the
scripture callethit. Nauis or nauicula, (...) it was no ship, it was a fishers
(...), they were not able to Why Christ would ra there go in to the boat then
(...) upon the land or the bank.
have a ship. What should be the cause, why he would not stand on the banck
and preach there, but he desired Peter to draw the boat somewhat from the
shore in to the mids of the water, what should be the cause? One cause was,
for yt be might sit there more commodiously, then on the bancke, an other cause
was, for that he was like to be thrust into the pond of the people that came
unto him. Why? our sautoure Christ might have withstand them, he was strong
(...) to An aun svver to a pretty ob iectio^ the sigure is (...).
have kept himself from thrustyng into the water. He was stronger then they
al, and if he had listed he might have stand on the water, as well as he walked
on the water: truth it is, so might he have done in deed. But as it was
sometime his pleasure to show the power of his Godhead, so he declared now
the (...) and imbecility of his manheade. Here (...) God must not be (...) so
long as we may work by (...) means
gives us an example what we shall do, we must not tempte god by any miracles,
so long as we may walk by ordinary (...). As our savior Christ, when the
devil had him on the top of the temple, and would have had him cast himself
down, he made him this answer. Non tentabis dominum deum (...). (...) not tempt
thy lord god, as if he should have said, we may not tempte god at all. It is no
(...) now to show any miracles: there is an other way to go down, by gresin
ges. Thus he did to show us an example, that we must not We must not tempt
god.
tempte God, except it be in extreme necessitye, and when we cannot other
ways remedy the matter, to leave it all to Why Christ came into Simons boat
(...) there then into any other.
God, else we may not tempt the majesty of his (...). Beware temptyng of God?
well, he commes to Symons boat, and why rather to Symons boat then another. I
will answer, as I find in experience in my self. I came hither to day from
Lambeth in a whirry, and when I came to take my boat, the water men came
about me (as the manner is) and he would have me, and he would have me. I took
one of them. Now ye will ask me why, I came in that boat, rather then in
another, because I would go into that, that I see stand next me, it stood
more (...) for me. And so did Christ by Simons boat. It stood nearer for
him, he saw a better seat in it. A good natural reason. Now come the papystes,
and they will make a misterye of it, they A simple matter that stands upon so
(...) a ground.
will pycke out the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in Pe ters boat. We may
make allegories enough of every place in scripture: but surely, it must needs
be a simple matter that stands on so weke a ground. But ye shall see
further. He desired Peter to thruste out his boat from the shore. He desired
him. Here was a good lesson, for ye bishop of Rome, and all his college of
Cardinals, to learn (...) and gentleness. Rogabat eum He desired him, it was
(...) done A good lesson of humility.
of him, without any austeritie, but (...) all (...), (...) nes, and softenes,
and humility. What an (...) is this, that he gives them here? but they spy it
not, they can se nothing but the supremacye of the bishop of Rome. A wondrous
thing, what sight they have. They see nothing but the supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome. Imperabatis ouibus meis How the bishop of Rome rule and reign over
the people.
says Ezechiel Cu^ auaritia, and austeritate, and disperse sunt absque
pastore. Ye have ruled my sheep, and commanded them with great lordlines,
austerity, and power: and thus ye have dispersed my sheep abroad, and why?
There was no shepherd, they had wanted one a great while. Rome has been many a
hundred years without a good shepherd. They would not learn to rule them ge^tly,
they had rule over them: but it was with (...), exco^munications, with great
austeritie, and thunderboltes, and the devil and (...), to (...) their (...).
I beseech God open their (...), that they may se the truth, and not be blinded
with those things, yt noman can se but (...). It follows in the text, (...) de
The prea cher uses to (...).
(...). He taught syttyn (...). (...) belike, were sitters in those days, as it
is written in an other place, (...) in (...), They sit in the chair of Moses.

I would our preachers (...) or standing, one way, or other. It was a goodly
pulpytte that our Sautour Christ re (...) the people more (...) the (...) The
(...) of God may be (...) in any co (...) place where it (...) heard
Christ had gotten him here: An old rotten boat. And yet he (...) his
fathers will, his fathers (...) out of this pulpyt. He cared not for the
pulpyt, so he might do the people good. In deed it is to be commended for
the preacher to stand, or sit, as the place is, but I would not (...) it so
(...) esteemed, but that a good preacher may de clare the word of god (...) on a
horse, or preching in a tree. And yet if (...) should be done, the unpreaching
prelates would laugh it to scorn. And though it be good to have the (...)
set up in churches, that the people may resort thither: yet I (...) not have
it so (...) used, but that in a profane place the word of God might be (...)
some times, and I (...) not have the people offended wythall, no more then they
be with our Savior Christ's preaching out of a boat. And (...) to have
pulpettes in churches it is ve ry well done to have them, but they would be
occupied: for it is a vain thing to have them as they stand in many churches. I
heard of a Bishop of England that (...) on (...) A merve tale and (...) of a
bishop (...) on vi sitation.
(and as it was the custom) when the Bishop should come and be runge into
the town, the great belles clapper was fall len down, the tyall was broken, so
that the Bishop could not be (...) into the town. There was a great matter
made of (...), and the chief of the paryshe were much blamed for it, in the
visitation. The bishop was somewhat quick with them, and (...) that he was
much offended. They made their aunsweres, and (...) themselves, as well as
they could, it was a chance said they, that the (...) brake and we could not
get it mended by and by, we must tarry till we can have it done? It shall be
amended as (...) as may be. Among the other, there was one wyser then the The
pulpit (...) his clapper.
rest, and he commes me to the Bishop, Why my lord, says he, does your
lordshyp make to great a matter of the bell, that lacks his clapper? here is
a (...) (says he) and poynted to ye pulpit, yt has lacked a clappar this 20.
years. We have a person that (...) out of this benefice fyftye pound every
year, but we never see him. I warrant you the Bishop was an vnpreachyng
presate. He could find fault with the bell, that wa^ted a clapper to ring him
into the town, but he could not find any faut with the person that preached not
at his be (...). Ever this office of preaching has been left regarded, it has
scant had the name of gods service. They must sing (...) festa dies, about the
church, that no man was the better (...) do foo les in (...)
for it, but to show their gay coats, and garments. I came once my self to
a place, ridyng on a journey homeward from London, and I sent word over night
into the town, that I would preach there in the morning, because it was ho
lyday, and me thought it was an holidays work. The church stood in my way,
and I took my horse, and my company, and went thither, I thought I should have
found a great company in the church, and when I came there, the church door
was fast locked. I tarried there half an hour and more, at last the keye was
found, and one of the (...) commes to me and says. Sir this is a busy day with
us, we Robin hoode would not give M. Latymer leave to preach.
can not hear you, it is Robin hoodes day. The paryshe are gone abroad to
gather for Robyn hoode, I pray you let them not. I was feign there to give
place to Robin hoode: I thought my rochet should have been regarded, though I
were not: but it would not serve, it was feign to give place to Robin hoodes
men.

It is no laughyng matter my friends, it is a weeping matter, a heavy matter, a
heavy matter under the (...) for gatheryng for Robyn hoode, a traitor, and a
thief, to put (...) a preacher, to have his office less esteemed, to prefer
Robyn (...) before the ministracion of Gods word, and all this has come of
vnpreachyng prelates. This realm has been ill provided for, that it has had
such corrupt judgments in it, to prefer Robin hoode to gods word. If the
Bishops had been preachers, there should never have been any such thing: but
we have a good hope of better. We have had a good beginning, I beseech God to
continue it. But I (...) bishops (...) have the people to (...) in ignorance
still.
tell you, it is far wide, that the people have such judgments, the
Bishops they could laughe at it. What was that to them: they would have them
continue in their ignorance still, and themselves in unpreaching prelacy. Well
sytting, sytting. He sat down and taught. The text does A good place of
scripture for a papist to build naught v pon nothieg.
tell us that he taught, but it does not tell us what he taught. If I were a
Papist I could tell what he said. I would in the Popes judgment show
what, he taught. For the Bishop of Rome has in serinio pectoris sui, the
true understanding of scriptures: if he call a counsel, the college of
Cardinals, he has authority to determine the Supper of the Lord, as he did at
the counsel of Florence. And Pope Nicolas, and Bishop Lanfranke shall come
and exponud this place and say, that our Savior Christ, said thus. Peter I do
mean this by sytting in thy boat, that thou shall go to Rome, and be Bishop
there syue and twenty years, after mine ascension. And all thy successors shall
be rulers of the universal church after thee. Here would (...) also holy
Here is naught vpo^nothing
water, and holy bread, and all unwritten verities, if I were a papist, and
that Scripture is not to be expounded by any private interpretation, but by
our holy father, and his College of Cardinals. This is a great deal better
place then duc in alcum. But what was Christ's sermon? it may soon be gathered
what it was. He is always like himself. His first sermon was poenitentiam
agite, Do penance, your living is naught, repent. Again at Nazareth, when
he red The (...) of Christ's first sermo A text of one Dioni sius. Rikel a monk
of the charter house.
in the temple and preached remission of sins, and healyng of wounded
consciences, and in the long Sermon in the mount, he was always like
himself, he never dissented from himself. O there is a writer has a iolie
text here, and his name is Dyonisius: I chanced to meet with his book in my
Lord of Caunterburies librarye: he was a Monk of the Charterhouse, I marvel
to find such a sentence in that author. What taught Christ in this sermon?
Mary says he, it is not written. And he adds more unto it. Eua^gelistae
tantum scripserunt de sermonibus and miraculis Christi, quantum cognouerunt
inspirante deo sufficere ad aedificationem (...) ad confirmationem fidei, and
ad salutem animarum? It is true, it is not written. All his miracles were not
written, so neither were al his sermons written: yet for all that, the
Evangelists did write so much as was necessary. They wrote so much of the
miracles and Sermons of Christ The english of the latin text before.
as they knew by gods inspiration to be sufficient for the edifying of the
church, the confirmation of our faith, and the health of our souls. If this
be true as it is in deed, where (...) unwritten verities? I marvel not at the
sentence, but to find it in such an author. Jesus what authority he gyues to
gods word. But God would that such men should be witness with the
auctority of his book, will they nyll they. Now to draw toward an end. It
follows in the text, duc in altum. Here comes in the supremacye of the
Bishop of Rome. When our Savior Christ had made an end of his Sermon, and had
fed their souls, he provided for their bodies. First he began with the
soul. Christ's word is the food of it. Now he goes to the body, he has
charge of them both: we must commit the fedyng of the body and of the soul to
him. Well, he says to Peter, duc in all Christ pro uides for the body as well
as for the soul.
tum, Launche into the depth, put forth thy boat farther into the deep of the
water: Lose your nets, now fyshe. As who should say, your souls are now
fed, I have taught you my doctrine, now I will confirm it with a miracle. Lo
sir here is (...) in (...), here Peter was made a great man, say Christ con
ferred his doctrine with mira cles.
the Papystes, and all his successors after him. And this is derived of these
few words, Launche into the deep. And their argument is this: he spoke to
Peter only, and he spoke to him in the synguler number, ergo he gave him such a
pre Upon what. vveake ground the Pope (...).
eminence above the rest. A goodly argument, I wene it be a sillogismus, in
que^ terra pontus, I will make a like argument: Our Savior Christ said to Judas
when he was about to betray him, quod facis fac citius, Now when he spoke to
Peter A faintand a feeble argument.
there were none of his disciples by, (...) James and John, but when he spoke
to Judas they were all present. Well he said unto him, quodfacis sac citius,
Speed thy business, that thou have in thy head, do it. He gave him here a secret
monition, yt he knew what he intended, if Judas had had grace to have ta ken it
and repented. He spoke in the singular number to him A good ground for the
college of cardinals.
ergo he gave him some preeminence. Belike he made him a Cardinal, and it might
full well be, for they have followed Judas ever (...). Here is as good a ground
for the College of Cardinals, as the other is for yt supremicie of yt Bishop
of Rome. Our Savior Christ (say they) spoke only to Peter for preeminence,
because he was chief of the Apostelles, and you can show none other cause, ergo
this is the cause why he spoke to him in the synguler number. I dare say there
is (...) uer a (...) at Westminster bridge, but he can answer to this, and give
a natural reason of it. He knows that one man is able to shoue the boat,
but one man was not able to cast out the nets: and therefore he said in the
plural number, laxate retia. Lose your nets: and he said in the synguler
number to Peter, launch out the boat. why? because he was Why Christ spoke in
the plural number and why (...) singular, Christ sen des not food and living
without labor.
able to do it. But he spoke the other in the plural number, because he was
not able to convey the boat, and cast out the nets to. One man could not do
it. This would the whirry man say, and that with better reason, then to make
such a mi stery of it, as no man can spy but they. And the cause why he spoke
to al, was to show yt he will have al christian me^ to work for their living. It
is he yt sendes soodeboth for the body, and soul, but he will not send it,
without labor. He will have all christen people to labor for it, he will, use
our labor as a mean whereby he sends (...) food. This was a wondrous
miracle of our Savior Christ, and did it not only to al Kepers of feales (...)
their sea ling times When Christ's doctrine was suffi ciently (...).
lure them to his (...), but also for our commodity. It was a seal, a seal,
to seal his doctrine wythall. (...) we ye know that such as be kepers of
seals, as my Lord Chan cellour and such other, what so ever they he, they
do not always seal, they have a sealinge time. (For I have heard poor men
complain, that they have bens put of from time to time of sealing, till all
their money were spent, and as they have times to seal in, so our Savior
Christ had his time of sealyng. When he was (...) in earth, with his Apostles,
and in the time of the primitine church, Christ's doctrine was sufficiently
sealed already with seals of his own making, what should our seals do? What
need we to seal his seal? it is a confirmed doctrine already. O Luther, when
he came into the world first, and disputed against the decretales, the
Clementines, Alexandrines, Extrauagantines, what a (...) had he? But ye will
say peradventure he was deceived in some things, I will not take upon me to
defend him in all points. I will not stand to it, that all that he wrote was
true, I think he would not so himself. For there is no man but he They called
upon Luther to do miracles.
may err. He came to further and further knowledge (but surely he was a
goodly instrument) well I say when he preched (...), they called upon him to do
miracles, they were wrought before, and so we need to do no miracles. In deed
when the popish What kind of miracles the (...) had. What pro sit we have
of Christ's miracles.
prelates preached first, they had need of miracles, and the devil wrought some
in yt preaching of purgatory. But what kind of miracles these were, all England
does know, but it will not know. A wonderful thing, that the people will
continue in their blindness and ignorance still. We have great utility of the
miracles of our savior Jesus Christ. He does signify unto us by this wonderful
work, that he is Lord as well of the water as of the la^d. A good comfort for
those that be on the water, when they be in any tempest or danger to call upon
him. The fish here came at his commandment. Here we may learn, that all
things in the water are subject to Christ. Peter said, Sir, we have labored
all night, and have not caught one finne, how be it at your word we Our (...)
and gayns musle not be imputed to god and not to our labor.
will to it a fresh. By this it appears that the gain, the lucre, the
revenues that we get, must not be imputed to our labor: we may not say,
gramercy labor, it is not our labor it is our savior Christ that sends us
living: yet must we labor, for he that said to Peter labor, and he that bad
the fishers labor, biddes all men to labor in their business. There be some
people yt ascribe their gains, their increase, gotten by any faculty, to the
devil. Is there any trow ye in England would say so? Now if any man should
come to another and so gat his living by the devil, he would fall out with
him. There is not a man in England that so safeth, yet (...) there some that
think it. For all that get it with false bying Who getes (...) luing by the
devil
and sellyng, with circumuention, with usury, impostures, mixte wares, false
wayghtes, deceyuing their lords and may sters, all those, that get their good
and on this fashion, what do they think, but that the devil sendes them
gains and riches. For they be his (beyug unlawfully gotten,) what is this to
say, but that the devil is author of their (...), when they be so gotten? For
god inhibites them Deus non volens iniquiratem tues, God will no iniquity.
These folk are greatly deceived. There be some again impute all to their
labors and works. (...), on the holy day, they cannot find in their Some
(...) pute their gains to theirlabo.
hearts to come to the Temple, to the blessed communion, they must be workyng
at home. These are wide again on the other side. And some there be yt think, if
they work nothing at al, they shall have enough: they will have no good
exercise, but gape and think that god will send meat into their mou these, and
these are far wide: they must work: he had the fyshers (...) must (...).
work. Our savior Christ (...) Peter work, and he that said so to them, says
the same to us, every man in his art, Benedictio dei facit diuite n. The
blessyng of god makes a man rich. He lettes his son shine upon the wicked,
as well as upon the good, he sendes riches both to good and bad. But this
blessyng turns to them into a malediction, and a curse, it increases their
damnation. Saint Paul writing to the Thessalonians, did put an order how
every manne should work in his (...). Cum essemus apud vos, hoc praecipiebamus
(...), vt si quis nollet operari, is nec edat.

When I was among you (says he) I made this ordinance that whosoever would not
do the worlt of his vocation, (...) have no meat. It were a good ordinance in a
common weal that every man should be set on work, every man in his vocation.
Let him have no meat. Now he says furthermore. Audiuimus quosdam inter vos
(...) inordinate, nihil o. peris facientes. I here say there is some amongst
you, that (...) inordinately. What is that word inordinately? (...). geuyng
themselves to no occupation for their (...). Curiose (...) Curious men, given
to curiosity, to searching what Curious men.
other men do. Saint Paul says, he heard say, he could not tell whether it
were so or no. But he took occasien of hearing say, to set out a good and
wholesome doctrine. His aute^ qui sunt eiusmodi precipimus, and obsecramus. We
(...) and desire you for the (...) of god, if there be any such, that they
will do the works of their vocation, and go quietly to their occupation, and
so eat their own bread: else it is not their own, it is other men's meat. Our
savior Christ before he began his preaching, lived of his occupacion, he
Christ labored.
was a carpenter, and gat his living with great labor.

Therefore let no man disdain, or think (...) to follow him, in a mean living, a
mean vocation, or a common calling and occupation. For as he blessed our
nature with taking upon him the shape of man, so in his doing he blessed all
occupations and arts. This is a notable example to signify, yt he (...) al
ydlenes. When he was a Carpenter, thenhe went, and did the work of his
calling, and when he was a preacher, he did the works of that calling. He was
no unpreaching prelate. The bishop of Rome should have learned that at him. And
these gainers with false arts what be they? They are never content with that
they have, though it be never so much. And they that are true (...), are
satissied with that that god sendes, though it be never so little. Quest magnus
pietas, cum (...) sua sort contento. Godliness is great gain, it is lucre
enough, it is va^tage enough, to be co^te^t with that, that god sends. The
faithful can not lack, yt unfaithful is ever lacking, though he have never so
much. I will now make an end. Labores manuu^ tuaru^. Let us al labor, Christ
teaches us to labor: yea the bishop of Rome himself, he teaches him to labor,
rather the^ to be (...) of yt church. Let us put our trust in god. Labores
manuu^ tuaru^. Cast thy (...) upon yt lord, and he will norish thee and (...)
thee. Again yt prophet says, Nunqua^ vidi iustu^ (...) eius quere^s pane^. I
never saw the rightuous (...) forsaken, nor his (...) to (...) his bread. It is
infidelity, infidelity that (...) al together. Well to my text, Labores (...)
tuarum quia manducabis, beatus (...) and been tibi (...). Because thou eatest
thy labors of thy hands, that, that God sendes the of thy labor. Every man
must labor, yea though he be a king, yet he must labor: for I know noman
has a greater labor then a king. What is his labor? To study gods book, to
see that there be no unpreaching prelates in his realm, nor (...) judges, to
se to all estates, to provide for the poor, to see vitailes good chepe. Is not
this a labor trow ye? thus, if you do labor exercisyng yt works of thy
vocation, you eatest the meat that god sendes the, and the^ it follows
Beatuses. Thou art a blessed (...) both for the body and the soul.
man in Gods favor, Et been tibi erit. And it shall go well with the in this
world, both in body and souls, for God (...) for both. How shall thou provide
for thy soul? go here sermons. How for the body? Labor in thy vocation, and
then shall it be well with the, both here and in the world to come, through
the faith and merits of our Sausour Jesus Christ. To whom with the father
and the holy ghosse be praise for ever and ever world without end.

Amen.
The seventh Sermon of Master Hugh Latymer, which he preached before king
(...), the. 19. day of April.
QVaecunque scripta sunt ad nostra^ doctrlnam (...) sunt, (...) things that
be written, they be written to be our doctrine. By occasion of this text
((...) be norable audience) I have walked this (...) in the broad field of
scripture and used my liberty, and entreated of such matters as I thought (...)
for this auditory. I have had ado with many estates, even with the highest of
all. I (...) of the duty kings, of the duty of magistrates, and judges, of
the duty of prelates, and alowing yt that is good All (...) ners and (...)
offended, he that (...) best may vveli be amended.
and disallowyng the contrary. I have taught that we are al sinners: I think
there is none of us al, neither preacher, nor hearer, but we may be amended,
and redress our Iyues: we may all say, yea all the pack of us, Peccauimus cum
patribus nostris, We have offended and sinned with our forefathers. In multis
offendimus (...), There is none of us all, but we have in sondrye things
greuouslye offended almightys God. I here (...) of many sautes and rebu ked
many kinds of sins. I intend to day by gods The reme die of syn
grace, to show you, the remedy of sin. We be in the place of repentance,
now is the time to call for mercy, whiles we be in this world: we be all
sinners, even the best of us all. Therefore it is good to here the remedy of
sin. This day is commonly called good friday, although every day ought to be
with us good friday, Yet this day we are accustomed spe cially to have a
commemoratio^ and remembrance of the passion of our savior (...) Christ. This
day we have in memory his bitter passion and death, which is the remedy of our
syn. Therefore I entend to entreat of a piece of a story of his passion. I am
not able to entreat of all. That I may do, that yt better, and that it may be
to the honor of god and the edificatio^ of your souls and mine both, I shall
desire you to pray. etc.

In this prayer I will (...) yon to remember the souls departed, with lauds
and praise to almighty God, that he would vouchsafe to assist them at the
hour of their (...): In so doing, you shall be put in remembrance to pray for
your selves, that it may please god to assist and comfort you in the agonies
and pains of death. Math. 26.


The place that I will entreat of, is the. xxvi. Chapter Luc. xxii.
of Sainet Matthew. How be it, as I entreat of it, I will (...). xiiii
borow part of Sainet Mark, and Saint Luke: for they have some what, that
sainet Matthew has not: and especially Luke. The (...) is, Tunc cum venisset
Jesus in villam, quae (...) Gethsemani, than when Jesus came, some have in
(...), some in agrum, some in praedium. But it is all one: When Christ came
into a grange, into a piece of land, into a (...): it makes no matter, call
it what ye will: At what time he had come into an honest man's house, and there
eaten his pascal lamb, and instituted and celebrated the Lords Judas did not
sleep. nor foreslowe his business.
supper, and set forth the blessed communion: then when this was done, he took
his way to the place, where he knew Judas would come. It was a solitary
place, and thither he went with his eleven apostles. For Judas yt twelfth
Christ left (...) of his disciples (...) the garden appoin. (...) them what to
do vvhiles he went (...).
was about his business, he was occupied about his merchandise, and was
prouidyng among the by shops and prtestes, to come with an imbushement of
Jews, to take our savior Jesus Christ. And when he was com into this (...) or
graunge, this village, or serme place, which was called (...): there was a
garden says Luke, into the which he goes, and leaves. viii. of his disciples
without: howbe it he appointed them what they should (...). He says, Sedete
hic, donec vada^ illuc, and ore^, Sit you here, whiles I go yonder and A
solitary place is mete for (...). A notable place to (...) doyrges for us.
pray. He told them that he went to pray, to monish the^ what they should do to
fall to prayer as he did. He left them there, and took no more with him, but.
iii. Peter, James, and John: to teach us yt a solitary place is mete for
prayer. Then when he was com into this garden, caepit expauescere, he began to
tre^ ble, in so much he said, Tristis est (...) mea vsque ad (...) My soul is
beauie and pensive, even unto (...). This is a notable place, and one of the
most especial and chefest of all that be in the story of the passion of Christ.
Here is our remedy. Here we must have in consideration, all his doings and
sayenges, for our learning, for our edification, for our comfort and co (...).

First of all, he set his three disciples that he took with him in an order, and
(...) them what they should do, (...): (...) di (...).
Sedete hic, and (...), (...) and (...) Sit here, and pray that ye enter not
into temptation. but of that I will (...) afterward. Now (...) he was in the
(...), Coepit (...). (...), He began to be heavy, pensive, (...) hearted. I
like (...) playing with this word (...), it was a perfect heaviness: it was
such a one as was (...) seen the the greater, it was not only the beginning
of a (...). (...) These doctors, we have great cause to thank God for them
(...) ours are o (...).
but yet I would not have them alwais to be allowed, They have handled many
points of our faith very godly: and we may have a great stay in the^ in many
things: we might not well lack them: but yet I would not have men to be sworn
to them and so addict as to take hand over head what (...) they say, it were a
great inconvenience so to do. Will, let us go forward. He took Peter, James,
and John, into this gardeyn. And why did he take them with him, rather than
other? Mary (...) that he had taken before, to whom he had reveled in the
hylle, the (...) and declaration of his (...), to see the (...) of the (...) of
his Godhead: now in the garden he reveled to the same the infirmity of his
man (...): because they had tasted of the (...), he would they should (...)
also of the (...). He took these with him at both times: for two or three is
enough to bear witness. And he began to be heavy in his mind. He was greatly
vered within (...): he (...) afflicted, it was a great (...): (...) had been
heavy many (...) before, and he (...) great afflictions in his soul, as for
the blyndnes of the Jews: and he was like to suffer mo (...) of pain in his
body. But this pang was greater than any he ever (...): yea it was a greater
(...) unto him, I think a greater pain than when he was hanged on the (...),
tha^ when the sower nails were knocked and (...) through his hands and fete,
than when the sharp crown of thorns was (...) on head. This was the (...) and
pensiuenes of his heart, the agony of the (...). And as the soul is more
preciou^s than the body: even so is the pains of the soul more grievous
thanne the (...) of the body: Therefore there is an other which writes, Horror
mortis grauior ipsa: (...), The horror and (...) of death is sorer (...) death
it self. This is the most grievous pain that ever Christ (...), (...) this
(...), that he suffered in the gardeyn. It is the most notable place one of
them in the whole story of the passion, when he said, Anima mea tristis est,
vsque ad mor tem, My soul is heavy to death And Cu^ cepisset expauescere, And
when he began to (...), to shake. The (...) of it is (...) by his prayer that
he made, (...), si possibile est. etc. Father, if it be possible, away with
this cup, ryd me of it. He understood by this cup his pains of death. For he
knew well enough, that his passion was at hand, that Judas was come upon him
with the (...) to take him. There was (...) unto him no we the image of death,
the image, the sense, the (...) of hell: fo death and hell go both together. I
will entreat of this image of hell which is death. Truly no man can show it
perfectly, yet I will do the best I can, to make you understand the grievous
panges that our (...) Christ was in, when he was in the gardein: As man's power
is not able to (...) it, so no man's tongue is able to express it. Painters
paint death like a man without skin, and a body having nothing but bones. And
hell they painte with horrible flames of brennyng fire: they bungie (...).
somewhat at it, they come nothing nere it. But this is no true paintyng: No
painter can paint hell, unless he could paint the (...) and condemnation both
of body and soul, the possession and having of all (...). This is hell, this
is the image of death, this is hell, such an evil favored face, such an vgsom
countenance, such an horrible visage our savior Christ saw of death and hell
in the gardein. There is no pleasure in behaldyng of it, but more pain than any
(...) tell. Death and hell (...) unto them this evil favored face of (...),
and through sin. This sinue is so hyghly (...) of God that he does prenou^ce
it worthy to be punished with lack of all felicity, with the felyng of
infelicitie. Death and (...) be not only the wages, the reward, the stipend of
sin: but they are brought into the world by sin, Per (...) mors says S.
Paul through sin death entered into the world. (...) shows the first
coming in of it into the world: where as our first father Adam was set at
liberty to live for ever: yet God inhibityng him from eating of the apple,
told him, If thou meddle with this (...), thou and al thy posterity shall fall
into necessity of death, from ever living, Morte morieris, thou and all thy
posterity shall be subject to death: here came in death and hell. Sin was
their mother. Therefore they must have such an image as their mother sin
would give them. An (...) thing and an horrible image must it needs be that is
brought in by such a thing so hated of God: yea this face of death and hell is
so terrible, that such as has been The example of A. chitophel which ha^ (...)
him self.
wicked men, had rather be hanged than abide it. As Achitophell that traitor
to David like an ambitious (...), thought to have come to higher promotion: and
therefore con spired with Absalon against his master David. He, when he saw his
counsel took no place, goes and hanges himself, in contemplation of this
evil favored face of death. Judas also when he came with (...) to take his
master Christ, in beholding this horrible face, hanged him self.

Yea the elect people of God, the faithful having the beholding of this face,
(though God has always preserved them such a good God he is to them that
believe in him, that he will not suffer them to be tempted above that, that
they have been able to bear:) yet for all that, there is nothing Job cursed
the (...) of his (...) the (...) he did inwardly be hold the horror of death.
that they complain more (...) than of this horror of death. Go to Job, what
says he? Pereat dies in quo natus sum, suspendium elegit anima mea, (...)
worth the day that I was borne in, my soul would be hanged: saying in his
panges almost he wist not what. This was when with the (...) of his
conscieuce, and the inward man, he beheld the horror of death and hell, not for
any bodily pain that (...) suffered: for when he had byles, botches, blaynes,
and scabbes, he suffered them pacientely: (...) say then: Si bona suscepi, de
manu Domini, etc. (...) we have received (...) things Why Job was vexed.
of GOD, why should we not suffer likewise evil. (...) was not for any such
thing, that he was so (...): but the (...) of this face of death and hell, was
offered to him so lively, that he would have been out of this world. It was
this evil favored face of death that so troubled him. (...) David also said
in contemplation of this vgsome (...), (...) in gemitu meo, I have (...) sore
vexed with sighyng and mourning. Turbatus est a (...) oculus (...) David fea
red not Goliath the mon strous (...) but he fea (...) death. Jonas fea red not
the sea, but he sea red death. (...) feared not the (...) ty army of Sennache
(...), but he fered death.
Mine eye has been greatly troubled in my rage. A strange thing, when he
had to fight with Goliath that monstrous (...), who was able to have eaten
him, he could abide him, and was nothing afraid. And now what a (...)? what
exclamations makes he at the syghte of death? Jonas likewise was bold enough to
bid the shipmen cast him into the sea, he had not yet (...) that face and
visage: but when he was in the whales bealy, and had there the beholding of it,
what terror and distress abode he? (...) when he saw Senacherib (...) his
(...) on every side most violently, was nothing afraid of the great host and
mighty army that was like to destroy him out of hand, yet he was afraid of
death. When the (...) came unto him, and said: Dispone domui (...), morte
morieris, and n on viues, It stroke him so to the heart that he fell a weeping.
O Lord, what an horror was this? There be some writers that 4. Kin. xx.
says, that Peter, James, and John, were in this felyng at the same time: and
that Peter, when he said, (...) a me Domine, quia homo peccator sum, did taste
some part of it: he was Little Bilney the blessed martyr of god had vvonder full
(...) in his mind.
so astonished, he wyste not what to say. It was not long that they were in
this anguishe, some says longer, sum shorter: but Christ was ready to
comfort them, and said to Peter, Netimeas, Be not afraid. A friend of mine told
me of a certain woman, that was eyghtene years together in it. I knew a man
my self Bilney, little Bilney, that blessed martyr of God, what time he had
borne his fagott, and was come again to Cambridge, had such (...) within
himself, beholdynge this image of death, (...) his friends were a frayde to
let him be alone: they were feign to be with him day and night, and
comforted him as they could, but no comfortes would serve. As for the
comfortable places of Scripture to bring them unto him, it was as though a man
would run him thoroughe the heart with a sword: yet afterward for all this he
was revived Bylney (...) his death patiently.
and took his death patiently, and died well against the tyrannical sea of
Rome. Woe will be to that bishop, that had the examination of him, if he
repented not. Here is a good lesson for you my friends: If ever ye come in
danger, in durance, in prison for gods quarrel, and his sake (as he did for A
good (...) son for such as (...) in prison (...) the (...) sake.
purgatory matters, and put to bear a faggot for preaching the true word of
God against pilgremage, and such like matters.) I will advise you first and
above all thing to abjure all your friends, all your frendeshyp, leave not one
vnabiured: it is they that shall undo you, and not your ennemies. It was his
very friends, that brought Bylney to it. By this it may somewhat appear what
our savior Christ's suffered: he does not dissemble it himself, when he
says, Christ was in a gony.
My soul is heavy to death: he was in so sore an agony, that there issued out
of him, as I shall entreat anon, drops of blood: An vgsome thing surely.
which his fact and deed shows us, what horrible pains he was in for our
sakes. But you will say, how can this be? It were possible that I and such An
(...) to an objection (...) and (...) menting. Christ suf fred nothing in his
god head.
other, as be great sinners should suffer such affliction. The son of God,
what our savior Christ? never sinned, (...) can this stand that he should be
this handled? he never deserved it. Mary I will tell you, how we must consider
our savior Christ two ways, one way in his ma^hod, an other in his godhed. Some
places of scripture must be referred to his deity and some to his humanity. In
his godhed he suffre^d nothing: but now he made him self void of his deity, as
(...) says, Cu^ esset in forma (...) exinaniuir seipsum, Whereas he was in the
form of God, he emptied himself of it, he did hide it, and used himself as
though he had not had it, he would not help him self with his Godheade, he
humbled himself with all obedience unto death, even to the death of the
cross: this How Christ took upon him our sins.
was in that he was man, he took upon him our sins, our sins, not the
work of sin. I mean not so, not to do it, not to commytte it, but to purge
it, to cleanse it, to bear the stypende of it: and that way he was the great
sinner of the world, he bare all the sin of the world on Why Christ was
the great sinner of the whole world.
his back, he would become detter for it.

Now to sustain and suffer the doloures of death, is not to sin: but he
came into this world, with his passion to purge our sins. Now this that he
suffered in the Gardyne is one of the bitterest (...) of all his passion:
Christ's suf ring in the gardeyne was one of the (...) of all his passion.
(...) fear of death, was the bytterest pain that ever he abode, dew to
sin, which he never did, but became detter for us. All this he suffered for
us, this he did to satisfye for our sins. It is much like as if I ought
another man twenty thousand pounds, and should pay it out of hand, or
else go to the dungeon of Ludgate? and when He declares what Christ did for
us by a similitude
I am going to prison, one of my friends should come, and ask, whether goes
this manne? And after he had heard the matter, should say, let me
aunswers for him, I will beecome suretye for him. Yea, I will pay all for him.
Such a part played our Savior Christ with us. If he had not suffered
this, I for my part should have suffered, accordyug to the gravity and
quantity of my sins, The greater the sin is, the (...) is the pain.
damnation. For the greater the sin is, the greater is the punishment in
hell. He suffered for you and me, in such a degree as is dew to all the
sins of the whole world. It was as if you would ymagine, that one man had
committed all the sins sense Adam, you may be sure, he should be punished
with the same horror of death, in such a sort, as all men in the world
should have suffered.

Feign and put case our Savior Christ, had committed all the sins of the
world: all that I for my part have done, all that you for your part have done
and that any man else has done: if he had done all this himself, his agonye
that he suffered should have been no greater nor greuouser, then it was. This
that he suffered in the gardyne was a (...) I say of his passion, and one of the
bitterest parts of it. His suffe ring in the garden was (...) painful.
And this he suffered for our sins, and not for any sins that he had
committed himself: for all we should have suf fered every man according to
his own deserts.

This he did of his goodness, partly to purge and Why Christ suf fered
such pains in the (...) All men shall behold the vgsomface of death.
cleanse our sins, partlye, because he would taste, and feel our
miseries, Quo posset (...) nobis, That he should the rather help and relieve
us: and partlye he suffered to give us example to behave our selves as he
did. He did not suffer, to discharge us clean from death, to keep us clean
from it, not to taste of it. Nay, nay, you must not take it so. We shall have
the beholding of this vgsome (...) every one of us, we shall feel it our
selves. Yet our Savior Christ did suffer, to the entente, to sygnifye to us,
that death is ouercomable. We shall in deed overcome it, if we repent, and
acknowledge, that our Savior Jesus Christ How we shall oner com death.
pacifyed with his panges and pains, the wrath of the father, having a love
to walk in the ways of God: if we believe in Jesus Christ, we shall overcome
death. I say, it shall not prevail against us. Wherefore (...) it chances
thee my friend, to have the tastyng of this death, What is to be done when
the horror of death comes.
that thou shalt be tempted with this horror of death, what is to be done
then? when so ever thou feel thy soul heavy to death, make haste, and
resort to this gardyne, and with this faith thou shall overcome this terror
when it comes. Oh it was a grievous thing, that Christ suffered Why (...) suf
fered such pain inthe garden.
here. Oh the greatness of his dolor that he suffered in the gar den partly to
make (...) for our fins, and partly to deliver us from death, not so, that we
should not dye bodily, but that this death should be a way to a better life,
and to destroy and oneccome (...). Our Savior Christ had a gardyne, but he
had little pleasure in it. You have many goodly gardynes, I would you would in
the mids of them cousider what agony our savior Christ suffered in his
gardyne. A goodly meditation A medita tion for us in our gar dynes.
to have in your gardynes. It shall occasion you to delight no farther in
vanities, but to remember what he suffered for you. It may (...) you from
sin? It is a good mo nument, a good sign; a good (...) to consider how he
behaved him self in this gardyne.

Well he says to his disciples. Sit here and pray with me. He went a
little way, of, as it were a stones cast from them, and falls to his prayer,
and says: Pater si possibile est tran seat a (...) iste. Father if it be
possible, Away with this bitter cup, this outrageous pain. Yet after he
(...) him self, and says: (...) non sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu vis, Not my
will but thy (...) be done O father. Here is a good meditation for Christen
men, at all times, and not only upon good Friday: Let good friday Every
day should be good friday to a christian man
be every day to a Christian man to know, to use his passion to that end
and purpose, not to read the story, but to take the fruit of it.

Some men if they had been in this agony, would 1. Sam. xxx
have run theymselues thoroughe with their swords as 2 Samuel xviii.
Saul did, some would have hanged themselves, as Achytophel did. Let us not
follow these men, they be no examples for us, but let us follow Christ,
which in his agonye resorted to his father with his prayer: This must be our
patron to work by. Here I might dilate the matter as touching We must pray
ogod and not to saints.
praying to Saints. Here we may learn not to pray to Saynctes, Christ
byddes us, Ora patrem qui est in coelis. Pray to thy father that is in heaven,
to the creator, and not to any creature. And therefore away with these
anouries: Let God alone be our auowrye, what have we to do to run hither
or thither, but only to the father of heaven? I will not tarry to speaks of
this matter.

Our Savior Christ set his disciples in an order, and com maunded them to
watch and pray, saying: Vigilate and orate. Watch and prays: whereto should
they watch and pray, he Why the (...) were com maunded to pray.
says by and by, Ne (...) in tentationem, That ye enter not into temptation.
He byddes them not pray that they be not tempted, for that is as much to
say, as to pray that we should be out of this world. There is no man in
this world without temptation. In the the time of prosperity we are tempted to
wantonness, (...), and all lyghtnes: in time of adversity to despair in gods
(...). Temptation A differe^s (...) being tem pted and (...) in to temptation.
never ceases. There is a difference between being tempted and entryng into
temptation. He byddes therefore not to pray that they be not tempted, but that
they enter not into temptation. To be tempted is no evil thing.

For what is it? no more then when the flesh, the dyuel, and the world does
solicit and move us against god.

To give place to these suggestions, and to yield our selves, and suffer us to
be overcome of them, this is to enter into temptation. Our Savior Christ
knew that they should be grievously tempted, and therefore he (...) them
warning, that they should not give place to temptation, nor dyspayre at his
death. And if they chanced to The apostles were warned of their (...).
forsake him, or to run away, in case they tripped or swarued, yet to come
again.

But our Savior Christ did not only command his Disciples to pray, but
fell down upon his knees flat upon Christ die (...) pray in his agony.
the ground and prayed himself, saying: Pater (...), transeat a me calix iste.
Father, deliver me of this pange and pain that I am in, this outrageous pain,
this word, Father, came even from the bowels of his heart, whenne he made his
moan, as who should say, Father ryd me, I am in such pain that I can be in no
greater? Thou art my Father, I am thy son, Can the father forsake his Son
in such anguish? Thus he made his moan. Father, take away this (...) of death
from me, ryd me of this pain, suffer me not to be taken when Judas comes,
suffer me not to be ba^ged on the cross, suffer not my (...) to be perced with
(...) nor my heart with the sharp spear. A wonderful thing, that he should
so often tell his (...) of it before, and now when he comes to the paynte, to
desire to be rydde of (...) thought he would have been disobediente to the
will of his father. Before he said, he came to suffer, and now he says away
with this cup. Who would have thought yt ever this gear should have come out
of Christ's mouth: What a case is this? What should a man say? You must
understand, that Christ (...) upon him our infirmities, of the which this
Christ (...) up on him all our infirmities, except sin.
was one, to be sorry at death. Among the stipends of (...) this was one, to
(...) at the cross, this is a punishment for our sin.

It goes otherwise with us, then with Christ, if we were in like case, and in
like agony, almost we would curse God, or rather wish that there were no God.
This that he said, was not of that sort, it was referringe the (...) to the
will of his father: but we seek by all means be it right, be it wrong of our own
nature to be rid out of pain, he desired it conditionally, as it might stand,
with his fathers will, adding A veruntamen to it. So his request was to show the
infirmity of man, here is now an example what we shall do, when we are in like
case. He never deserved it, (...) for us when we are tempted.
we have. He had a Ueruntamen, and not withstanding, let us have so to, we
must have a nevertheless, thy will be done and not mine. Give me grace to be
content to submit my will unto thine. His fact teaches us what to When we are
in Agony what phisik we should use.
do. This is our surgery, our phisike, when we be in agony, and reckon upon it
friends, we shall come to it, we shall feel it, at one time or an other. What does
he now? what came to pass now, when he had hard no voice? his father was
domme. He resortes to his friends, seking some comfort at their hands, seeing he
had none at his fathers hand, he comes to his disciples, and finds them a
sleep, he (...) unto Peter and said. Ah Peter art thou a sleep? Peter be fore
had bragged stoutly, as though he would have killed God have mercy upon his
soul. And now when he should have comforted Christ, he was a sleep, not once
buffe, nor baffe to hi, not a word, he was fain to say to his disciples.
Vigilate et orate. Watch and pray, the spirit is ready, but the flesh is
weak, he had never a word of them again. They might at the least have said.
Oh sir remember your self, are you not Christ? came not you into this world, to
redeem sin? be a good cheer, be a good comfort, this soro we will not help you,
comfort your self by your own preaching, you have said: Oportet filium hominis
pati. You have not deserved any thing, it is not your fault. In deed if they
had don this with him, they had plaide a frendlye part with him, but they gave
him not so much as one comfortable word. We run to our friends in our
distresses and agonies, as though we had al our trust and confidence in them,
he did not so, he resorted to them, but trusted not in the^, we will run to our
friends and come no more to God, he returned again. What? shall we not resort to
our friends in time of neade? and trow ye we shall not find the^ a sleep? Yes I
warrant you, We shall find our friends sle ping.
and when we nead their help most, we shall not have it. But what shall we do,
when we shall find lack in them? we will cry out upon them, vpbraid them,
chide, braul, fume, chafe and backbite them. But Christ did not so, he excused
his friends saying: Vigilate and orate, spiritus quidem promptus est, caro aute^
infirma. Oh (quoth he) watch and pray, I se well the spirit is ready, but the
flesh is weak. What means this? surely it is a comfortable place. For as
long as we live in this world, when we be at the best, we have no more but
Promptitudine^ spiritus cu^ infirmitate carnis. The readiness of the spirit
with thinfirmity of the flesh. The very saints of god said: Velle adest mihi,
my will is good, but I am not able to perform (...). (...).
it, I have been with some, and sain they would, feign they would, there was
readiness of spirit, but it would not be. It grieved the^ that they could not
take things, as they should do. The flesh resysteth the work of the holy ghost
in Now the flesh resistes.
our hearts, and lets it, lets it. We have to pray ever to god. m. L. wishes
prayer to be used:
Oh prayer, prayer, that it might be used in this realm, (...) it ought to be
of al men, and specially of magistrates, of coun sailers, of great rulers, to
pray, to pray, that it would plese God to put godly policies in their hearts. Call
for assistans. I have hard say, when that good Queen that is gone had ordained
in her house, daily prayer both before none, and after none, the Admiral
gettes him out of the way, (...) a moule digging in thearth. He shall be
Lottes wife to me as long as I live. He was I hard say a covetous man, a
covetous man in deed. I would there were no more in England. He was I heard
say an ambitious man. I would there were no mo in England. He was I hard say a
seditious (...), a contemner of common prayer, I would there were no mo in
England, well he is gone. I would (...) had left (...) behind him. (...) you my
lords, yt you pray in your houses to the better mortificatio^ of your flesh.
Remember god must be honored, I will you to pray yt god will continue his
spirit in you. I do not put you in comfort, that if ye have once the spirit,
ye He (...) the^ to prayer.
cannot lose it. There be new spirits start up now of late. yt say after we
have received the spirit, we cannot sin. I (...) spirits (...) start up.
will make but one argument. Saint Paul had brought yt (...) to the profession
of the faith, and left them in that (...), they had received the spirit once
but they sinned again, as he testified of them him self. He says: Currebatis
been. Ve were once in a right state, and again; recepistis spiritu^ ex operibus
legis, an ex iusticia fidei? Once they had the spirit by faith, but falls
prophets came (when he was gone from them) and they plucked them clean away
from all that Paul had planted them in, and then said Paul unto the^. O stulti
Galathe quis vos fascinauit? If this be true, we may lose the spirit, that we
have once possessed. It is a fod thing, I will not tarry in it. But now to the
passion again. (...) had been with his father, and felt no help, he had been
with his friends, and had no comfort, he had prayed twice, and was not hard,
what did he now? did he give prayer over? no, he goes again to his father,
and says the same again, father Christ (...) ed in prayer
if it be possible, away with this cup, here is an example for us, although we
be not hard at the first time, shall we give over our prayer? nay we must to
it again, we must be instant in prayer. He prayed thrice and was not hard,
let us pray three score times, (...) are (...) dull now a days in prayer, to
come to sermons, to resort to common prayer. You houskepers, and especially
great me^ give example of prayer in your houses. Well, did his father look
upon House kepers and great men must give example of prayer.
him this second time? no, he went to his friends again, thinking to find
some comfort there, but he finds them a sleep again, more deper a sleep then
ever they were. Their eyes were heavy with sleep. There was no comfort at al,
they wist not what to say to him. A wonderful thing, how he was toste from
post to pillar, one while to his father, and was destitute at his hand,
another while to his friends, and found no comfort at them, his father gave him
loking on, and suffered him to bite upon the bridle a while. Almighty God beheld
this battle, that he might enjoy yt honor and glory, that in his name all
knees should bow, Celestium, Terrestrium, et infernorum, in heaven, earth and
hell. This that the father would not hear his own son, was God punishes sin in
not hearing ofour pra yers
an other punishment due to our sin. When we cry unto him, he will not hear
us. The prophet Ieremye says: Clamabunt ad me, and ego non exaudiam eos.
These beIeremies words, here he threatens to punish sin, with not hearing
their prayers, the prophet says: They have not had the fear of God before
their eyes, nor have not regarded discipline and correction. I never saw
surely so little discipline as is now a dais. Men will be masters, they will be
masters, and no disciples. Alas where is this discipline now in England. The
people regard no Discipline, they be without al order. Where they should give
place, they will People are without order or honesty.
not stur one inch, yea, where magistrates should determine matters, they will
break into the place before they come, and at their coming not move a whit
for them. Is this discipline? Is this good order? If a man say any thing unto
them, they regard it not. They that be caled to answer, will not answer
directly, but skoffe the matter out. Men the more they know, the worse they
be, it is truly said. sciencia inflat, knowledge makes us proud, and causes
us The more we know thewors we be.
to forget all, and set a way discipline. Surely, in Poperye they had a
reverence, but now we have none at al, Ineuer saw the like. This same lack of
the fear of God, and dyscipline In time of popery there was some reverence but
now none at all.
in us, was one of the causes that the father would not hear his son. This
pain suffered our savior Christ for us who never deserved it. (...) what it was,
that he suffered in this garden, till Judas came. The dolors, the terrors, the
sorrows that he suffered, be unspeakable. He suffered part ly, to make amends
for our sins, and partly to give us exa^ Why christ suf fered so sore in the
garden.
ple, what we should do in like case. What comes of this gear in thend. Well,
now he prays again, he resorteth to his father again. Angore correptus
prolixius orabat. He was in sorer pains, in more anguish the^ ever he was, and
therefore he Christ prayed the third time and swettes blood.
prays longer, more arde^tly, more ferue^tly, more vehemently the^ ever he
did before. Oh lord, what a wonderful thing is this, this horror of death is
worse the^ death it self, more He prays now the third time. He did it so
instantlye, so fervently, that it brought out a bloody sweat, and such plenty
that it dropped down even to the ground. There issued out of his precious body
drops of blud. What a pain was he Our ingratytude and vnthank fulness to God,
which di ed for us.
in, when these bloody drops fell so aboundantlye from him? Yet for all that, how
unthankful do we show our selves toward him that died only for our sakes, and
for the remedy of our sins. Oh what blasphemy do we commit day by day, what
little regard have we to his blessed passion thus (...) and swearing in all our
pastimes.
to swear by gods blood, by Christ's passion. We have no thing in our pastime,
but gods blood, gods wounds. We continually blaspheme his passion in hauking,
hunting, dising and carding. Who would think he should have such ennemies among
those that profess his name. What became The blood of (...) was taken once for
a religious relic.
of his blood that fell down trow (...)? was yt blood of Hales of it, woe worth
it. What a do was it to bring this out of the kings head. This great
abomination of the blood of hales could not be taken a great while out of his
mind. You that be of the court, and especially ye sworn chaplains beware of a
lesson that a great man taught me at my first coming to the court he told me
for good will, he thought M. Latimers lesson that was taught him at his first
coming to the court.
it well. (...) said unto me. You must beware how so ever ye do that ye contrary
not the king, let him have his saiyngs, follow him, go with him. Mary out upon
this counsel, shall I say, as he says? Say your conscience, or else what a worm
shall ye feel gnawinge, what a remorse of conscience shall ye have, when ye
remember how ye have slacked your duty? It is a good wise verse. Gutta cauat
lapidem, non vi sed sepe cadendo. The drop of rain makes a hole in the stone,
A princes mind must be persuaded, but not violent ly forced.
not by violence, but by often falling. Likewise a prince must be turned not
violently, but he must be won by a little and a little. He must have his duty
told him, but it must be don with humbleness, with request of pardon, or else
it were a dangerous thing. Unpreachinge prelates have been the cause, that the
blood of Hales did so long blind the king. Woe worth that such an abominable
thing, should be in a Christen realm, but thanks be to God, it was partlye
redressed in the kings days that dead is, and much more now. God grant good
will, and power to goo forward, if there be any such abomination behind, yt it
may utterly be roted up. O how happy are we, that it has plesed almigh ty God
to vouchsafe, that his son should sweat blood for the redeming of our sins,
and again how unhappy are we, if we will not take it thankfully, that was
redeemed so painfully. Alas what hard hearts have we. Our savior Christ never
sinned, and yet sweat he blud for our sins we will not once water our eyes
with a few tears. What an horrible thing is sin? that no other thing would
remedy Sin is horrible, and why.
and pay the ransom for it, but only the blood of our savior Christ. There
was nothing to pacifye the fathers wrath against man, but such an agony as he
suffered all the passion of all the martyrs that ever were, all the sacrifices of
Patriarchs that ever were, all the good works that ever were done, were not
able to remedy our sin, to make satisfaction for our sins, nor any thing
besides, What was the only remeadye for our sin.
but this extreme passion and blood sheddinge of our most merciful savior
Christ.

But to draw toward an end, what became of this three fold prayer, at the
length, it pleased God to hear his sons prayer, and sent him an angel to
corroborate, to strengthen, to comfort him. Christ nead no angels help if he
had listed to case him self with his deitye. He was the son of Why Christ
received comfort of thangel.
God, what then? for so much as he was man, he received comfort at the angels
hand, as it accordes to our infirmity. His obedience, his continuance and
sufferinge, so pleased the father of heaven, that for his sons sake, be he
never so great a sinner, leaving his sin, and repentinge for the same, he will
owe him such favor, as though he had Note a comfor table promise, and a
joyful (...).
never committed any sin.

The father of heaven will not suffer him to be tempted with this great horror
of death and hell to the uttermost, and above that he is able to bear. Look for
it my friends, by him and through him, he shall be able to overcome it, let us do
as our savior Christ did, and we shall have help A lesson for us in time
ofte^ptation.
from above, we shall have angels help, if we trust in him, heaven and earth
shall give up, rather then we shall lack help: he says he is. Adiutor in
necessitatibus, an healper in time of nead. When the angel had comforted him,
and when this horror of death was gone, he was so strong, that he offered him
self to Judas, and said, I am he. To make an end, I pray you take pains, it
is a day of penance (as we use to say) give me leave to make you weary this
day. The Jews had him to (...) and Annas, and there they whipte him, and The
horror of death, and the agonye which christ sustained in the garden excedeth
the other pains.
bet him, they set a crown of sharp thorn upon his head, and nailed him to a
tree, yet all this was not so bitter, as this horror of death, and this agony,
that he suffered in the garden, in such a degree as is due to all the sins of
the world, and not to one man's sins. Well, this passion is our remeadye, it
is the satisfaction for our sins. His soul descended to hell for a time.
Here is much a do, these new vpstarting spirits, say Christ never descended
into hell, neither body nor soul. In (...) they will ask, was he there, what
did he there? what if we cannot tell what he did Against such as deny that
Christ descended into hell.
there? The Creed goth no further, but says, he descended thither, what is,
that to us if we cannot tell seeing we were taught no further. Paul was taken up
into the third heaven, ask likewise what he saw, when he was carried thither,
you shall not find in scripture what he saw or what he did there, shall we not
therefore believe that he was there. These arrogant spirits, spirits of vain
glory, because they know not by any express scripture, the order of his
Arrogant spitits of vain glory.
doings in hell, they will not believe that ever he descended into hell. In deed
this article has not so full scripture, so many places and testimonies of
scriptures as other have, yet it has enough, it has ii. or iii. textes, and
if it had but one, one text of scripture, is of as good and lawful authority
as a (...). and of as certain truth. It is not to be wayed by the multitude of
textes.

I believe as certainlye and verelye that this realm of England has as good
authority to hear Gods word, as any natyon in all the world, it may be
gathered by two textes, one of them is this. Ite in vniuersum mundum, and
predicate euangeliu^ omni creature. Go into the whole world, and preach yt
gospel to al creatures. Again, Deus vult omnes hoi^s saluos fieri. God will
have all men to be saved, he exceptes not the English men here, nor yet
expressly names them, and yet I am as sure, that this Realm of England, by
this gathering, is allowed to hear Gods word, as though Christ had said a
thousand times, go preach to Englysh men. I will that English men be saved.
Because this arti cle of his descending into hell, cannot be gathered so direct
ly, so necessarily, so formally they do utterly deny it. This article has
scriptures two or three enough for quiet minds as for curiouse brains, nothing
can content them. This Curious brains are never content.
the devils sturring up of such spirits of sedityon, is an evident argument,
that the light is come forth, for his word is a broad, when the devil
rusheth, when he roreth, when he stirs up such busy spirits, to sclaunder
it. My An argument that Gods word is abroad
entente is not to entreat of this matter at this time. I trust the people will
not be carried away with these new arrogant spirits, I dout not, but good
preachers will labor against them. But now I will say a word, and herein I
protest first of al not arrogantly to determine, and define it, I will contend
with no man for it, I will not have it be prejudice to any body, but I offer it
unto you to consider and way it. There be some great clerks that take my
part. and I perceive not what evil can come of it, in saying, Bear with
father Latymer in this place.
that our savior Christ did not only, in soul descend into hell, but also that
he suffered in hell such pains, as the dam ned spirits did suffer there.
Surely, I believe verelye for my part, that he suffered the pains of hell
proporcionably, as it correspondes and answers to the whole sin of the world.
He would not suffer only bodily in the garden, and Fire, gnashing of teethe,
the worm of conscience, are terms, vttrynge to us the pains of hell.
upon the cross, but also in his soul, when it was from the body, which was a
pain due for our sin. Some write so and I can believe it that he suffered
in the very place, and I cannot tell what it is, call it what ye will, even in
the skalding house, in the vgsomnesse of the place, in the presence of the
place, such pain as our capacity can not attain unto, it is somewhat declared
unto us, when we utter it by these effects, by fire, by gnashynge of teth, by
the worm that gnaweth on the conscience. What so ever the pain is, it is a
great pain that he suffered for us. I see no inconvenience to say, that Christ
suffered in soul in hell. I singularly commend the exceeding great charity of
christ, that for our sakes would suffer in hell in his soul. It settes out the
unspeakable hatred that God has to sin. I perceive not that it does
derogate any thing from the dignity of Christ's death, as in the garden, when
he suffered, it derogates nothing from that he suffered on the cross The (...)
phrase and manner of speaking of the scripture is to be noted.
Scripture speaks on this fashion: Qui credit in me, habet vi tam aeternam.
He that believes in me, has life everlasting. Here he settes forth faith as
the cause of our (...), in other places as high commendation is given to works,
and yet, are the works any derogation from that dignity of faith? No. And
again scripture says: Traditus est propter peccata nostra et exuscitatus
propter iustificationem, etc. It attributes here our justification to his
resurrection, and does this derogate any thing from his death? not a whyt. It
is whole Christ. What with his nativity, what with Christ wrought our
salvation in all his doings.
his circumcision, what with his incarnation, and the whole process of his life,
with his preaching, what with his ascen ding, descending, what with his death,
it is all Christ that works our salvation. He sits on yt right hand of yt
father, and al for us. All this is the work of our salvation. I would be as
loathe, to derogate any thing from Christ's death, as yt best of you all. How
vnestimably are we bound (...) him? what thanks ought we to give him for it? We
must have this continually in remembrance. Propter te morti tradimur tota die.
For the, we are in diyng continually. The life of a christen man is nothing but
a readiness to dye, and a remembrance of death. If this that I have spoken of
Christ's sufferyng in the gardeine, and in hell, derogate any thing from
Christ's death and passion, away with it, believe me not in this if it do not,
it commendes and settes fourth very well unto us, the perfection of the
satisfaction that Christ made for us, and the work of redemption, not only
before witness in this world, but in hell in that vgsome-place, where, whether
he suffered, or wrastled with the spirits, or comforted Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob I will not desire to know. If ye like not that which I have spoken of
his sufferyng, let it goo, I will not strive in it, I will be prejudice to no
body, wey it as ye list, I do but offer it you to consider? It is like his
soul did somewhat the three days that his body lay in the grave. To say he
suffered in hell for us, derogats nothing from his death. For all things that
Christ did before Christ was be neficiall to us in all his dooinges.
his suffering on the cross, and after, do work our salvation, If he had
not been incarnate, he had notdied, he was beneficial to us with althinges he
did. Christen people should have his suffering for them in remembrance. Let
your gardaynes monish you, your pleasant gardains what Christ suffered for you
in the Gardaine, and what com moditie you have by his sufferyng. It is his will
ye should so do, he would be had in remembrance. (...) your pleasures with
the remembrance of his bitter passion. The whole passion is satisfaction for
our sins, and not the bare death, considering it so nakedly by it self. The
(...) of speaking of scripture, is to be considered. It attributes our
salvation, now to one thing, now to a another that Christ did, where in deed
it pertayned to all. Our Savior The blessed co^ munion is a re membraunce of
Christ's passion.
Christ has left behind him, a remembrance of his pas ssion, the blessed
communion, the celebration of the Lords supper: a lack it has been long
abused, as the sacrifices were before, in the old law. The Patriarks used
sacrifice, in the faith of the seade of the woman, which should break the
serpents head. The Patriarks sacrificed on hope, and after ward the work was
esteemed. There comes other after, and they consider not the faith of Abraham,
and the patriarchs, but do their sacrifice according to their own imagi
nation, even so came it to pas with our blessed communion.

In the primative church, in places, when their friends The usage of the
primative church in the receuing of the (...) at the burial of the dead.
were dead, they used to come together to the holy communion. What? to remedy
them that were dead? No, no. A straw, it was not instituted for no such
purpose. But then they would call to remembrance gods goodness, and his
passion that he suffered for us, wherein they comforted much their faith. Other
came afterward and settes up all these kinds of massyng, all these kinds of
iniquity.

What an abomination is (...) the foulest that ever was, to Massing was the
foulest (...) that (...).
atribute to man's work our salvation. God be thanked that we have this blessed
communion set forth so now, that we may comfort, increase, and fortify our
faith at that blessed celebration. If he be guilty of the body of Christ,
that takes it unworthily, he fetches great comfort at it, that eats it
worthily: He does eat it wortely, that does eat it in faith. In faith? in
what faith? not long a go agreat man, The great man that never knew other (...)
the whore (...) faith.
said in an audience. They babble much of faith, I will go lie with my, whore
all night, and have as good a faith, as the best of them all. I think he never
knew other, but the whoremongers faith. It is no such faith that will serve.
It is no (...) Judges, or justices faith, no rentraisers faith, no
whoremongers faith, no leas mongers faith, nor no seller of benefices fayeth,
but the faith (...) the passion: of What (...) will serve.
our Savior Christ. We must believe that our Savior Christ has taken us
again to his favor, that (...) has delivered us his own body and blood, to
plead with the devil, and by merit of his own passion, of his own mere
liberality. This is the faith I tell you, that we must come to the communion
with, and not the whore mongers faith Look where remission of sin is, there is
ackowleding of sin also. Faith is a noble duchess, she has ever her gentleman
Faith is a (...) ble woman she is at her gentleman usher going before her, and
her train after her.
usher going before her, the confessing of sins, she has a train after
her, the fruits of good works, the walkyng in the commandments of God. He
that believes, will not be idle, he will walk he will do his business, have
ever the gentelman vssher with you. So if ye will try faith, remember this
rule, consider whether the train be waiting upon (...). If you have another
faith the^ this, a whore The true (...) of faith.
mongers faith, you are like to go to the Scalding house, and there you shall
have two dishes, weping and gnashing of teeth, much good do it you, you see
your fare. If ye will believe and acknowledge your sins, you shall come to the
blessed communion of the bitter passion of Christ, worthily and so attain to
everlasting life to the which the father of heaven bring you and me.

Amen.
The end of the seven Sermons, that M. Latimer Preached before King (...).
A Sermon of Master Latimer, preached at Stamforde the. ix. day of October.
Anno. M. CCCCCL.
Reddite ergo quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, et quaesunt dei, deo.

Give that that is Cesars to Caesar, and that that is Gods to God.


This doctrine is grievous, heavy, and irkesom to covetous hearts, rebellious and
seditious hearts. Give, give they ca^ not away with it, it cannot stick in
their minds, nor settle in their stomakes: they would rather be taking,
scraping, and catching, then giving.

But godly persons will well accept and take it, for it is to them a great
pleasure, Joye and comfort. For the better understanding of this place, ye
shall understand, Christ Christ came not to deliver from civil (...).
came to bring us out of bondage and to set us at liberty: not from civil
burden, as from obaying the magistrates, from payng tax and tribute, but from
a greater burden, and a more greuouser burden, the burden of sin, the
burden not of the body but of the soul, to make us free from it, and to
redeem us from the curse and malediction of the law, unto the honorable state
of the children of God.

But as for the civil burdens, he delivered us not from them, but rather
commanded us to pay them: give, give, says he to Caesar obedience, tribute,
and all things dew to Caesar. For the understanding of this text, it shall be
needful to consider the circumstance going before: which thing dewly
considered, gives a great light to all places of the scripture: who spoke
these words, to whom they were spoken, upon what occasyon, and before whom.

Therefore I will take the whole fragemente and shred, taken out of gods (...)
for the gospel of this day, written in the gospel of Matthew the. xxii. (...).
Tunc abierunt Pharisoei. Then went the Pharisees and took a counsel, Luke has
Obseruantes, marking, spying, looking, tooting, watching: like suttel, crafty
and sleightie fellows they took a council and sent to him their disciples,
which should fain the^ selves just me^, godly men, glad to learn his
doctrine. And None such (...) as these
with them Herodes servant, to trap him in his words: and they said to him:
M. we know that thou art a true man, and teach the way of god, in veritate,
truly, and carest for no man. For thou regardest not the personage of man. Tell
us there fore, what think thou? Is it lawefull to give Caesar tribute money or
no? This was their question that they would have (...) him with. In (...) to
this they would have caught him by the foot. But Jesus cognita malitia (...)
knowing their malice, their wickedness, their (...) nes, he said to them:
hipocrits why do ye tempt me? Show me a piece of the tribute money. And they
brought him a penny. And he said to them: whose image is this, and the writing?
They answered: Cesars, He said to (...). Give to (...) that that belongs to
Caesar, and to god that that is gods.

Thus ye may perceive, it was our savior Christ that spoke these words, and
they were spoken unto the Phari seis that tempted him. But they be a doctrine
unto us that are (...) disciples. For whose words should we delight to hear
and learn, but the words and doctrine of our sa uiour christ? And that I may
at this time so declare them, as may be for gods glory, your edifying, and my
discharge, I pray you all to help me with your prayers.

In the which prayer. etc. For the universal church of christ through the
whole world. etc. For the preservation of our Sovereign Lord king Edward the.
vi. sole supreme head under God and christ of the churches of England and of
Ireland. etc. Secondly for the kings most honorable (...)? Thirdly I commend
unto you the souls departed this life in the (...) of Christ, that ye remember
to give (...), praise and thanks to almightye God for his great goodness and
mercy showed unto them in that great need and conflict against the devil and
sin. To give them at the hour of death faith in his sons death and (...),
(...) they might conquer and overcome, and get the (...). (...) thanks I say
for this, adding prayers and supplycations for your selves, that it may please
God to give you the like faith and grace, to trust only unto the death of his
dear so^, as he gave unto them. For as they be gone, so must we: and the
devil will be as ready (...) tempt us as he was then, and our sins will light
as heavy upon us as theirs did upon the^: And we are as weak and unable to
resist as were they. Pray therefore that we may have grace to die in the same
says of Christ as they did, and at the latter day be raised with (...),
Isaac and Jacob, and be partakers with Christ in the kingdom of heaven: for
this and grace, (...) us say the Lords prayer. Tunc abeuntes. Tunc, It hangs
ou a text before. Christ told them a similitude that the kingdom of heaven is
like to a king that made a bridale to his senne, he married his son, and sent
his servant out to bid his gestes. Well they would not come although he had
made great preparing and much cost for them: ambicion, covetousness, and
cruelty would not let them come. Then he sent his warriors and destroyed
them: and again sent other servants to bid gestes to his bridal, hand
over head come who would. They did his bidding, and the (...) was full of
gestes. The king now would view his (...): and fynding there one not cladde in
mariyng garments, he asked him: friend how came thou here, not having a
marriage garment? And commanded to bind him hand and foot, and cast him into
utter darkness: there was wayling and grinding of teth. For many (...) called
and few be chosen. Now Christ expounds this. The kingdom of heaven is
preaching of the Gospel. This marriage is the joining of Christ and his
church, which was begone by Christ hear in earth, and shall continue to the
end of the world. The bidders of his (...) to the (...).
gestes are preachers, but here are so many lettes and hindrances: couetis is
a let, ambicion is a let, cruelty is the gretest let. For they bet his
servant, brake their heads, yea (...) them, which (...) them to this
bridal. With this the king was angry, and sent his men of war to destroy
those unthankful people. Was he not angrye with covetousness and with
ambition? Yes he is angrye with covetous men, with ambitious men: But most of
all with cruel tie. This is an anger above commune anger, when men be not only
(...), but also add cruelty to persecute the preachers, that comes to call
us to this marriage.

This touches God so nigh, that he says. Qui vos audit me audit. This
cruelty the king would not leave unpunished, but sent forth his men of war.
They are called his me^ of war, his men, his men, for wars come at his
commaun dement. Titus and (...) sent of God to punish those covetous Jews,
ambicious Jews, cruel Jews yt would not credit Christ, nor believe the
preaching of salvation.

Now in war, what (...) so ever get the victory, that is The victory (...)
Gods.
Gods part, that is Gods host. Nabuchodonosor was an evil man, a wicked man,
yet was he sent of God to punish the stubburne and covetous Jews for their
ambicion, and cruelty, and forsaking gods most holy word: And he is called in
scripture Gods servant. It is no good argument. He has the victory, Ergo he
is a good man. But this is a good argument. He has the victory, Ergo God was
on his side, and by him punished the contrary part. The preachers called good
and bad. They can do no more but call, God is he that must bring in, God must
open the hearts, as it is in the Acts of the Apostles. When Paul preached to
the women, there was a silk woman Cuius cor deus aperu it, whose heart God
opened. None could open it but God. Paul could but only preach, God must
work, God must do the thing in wardly. But good and bad came. Therefore the
preaching is likned to a Fishers net, that takes good The (...) of the net.
fish and bad, and draws all to the shore. In the whole multitude that
profess the Gospel, al be not good, all cannot away with the mortifying of
their flesh, they will with good will bear the name of Christians, of
gospellers, but to do the deeds they grudge they repine, they ca^ not (...)
with it. A monge the Apostles, all were not honest, nay, one was a devil, So
among so great number of gospellers Diverse (...) of Gospellers.
some are card gospellers, some are dise gospellers, some pot gospellers, all
are not good, al seek not amendment of life. Then comes the king to see his
gestes. And finds one not having the marriage garment, and says to him:
Friend how came thou hither, and have not the marriage garment? Faith is the
marriage garmente, not a feigned faith without The (...).
good living, but faith that works by love. He was blamed because he
professed one thing, and was in deed another. Why did he not blame the
preachers? There was no fault in them, they did their deuties, they had no
further commandment but to call them to the marriage.

The garment he should have provided him self. Therefore he quarrelleth not
with the preachers: what both this fellow here? Why suffered ye him to enter?
etc. for their commission extended no further but only to call him. Many are
grieved that there is so (...) fruit of their preaching. And when as they are
(...): why do you not preach having so great gifts given you of God? I would
preach say they, but I see so little fruit, so little amendme^t of life, that
it makes me weary. I noughty answer, a very noughtye answer. Thou art
troubled with that God A good lesson for preachers.
gave thee no charge of, and leauest undone, that thou art charged with. God
commands thee to preach, and Si non (...) fueris. If thou speak not, if
thou warn not the wicked that they turn and amend, they shall perish in their
iniquities. Sanguinem autem eius de manu tua requiram. This terte nippeth, this
pincheth, this touches the quick. He shall dye in his wickedness, but I will
require his blood at thy hand. Herke^ well to this, mark it well ye curates, I
will ask his blood at thy hand. If you do not your office, if ye teach not
ye people, and warn the^ not, You shall be damned for it. If you do your office,
you ar discharged. Tua^ anim tua^ liberasti. Learn to discharge (...).
Warn the^ therefore to leave their wickedness, their couetise, their ambicio^,
their crueltye, unmercifulness. etc. and thou have saved thine own soul. For
there was no quarrel with the preachers, but he was cast in prison, where was
weping and wailing, and grinding of teeth: these were his delicates. Multi sunt
vocati, Many are called, but few ar chosen. To this parable now (...) this
gospel. Tune Pharisei abeuntes. Pharisei was a sect of religion among the
Jews most exquisite, perfect, holy, and learned, and were (...) most godly men,
even such as in holiness excelled all other, as our Monks were of late among
us, and be yet in other places. They were in Gods bosom, even at heaven
gates in the sight of yt world: But in wardly supersticious, (...) name
changed.
fained, holo wherted, dissimulers. Now at this time I know none more like
them; the^ the hipocriticall holow hearted (...). The name is changed, but the
thing remains: Therefore they may well be called by the name, that keep the
thing. These were enemies to Christ and his doctrine. They would be ordered by
old wont, customs, forfathers: and so mainteyne their tradicions set aside
the commandments of God, refused Christ, and his word. S. Luke has
obseruantes obseruauntes, that is watchers, toters, spies, much like the
obseruaunte friars, the barefote friars, that were here, which in deed were
the Bishop of The pops (...)
Romes spies, watching in every country, what was said or don against him. He
had it by and by, by one or other of his spies, they (...) his men all
together, his posts to work against the Regalitie. In the court, in the noble
men's houses, at every merchants house, those obseruauntes were spying,
toting, and loking watching and catching what they might hear or see against
the sea of Rom^e. Take heed of these obseruauntes. To understand the word
obseruantes mark what the poet says in his comedy. Obserua Dauum, (...)
head, be ware and mark Dauum, for they will be stirring in every town, in
eueryge^telmans house, yea at their very tables: well, be wise, beware of them.
Inierunt (...).

They took a counsel, some goodly thing, some wayghty matter, I am sure, that
these holy fathers consult upon. It must needs be for the commune wealth, and
the profit of many, that these holy fathers come together for. It was to snarle
or trap him in his words. This was their device, this was their counsel. To
this end they gather such a compa ny of holy fathers. I council, a council.
Bonum est concilium said one. (...) marye quod another: sed bonorum. A council
is good, yea sir if it be of good men. For else what is a council, if it be
wicked, of wicked men? If they say: This was done by a counsel, determined in
a counsel, what is it the better, if the council be wicked? Nicene council
was gathered of a great number of Bishops and learned men: yet had not one man
ben, they had determined contrary (...) prcuailed a lone.
to gods word. They were minded, and ernesilye bent to make a decree that no
priess should mary: but one old man, and un married him self, (...) that act,
and turned the councels mind: so that they (...) not with that decree. And
why? more credence is to be given to one man having the holy word of god for
him, then to r. thousand without the word If it a gree with Gods word, it is
to be received: if it agree not, it is not to be received, though a (...), yea
though an aungel from heaven had determined it. Truth it is that Christ
grants to a congregation gathered in his name, to be amongs them, yea though
it be but. ii. or iii. There is as much granted to. ii. or three, as to ten
thousand, so they come in Christ's name. Vbiduo vel tres congregati sunt in
nomine meo, ibi sum in medio eorum. In nomine meo, much wickedness is don. In
nomine domini, when they come together, selling their own private lust,
pleasures, and ambicyous desires, it is not in in nomine domini, But to seek
Gods glory, Christ's glory, Christ's true religion, that is in nomi ne Christi,
and then they are to be hard. But what was these men's counsel? Vt
illaquearent eum in sermon.

To snarle or tangle him in his words, tooters and watchers to catch him in
his word, that they might enforce somewhat against him: Non est concilium
aduersus dominum: These were wyly pyes, sleyghtye children, children of the
world, and craftily they handled their matters.

Miserunt discipulos suos cum Herodianis. They would not go themselves, lest
they might have been known, but he knew not their disciples as they thought.
And they went not alone, but had with them Herodes Sowdiers, Herodes favorers.
This Herod was an (...), and was appointed by the Romans to govern the
Jews, and to gather the tribute money. Therefore he was hated among yt Jews
and so were those that favored the Romans part, and in dis dayne they were
called Herodians. Now was the time come, that the holy Patriarch prophesied,
that the Scepter and kingdom was removed, and Christ was borne. Agremente
against God.
This they should have marked, and received his doctrine. But they went about
to destroy him, and therefore they brought the Herodians with them, Here now is
an agreement in wickedness between the Phariseis and the Herodians: against the
truth, against Christ, against Gods word they agree together, where as in
deed neither loved other, but hated each other as a toade. So, many now adays
of our Phariseis Papists, in destroying the truth they agree wonders well:
where as in pryuate matters, they hate one another as a toade.

Here commes me now these holy fathers from their council, and send their
Disciples with the Herodians: mark their behaniour, and mark Christ's
behauioure. They come lowtyng and with low curtesye, as though they would
creape into his bosom: as for Herod's men, they meddle not, bud stand by to
hear the tale as witnesses, and if he should speak any thing amiss, be
ready to lay hands upon him. They would feign rid him and destroy Thus have
their successors done (...) sense.
him, but they would turn the envy of the deed upon Herod, so that they
would be seen fauteles. It had been more meet for them to have counceld how
to amend their fautes and to have come to Christ, to learn his doctrine, then
to study malyciously to trappe him, and to destroy him. What said they?
Magister scimus quod verax es. etc.

Master we know that thou art a true manne, and teach the way of God
truly, master we know that thou art (...) truth, and thou tellest the very
truth, and sparest for no man. Thou art plain Tomme truth. Goodlye words,
but out of a cancard stomach and malicious heart. Smilyng speakers crepe into a
man's bosom, they love and all to love him, they favor his word and call
him Subtle (...) pentes.
Master, and yet would gladly see him hanged.

These are in deed Hipocrites, one in heart and another in mouth. We know that
thou art a true manne.

Et viam dei in veritate doces. Yea this is Gods way taught truly. There
is Gods way and man's way: Many teach men's way, but that should not
be: we should learn viam dei, Gods way, and that truly, without mirture,
temperature, blaunching, powderyng.

Many teach Gods way, and shall preach a very good and (...),
godly Sermon, but at the last they will have a blanched almonde, one litell
peace of Poperye patched in, to powder their matter with, for their own lucre
and glory. They make a mingling of the way of God and man's way together, a
mingle mangle as men serve pigs in my country. Christ did not so. He taught
the way of god truly without mixture poudering, or blau^ching. These be the
properties of al true preachers, that these confess to be in Christ. It was
true every word that they spoke. (...) is our master appointed of god, he was
true and taught Gods way, not man's way: truly, not blaunching it with man's
doctrine. So should we preachers be true men. Preachers of Gods way, truly,
truly, without regard of person: That is for no man's pleasure corrupting the
word, or mingle mangle the word with man's inventions and traditions.

Here may patrons of benefices learn upon what manner a man they should bestow
their benefice. Upon a true man, a teacher. He may not be to learn, and a
scholar when he should teach other, but one learned, hable to teach, hable
and well willing to discharge his cure. But what do you patrons? Sell your
benefices, or give them to your servant Patrons of benefices.
for their service, for keeping of hounds, hawks, for making of your gardens.
These patrons regard no souls, neither their own, nor other men's. what care
they for souls, so they have money, though they perish, though they go to the
Devil? Where as in deed the office of a patron is to have a care, a zeal, a
vigilant eye for soul health, and to provide for his churches, that he is
patron of, that they might be taught in Gods word. Truly many now a days,
strive to be patrones of benefices, and go to the law who should be patron.
And what strive they for think ye? Even which of them shall goo to the Devil
first. For they regard not soul health, nor the office of preaching, the
office of salvation: where as in deed therefore are they patrons to look to it
and to se it be provided for. God of his goodness and almighty power, might
ordeyn otherwise and means of Wherefore (...) do strive.
salvation: but this office of preaching is it that God has ordained, as
Saint Paul says. Cum non cognouerit mundus per sapientiam deum, placuit deo
per stultitiam praedicationis saluos facere credentes. Where as the world by
his wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by folish preaching to save credentes,
those that believe, per stultitiam praedicationis, by foo lishues of preaching,
or folish preaching, it makes no matter. Not that it was folish in deed, but
that the wisemen of the world did so esteem and take the preaching of the
gospel, whereas in deed it is most godly wysdom: and the prea ching office, is
the office of salvation, and the only means that God has appointed to
salvation. Credentes. Those The office of salvation,
that believe be saved by this holy office of preaching. I would wish it were
better looked unto, and provided for, and that patrons and bishops should see
more (...) to it, then has been done before time: I would ask no more
diligence to this office of salvation, then men are wont to bestow upon these
worldly pleasures and luker or common dities. Nay would they bestow but the
half labor and pains, and some litell part of the expenses, it were well.

To consider what has been plucked from Abbaies, colleges, and chaa^utries: it
is meruell no more to be bestowed up on this holy office of salvation. It may
well be said by us that the Lord complayneth by his Prophet. Domus mea
deserta, vosfestinatis vnusquisque in domum suam.

What is Christ's house but christen souls? but who makes any provision for
them? every man scrapeth and gets Christensoules are Christ's house.
together for this bodily house, but the soul health is neglected, schools are
not maintained, scholars have not ex hibition, the preaching office decays:
men provide lands and riches for their children, but this most necessary
office, they for the most part, neglect. Uerye few there be that hell peth poor
scolers, that sets their children to scole to learn the word of God, and
to make a provision for the age to come. This notwithstanding is the only way
to sal uation, God will not devise any new way as far as I per ceiue, but
would have us to use this way ordained al rea die. This preaching way we ought
to use, and not to look for any new way; this office of salvation we ought to
main teyne, and not look for any other. My request is that ye would bestow as
much to the maintenance of this necessary office God will (...) no new way.
of salvation, as ye were wont to bestow in times past upon Romish trifels
and things of man's tradicions. Nether do I now speak for my self and my
couente, as the (...) Friars were wont to do. I have enough, I thank God,
and I neade not to beg. I would every preacher were as well provided as my
self through this Realm, as in deed I thyncke them as well worthy as my self.
I wish (I say) ye would bestow as much upon this necessary office of
salvation, as in times paste ye bestowed Father (...) wish.
in Pilgrimage, in Images, in gildyng, painting, in (...), Diriges, Trenfauls,
Chauntryes and such vain things of the Romyshe Pharyseis and Papists
inuentyng.

Ye would do that without calling, and to this will you not be ready when ye
be called. If it be no better in time to come, then hitherto looked unto, then
England will at What a charge hangs upon the (...) of pre ching.
the last be wayle it, Christ knew what a charge hangs upon this necessary
office of preaching the office of salvation, and therefore most earnestly
applied it him self.

And when he chose his twelve Apostles to send them forth unto this office, he
first prayed all the night. He being God almighty with the father, might have
given all gifts fit for this office, but to teach us, he would first pray
all night. Here is good matter for Bisshops and patrons to look upon, and not
to regard so little whom they give their benefyce unto, or whom they admit to
cure the fowls they have charge of. A notable example. Christ Note this ye
patrons.
prayed all night, or he would send them forth, or he would put them in
this preachig office, this most necessary office of salvation. For he saw
that they had neade of great zeal to God, and to soul health, that should
take upon them to keep souls, and a boolde courage and spirit that should
rebuke the world of their sin and (...), Many will choose now such a
Curate for their souls as they may call fool, rather then one that shall
rebuke their couetise ambition, unmercifulness, uncharitableness, that shall be
sober, discrite, apt to reprove, and resist the again sayers, with the word
of God.

These be the properties of every good preacher, to be The properties of a
good preacher.
a true manne, to teach, not dreams, nor inuencions of of men, but viam dei
in veritate, the way of God truly. And not to regard the personage of man.
Not to creep into his bosom, to clawe his back, to say to the wicked, he
doothe well, for filthy lukers sake. Ah these flatterers no greater myschyse
in the commune wealth then these flatterers. But who would have discerned
this but our savior Jesus Christ? He spread them out and knew all their
malicious hearts, their uncharitable hearts, their dissimulyng hearts and
said;

Quid me tentatis hypocritae.

Hipocrites, Hipocrites, Hipocrites, one in heart, a another in mouth, fair in
pretense, but full of mischief, and (...) hearted within. He saw what was
within. Hipocrites.


Then have at ye, ye Hipocrites, they put forth their question. Licet censum
dare Coesarian non?

A perilous question to answer to. This was the fruit of their counsel, and
this was the snare laid for him, what should he do now? hold his peace?
That had been a slander to his doctrine. They would have said: loo, how
ignorant he is in the law that has no answer to this simple and plain
question. If he affirm and bid pay the tribute, he shall incur the hatred of
the people, and seem to A dangerous question.
to speak in the favor of the Romans. If he would have denied it. Then
had they that they sought.

The Herodians were ready to lay hands upon him, to have him to Bocardo, to
prison with him, a traitor that speaks against Ceaser, away with this
sedicious fellow.

O Lord what peril is it to have to do with these Hipocrites? Who could
have escaped this snare, but Christ only which is the wisdom of the father,
and knew all their malicyousnes and craftye sleyghtes? And as he then by his
wisdom overcame them, so now douties he gives wisdom to all his, to spy
out and beware of (...) sutle God (...) wisdom.
crafts. For such traynes, trappes, snares and sutleties, as these Pharisees
laid for Christ, such have our Pharisaicall Papists laid for Christ's
preachers. But he mer cyfully ever fulfilled his promise, dabo os and
sapientiam, cui non possunt resistere omnes aduersarii vestri.

I will (says Christ) give mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able to resist. They shall not be tongue tied, they have their
answer, yea so wise that their adversaries shall not be hable to resist.
They may well oppress it here in this world with pow er, but they can not
be hable to overcome it with arguments of truth, no, all the pack of
adversaries with all their subteltyes, snares, and gynnes. They may rail upon
it, as in many places lewd fellows do against Priests Maryages. That Dame
his wife, his whore, etc.

But they can not deny it by any scripture, but that the Marriage of (...).
marriage of Pryestes is as good and godly, as the marriage of any other manne.
For wedlock is honorable among all men. And the wedded bed vndetyled.

And to avoid fornication, let (...) man have his own wife. Well, let them
rail, let them do what they can against the truth, (...): mark the end.
Look upon the end. The end is, all adversaries of the truth must be
confounded and come to naught, neither shall they be able to resist it. And
though the poor Disciples be troubled, vexed, and persecused, mark the end.

The hiest promotion that God can bring his unto in this life is to suffer for
his truth. And it is the greatest setting forth of his word, it is Gods
seed: And one suffering for the truth, turns more then a thousand Sermons.
I will tell you an example of this, how God gives mouth and wisdom.

I was once in examination before five or six (...), Father Latimers (...).
where I had much turmoyling: every week thrice I came to examynations, and
many snares and (...) were (...) to get some thing. Now God knows I was
ignorant of the law, but that God gave me answer and wisdom what I should
speak. It was God in deed, for else I had never escaped them. At the last I
was brought forth to be examyned, into a chamber hanged with arras, where I was
before wont to be examyned, but now at this time the chamber was somewhat
altered.

For where as before there was wont ever to be a fire in the chymney, now
the fire was taken away, (...) an Arrace hangyng hanged over the chymney, and
the table stood near the chymneyes end, so that I stood between the Table and
the chymneyes end. There was among these Bishops that examined me, one with
whom I have been very famyliar, and took him for my great friend, an aged
man, and he satte next the table end.

Then among all other questyons, he put forth one, a very subtle and (...)
one, and such one in deed, as I could not thyncke so great danger in. And
when I should make annswer, I pray you master Latimer said he, speak out,
I am very thick of hearing, and here be many that sytte far of. I
maruayled at this, that I was bidden speak out, and began to (...), and gave
an ear to the chimney. And sir there I heard a (...) walking in the chimney
behind the cloth. They had appointed one there to write al mine aunsweres,
for they made sure work that I should not starte from them: there was no
startynge from them.

God was my good Lord, and gave me aunsweare, I could nauer (...) have scayed
it. The question was this: Master Latimer, do you not think on your
conscience that you have been suspected of heresye? A subtle questyon, A
subtle (...)
a very subtle question. There was no holding of peace would serve. To
hold my peace had been to grant my self fautye. To answer, it was
every way full of danger. But God which always has given me answer,
healped me, or elsse I could never have eskaped it, and delyuerd me from their
hands. Many one have had the (...) gracious deliverance, and been endued
with gods wisdom and gods spirit, which all their adversaries can not be able
to resist. Ostendite mihi (...) census. Show me said he a penny of the tribute
(...). They laid snares to destroy them, but he ouerturneth the in their own
traps. Qui comprehendit tastutos in fallacia eorum. He takes the craf ty in
their own subtle ginnes and snares, but not maliciously to destroy them, as
they malitiosly would have seen him hanged, but mercifullye to turn them from
their wicked imaginations, that they might consider that no wisdom, no
subtle crafts, nor Counsel is against the Lord, and so repent and become
new men. At (...): illi denarium. And they brought him a denari, a piece of
their current coin, that was worth x. of our usual pence, such another piece
as our (...). And he said. Cuius est imago (...) and super scriptio? dicunt
(...), whose Image is this, and superscription: They said Ceasers, for now
was Iewerye brought under the bondage of the Romans, and therefore used they
the Roman coin, that had upon it does Ceasars image, and Ceasars
superscription. Then aunsweared Jesus. (...) ergo quae (...) Caesaris Caesari,
and quae sunt dei Deo. Pay to Ceasar that is due to Ceasar and to God that
which is due to God.

Make not a mingle mangle of them, but give to God his own, give to Ceasar his
own. To GOD give thy soul, thy faith, thy hoope, thy obedient mind to keep
his word and frame thy life there after. To Ceasar give tribute, Tax,
Subsidy, and all other duties (...) to him, as to have him in thy honor and
reverence, to obey his just laws and right wise commandments Give (...)
own.
etc.

But because the time is paste, I will hear make an end for this fore noone,
desiringe you to pray to God for his healpe, for at after noone I purpose to
begin again at this text, and to goo forth as God shall give me his grace.

Now let us al say together the Lords prayer. Our (...) which art in heaven.
etc.

The resydue of the Gospel. declared at after none by master Latimer.
Reddite caesari quae sunt Caesaris, and quae sunt, dei, Deo.
Yield to Ceasar, that belongs to Ceasar and to God, that belongs to God,
ye may perceive by that we have said, who spoke these words, and upon what
occa syon they were spoken. Our sauyoure Christ spoke them to the tempting
Pharisees, to the craftye and subtle holowe hearted Pharisees, willinge them to
know their duetye by their own confession, and to give to Ceasar his duty,
and to God his duty. Our savior Christ spoke them. If he spoke them, we
ought to regard them. Regard them I say and make much of them, for though
they were then spoken to them, yet in them they were spoken to all the world, I
use to make a rehearsal of that I spoke before, but because the time is
short, I will omit it. The service must be done, and the day goes fast
away. Therefore I will to my matter, and leave the rehersall. These words be
words of great importance, and would well be considered: for he that does
this, receives great benefits by it, but he that does it not incurreth great
damage and dan ger. The occasyon was a counsel taken among these holy fathers
to snarle Christ, a good and charitable deed, yet were they holy men, holy
fathers, full of (...) up to the hard ears. This they learned in their
council, and this now they set on broche. But Christ now causes them to They
(...) their own questyon.
make answer to their own question, as he also did a little before. When he was
come up into Jerusalem, and had driven out the biers and sellers in the temple.
The Archpharises, prouincials and Abbots phariseis, came stoutlye to him as he
was preaching in the Temple, and said to him: Qua authoritate ista facis? aut
quis dedit tibi istam aut horitatem? By what authority do thou these things?
who has given thee this authority? We have the rule of the people of god we
have given thee no such authority. A wo^derous thing, Christ had testimonye of
his father. This is my beloved son hear him. Ihon had born him witness,
saying. (...) the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of yt world, his
works and miracles were testimonies that his doctrine was of God, well, all this
will not serve. He must have license of these holy fathers, or else all is
nothing worth, Christ answered not directlye to their questyon, but asked them
a another question, and made them give answer a (...) them selves, and as it
were with one wedge dryued out a another. The baptism of Ihon, was it of God:
or of man? Was Ihon sent of God, had he his authority of god or of man? Here he
drives them to confess his doctrine to be of God. For Ihon whom they could
not deny to have been sent from god, bare witness that his doctrine was (...). If
they had confessed this, he would have inferred; why believe ye him not? If they
should have said Ihon was not of god: the^ would al yt people have been against
them, yea in a horlye burlye have stoned them. This they considered within them
selves, and yet their malicious hearts would not bear it to confess the truth,
nay rather like wise gentle The (...) confess ignorancy.
men they answered. We know not, we cannot tell.

These Arch Pharisees thought nothing might be done, or taught without their
license, nor otherwise, but as they pleased to interpreat. They were like our
religion and clergy, that thought nothing might be taught, but as they
pleased. They would pay no tribute, tax nor tribute. They had their Immunities,
priueledges and graunts from the Romain bishop. And to maintain this, they
alleged many scriptures as thus, Nolite tarigere Christos meos, which is
touch not mine anointed or consecrated people, which words the Lord spoke by
the Israelites in Egipte, warning king Pharao to leave and cease from
persecutyng yt Israelites, and it makes as much for our cleargyes immunity, A
good proof.
and proves it as well, as if a man alleged, Quem ter ra pontus to prove that
an Ape has a tail. Well, they answered. Cesaris, Lesars, they confessed it was
Lesars money, and Lesars image and wrytinge upon it: hear Christ compelled
them to make answer unto their own question. And if envy should arise, to take
it them self. For they con fessed it to be Ceasars. Then said he. Give to
Lesar that which is Ceasars, and to God that is due to God. This answer of
Christ I would have you all to learn: give to your Ceaser to your king, to
our most noble king Edward Give to our Ceasar.
our Ceasar, our king and magistrate appointed, and given to us of God, give to
him that which is due to him. This is a commandment of God, as are these:
Thou shall not murder, thou shall not steal, nor bear falls witness against
thy neighbors. And as thou art bound upon pearil of thy soul to obey the
other, so upon pearill of thy soul thou art bound to obey and keep this. Look
well upon Give, is an he uy word to some.
it, for it is upon pearill of thy soul. date, give, give, a heavy word to a
covetous heart, to a rebellious heart, they would not hear Reddite or date, pay
or give, but take, catch keep fast. We are al bound to live in obedyence unto
our king, under his just and rightwise laws and commandments. Christ came
in deed to deliver us from burdens and bondage, but that was not from civil
and polityke laws and obedience. He came to deliver us from the greatest
bondage that can be, from sin and damnation. The heauiest burden that Sin
is the (...).
can be, is sin, and in comparison of it, al other burdens are but light and
easy matters to bear. Therefore Christ came to deliver us from that, and gave
his body to be torn upon the cross for that. Neither could any work or law,
or sacrifice redeem us from that, but Christ only. I never preached in
Lincoln shire before, nor came here a fore, save once when I went to take
orders at Lincoln, which was a good while a go, therefore I can not say much of
Lyncolne shire, for I know it not, but I dare say, if Lincoln shire be Lincoln
shire.
as other places that I know, this text condemns a great many of Lincoln
shyre, and drives them down to hell for breakinge of this commandment: Give
to Ceasar that which is due to Ceaser, and to God that which is due to god.
The office of a magistrate is grounded upon Gods word, and is plainly
described of S. Paul, wrytinge unto the Romans, where he shows that all
souls, that is to say, all men ought to obey the magistrates, for they are or
dained of God, and to resist them, is to resist against God. For he is Gods
minister ordained to punish the wicked and to maintain the good. Wherefore we
ought to pay to him tribute, custom, Taxes and other things that he requires
upon us, as Christ says here, Reddite give to Caesar. How much we should give,
he defines not, but leaves it to Ceasars officers to determine, and to his
counsel to appoint. Christ was not the Emperoures treasurer, therefore Christ
was not Lord treasurer.
he meddled not with that point, but left it the treasurer to define and
determine. He went about another vocation, to preach unto the people their
duetye, and to obey their Princes, Kings, Emperoures and magistrates, and to
bid them give that the king requires of them, not to appoint a king what he
shall require of them. It is meet for every man to keep his own vocation, and
diligently walk in it, and with faithfulness to study to be occupied in that
God has called him unto, and not to be busye in that God has not called him
unto. Therefore says Christ: give to Ceasar, but he appoynteth not how
much, for that should his treasurer know, and should warn him of it, when
he has enough, that the people be not oppressed with vnnecessarye burdens,
nor that the kings treasures be to seek, when they should be occupied. The
king must have his treasures before hand, what chance so ever come soddenly.
It is no reason when the The treasurers duty.
king should occupy his treasure in maintenance of a co^ mon wealth, in
defense of a country, in maintaininge of his wars, that then his monye
should be in thy purse to seek and ungathered. Nay he must have it in a
readiness, at hand, that it be not to seek. And he must have as much as is
necessary for him. For so much is due to a king as is necessary, and so much
may he require by the law of God, and take of his commons is as necessary. And
that must not (...) much a (...) may take.
thou nor I that are subjects appoint, but the king him self must appoint it,
his counsel must appoint it, we must give it, we must pay it, for it is due to
the king, and upon peril of thy soul thou must pay it. And as he that takes
my tippet or my cloak does me wrong and is a thief: so he that does not pay to
the king that is his due, without fraud or guil, does the king wrong, and is
in peril of his soul for so doing. Well, mark it well now, and se whether this
text be a nipping text for covetous me^ or no: Give to Ceaser, yt is due to
Ceasar. When the parliament, the high court of this realm is gathered
together, and there it is determined that every man shall (...) a rv. part of
his goods to ye King: Then commissio^s come forth, and he that in sight of men
in his cattle, corn, sheep, and other goods is worth an. C. Twenty pound
men to the (...).
mark or an. C. pound, will set him self at x. pound. he will be worth no
more to the king but after x. pound. Tell me now whether this be theft or no?
His cattle, corn, sheep in every man's eyes shall be worth. ii. C. pound
besides other things, as money and plate, and he will mary his daughter and give
with her. iiii. or v. C. marks, and yet at the valua tion he will be a xx.
pound man. does he give to Caesar that which is due to Caesar? Does he not rather
rob the king of his bound duty and (...) that he ought to the king? yes it is
very theft, and thou might with as good conscience take my cloak or my
tippet from me, as so unjustly take or withhold from the king that which the
parliament has given unto the king, it is thy bound duty to pay him truly
that which is granuted for it is due debt, and upon peril of thy soul thou art
bound to obey it. (...) I will say more. If the king should require of the an
unjust request, yet art thou bound to pay it, and not resist nor rebel
against the king. The king in deed is in pearil of his soul, for askinge of
an The king map (...) unjust,
unjust request, and God will in his due time reckon with him for it: but thou
must obey thy king, and not take upon thee to judge him, God is the kings
judge, and doutlesse will grievously punish him, if he do any thing
unrighteously. Therefore pray thou for thy king, and pay him his duty, and
disobey him not. And know this, that when so ever there is any iniust exaction
laid upon thee, it is a plage and punishmente for thy sin, as all other
plages are, as are hunger, dearth, pestilence and such other. We meruel, we are
plaged as we be, and I think berely this unjust and unfaithful dealing with
our princes, is one great cause of our plage: look therefore every man upon his
(...). One cause (...).
Ye shall not be judged by worldly policy at the latter day, but by Gods word.
Sermo quem locutus sum vobis, ipse iudicabit vos in nouissimo die. The word
that I have spoken to you, that shall judge you at the latter day. Look well no
we, every man upon his conscience, and see whether he have done this
commandment of God: give to your king, that which is due to him, and he
that finds him self gilty, let him amend in time to come. This is hard
gear and sore gear thou wylt say, give, give, I have wife and children and
great charge: well I shall tell thee, it minisheth not thy stock one
farthinge at the years end. Harken what God says. Si audieritis verba mea.
If you will hear my To give (...) not (...) the stock.
words says God, and keep that I command thee, I will bless thee, and Si
non audieritis. If ye will not hear my words, and do my commandments, thou
shall be cursed etc. What is blessing, not wagginge of the syngers, as our
bishops were wont, but it is. I will favor thee and increase thy goods,
thy corn, thy cattle, thy Ox, thy sheep, and in all thy business thou shalt
prosper and goo, forward. And what is the curse, but to be out of Gods
Blessinge and cursyng.
favor, I will empouerishe thee, thy corn, thy cattle, thy Ox, thy sheep
shall not prosper, what thou take in hand, it shall not goo forward. This was
not taught in times past, men had pilgrimages, Images, Masses, Trentals etc.
but I would have you muse of these two points, cursed, if thou hear not Gods
word, commanding thee to pay thy duty to the king, and blessed if thou hear
it and keep it, I would have you to muse of these two things. Causes of (...).
That it shall not minish thy stock. Show me one man in all England that is
the porer for paying the king his duty, for being a true dealing man, a good
alms man etc. Many have come to poverty by dising, carding, riot, whore dome
and such like. But never no man by truth, mercy, alms, right dealing with
the king. In the cardinals time me^ were put to their oaths to swear what they
were worth. It was a fore thing, and a thing I would wish not to be followed. O
Lord what periurye was in England by that swearinge, I think this realm
fares the worsse yet for that perjury. For doutlesse many one willingly and
wittingly forsware them selves at that time. It is a dear time thou will say,
and men have much a do to live, therefore it is a good policy to set my self
much less then I am, well, that is thy worldly pollicye, and with it thou
runnest into the curse of God for breaking his word and commandment: Give to
Ceasar, that which is due to Ceasar. I will tell thee a good policy to keep thy
stock, and to maintain thine estate, not a policy of the world, but of Gods
word, and it is this. Quaerite primum regnum dei, and institiam eius, and baec
omnia a diicienturvobis, seek first the kingdom of God, and (...) to maintain
the stock.
the righteousness of it, and al these things shall be plenteously given to
you. Do thou not believe this to be true? is Christ an holowe man, an untrue
man, a dissembler? The Pharisees make him a true man, and we make him a false
harlot. He is a true man, and his words and promise are true. Nay we be false
holow hearted, and therefore justly pu nished. For if we would credit his
words, it should without dout be given us a boundantly upon heaps, yea more
then we could desire. When we pray for things unto almighty God, what ask we,
do we ask forth with at yt first chop our necessaries? Nay The right order of
prayer.
Christ taught us first to pray: Our father which art in heaven, hallowed by thy
name, thy kingdom come, thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven. etc. First
we pray these peticions, for faith, hope, and charity, that Gods honor may in all things be set out among us, and then we pray after for bodily things. But
we now leave these peticions, and would be in panem nostrum at the first dash,
we would have our day ly bread at the first chop, and so we have that, we
force little of the other. We will not say in words that we think God false,
but in deeds we plainly affirm it, for we trust him (...), neither believe his
promise when he byddeth us, (...) give, I will bless ye, I will make good my
word. Nay nay, we will scrape and scraule, and catch and pull to us all that we
may get. Alii diuidunt sua, and ditiores fiunt, alii rapiunt non suae et semper
in egestate sunt. Some men (says Salamon) deuides their own goods, they pay
the king his duty, every man his Note this well.
own, give alms, and yet are more richer, they have enough and enough. Other,
rob other men, cratch and scrape all that they may come by, never content, never
enough, heap to heap, and yet ar they al way beggars. Qui (...) impignabitur,
he that blesses shall be fat and wealthy. He that blesses (not with waggyng
his fingers) but helping the poor people, he shall be blessed and ever have
enough, god will bless him, God will increase him. And in deed so (...) men to
consider their gifts and goods to be given. vtillorum copia, aliorum succurrat
inopie. That their abundance might succor the necessity, poverty, and mysery
of their pore neighbors, and not to wast it, consume it in riot and excess,
but in deeds of mercy, Learn (...) spend thy goods.
in deeds of charity and pity upon the poor. Qui miseretur pauperis, feneratur
domino. He that has mercy upon the poor, he lends upon usury unto the Lord.
This is a good usury, to make God thy debtor. Many lends upon worldly vsery,
Good vsurye.
which surely is a very wicked thing, and God forbyddeth it. But this usury God
commands and promyseth to supply the lack of it in thy cofers. He will be
debtor, he will be pay (...). Thou shall not find thy stok deminished at yt
years end by keeping Gods commandment, but rather blessed and increased.
Give therefore unto the king, that is due unto the king, Et que sunt dei deo,
and give to God that which is Gods. What is Gods? That I give at Gods bidding.
The tithes, Things du to God.
oblacions, first borne of beasts, and sacrifice cattle, which all God
appointed unto the Jews to the mayntenau^ce of their church ministers of the
clergy, poor widows, fatherles children, mayntenance of poor scholars. This
was the cause that God assigned the Jews to pay their tithes, and until the
coming of Christ, they were due by Gods law, and might by the law given to
Moses be claymed. But now that law is at an end, neither can they be claymed
any more by that law. Notwithstanding now in the time of the new Testament, the
Princes be bound to provide a sufficient living for the ministers, as Saint
Paul says: Qui (...) predicant de (...) uiuant: They that preach the Gospel,
this is the The Minister must be provided for
ministry of salvation, preaching of the Gospel, and unto such ministers, ye
be bound to give a sufficient living. Comunicate Catechizanti in omnibus bonis,
give part to him that teaches you in all good things, give him part of al
your goods, se he have sufficient living. But who shall appoint him a sufficient
living? him self? nay, who then? you? nay another. The King must apoynt him
sufficiently to live upon. For I think verily there are a great many, which if
the ministers should have no living, but at their appointment: he should not
have clouttinglether to piece his shoes with, no not clouting lether to his
shoes. The King therefore must appoint the ministers The King must appoint yt
ministers (...).
their liuinges by his law, and that living that the King appoynteth, they
must claim, and you must pay it to them truly, for it is their duty and it is
theft to withdraw it or (...) it from them. For God commands you to obey
your kings laws, and by the same laws the King gives the minister his tithes
and other duties, therefore upon peril of thy (...) thou art bound to obey thy
King and to pay to thy Curate yt tithe that thou art commanded. But some will
say, our Curate Have no re spect to the person.
is naught, an Assehead, a dodipoll, a lackelatin and can do nothing: Shall I
pay him my tithes that does us no good, nor none will do: Yea I say thou must
pay him his duty, and if he be such a one, complain to the Bishop. We have
complained to the ordinary, and he is as negligent as he. Complain to the
council, sir so have we done, but no remedy can be had. Well I can tell where
thou shalt complain. Complain to god, he will surely hear the, he will cemedy
it. Christ saw the people lying, tanquam oues non habentes pastores. As sheep
having no shepehard. They had Bishops, scryhes and Pharisees, curates in name a
great many, yet were they tanquam oues non habentes postorem, as sheep having
no shepeheard, what is that to say? they had no true teachers, they had no
preachers of the law of God to them. What remedy taught Christ for it,
withdraw their liuinges? Nay. Make (...)? nay, but, (...) dominum messis, pray
yt Lord of harvest Pray, pray. Prayer is the remedy that never fails, when al
A mean to reform ne hligent Cu rates.
other fails this never fails. Therefore pray unto God, and he will either
turn his heart and make him better, or remove him from thee and send a better
in his place, orels take him away all to gether. So will the Lord do with any
other oppressor of then poor, either he will turn their hearts, and make them
better, orels remove them and take them quite a way. Therefore let men (...)
pacient and suffer, and pray unto God for (...) from their troubles, and not
think to remedy it them selves, but pray to God, and he will remedy it. Pray
I say, and take pecience, and you shall se the Lord will in due time remedy it.
There be many that turn this text Many turn this text.
clean contrary. For they yield to Ceasar that which is Gods, and to God that
which is Ceasars. They had money enough to build Monastaries, Chauntries,
Masses, year days, Trentals, to gild images. etc. And all this they did (say
they) to honor God with.

They would worship God with copes, torches, tapers, candels, and an hundred
things mo that god never required at their hands. God requires the hearts to
fear him, and love him, and stoudiously to walk before him: But this inward
service (...) will not give him. Nay, (...) give Ceasar our heart, and God our
outward service, as al such do as have received the Interim. God should posses
our whole hearts, and we should most studyously walk every man in his
vocation, according to the word of God, according to his commandments, obey
ing our king, and succouring the pore and needy, as he has The true Gods
service.
commanded us. And this is true Gods service, and the thing that belongs to
God Ifthys be true, what is be come of our forefathers? I answer, it is a vain
and unprofitable question, other it needs not, or it botes not. What so ever
they did, let us do well. Let us keep Gods bidding. Gods (...), and then are we
safe. When one dies, we must have belles ryngyng, singing and much a do. But
to what purpose. Those that dye in the favor of God are well, those that dye
out of the favor of God, this can do them no good, vbiceciderit lignum ibi
erat. Where the tree falls, there it shall remain. Study therefore to live in
the favor and grace of God, in repentance, in amendment of life, and then
dyest thou well. Further to the question of our forefathers. God Leave the
Fathers to God.
knows his elect, and diligently watches and keeps them, so that all
things serve to their salvation. The nature of fire is to bren all that is laid
in it, yet God kept the. (...). young men in Babylon, that they (...) not. And
Moses saw a bush on fire, but'it burnt not. So false doctrine, as fire
burns, it corrupts. But God kept his elect that they were not corupte with
it, but always put their trust in one ever living God, through the death of
Jesus Christ our Lord. In Elias time Idolatry and superstition reigned, so
that Elias said, domine altaria tua subuerterunt. Lord they have destroyed
thine altars, and stain thy prophets and preachers, and I am left alone. But
the Lord answered him, I have reserved to my self. vii. M. men that have not
bowed their knee to Baall. So God (I trust) reserved our forefathers, in so
perilous times, more graciously then we can think. Let us thank God then for
the gra cious light of his word sent unto us, and pray for our gracious king
and his council, that set it forth unto us. And as for our forefathers, seeing
we have no charge given us of God, leave them, and commend them unto gods
mercy, who disposed better for them then we can wyshe. But some (...) say now,
what need we preachers then, God can save his elect without preachers. A
goodly reason. God can save my life (...) meat and drink, need I none
therefore? God can save (...) (...) place (...) place round about the City,
and said nothing (...), but there is yet. xl. days (quod he) and (...) shall be
destrayed. There is no great ods nor difference at the lest wise, in yt (...)
of words, no nor yet in the sense or meaning between these two (...): There is
yet forty days, and Niniue shall be destroyed, and these words yt I have taken
to speak of this day: Take heed and beware of (...). For Niniue should (...)
destroyed for syn, and of their (...) was one, and one of the greatest, so yt
it is all one in effect. And as they be like conserning the shortness, the
paucity of words, yt breuity of words, and also the mening and purpose: So I
would they might be like in frut and profit. For what came of Jonas sermon: what
was the fruit of it? Ad predicacionem Ionae erediderunt (...). At The (...) of
Jonas sermon.
the preaching of (...) they beleved God. Here was a great frut, a great effect
wrought. What is yt same they believed god They believed Gods Preacher, Gods
Officer, Gods Minister Jonas, and were converted from their syn. They (...)
that (as the preacher said) if they did not repent and amend their life the
City should be destroyed within forty days. This was a great fruit, for
Jonas was but one man, and he preached but one sermon, and it was but a short
sermon, neither as touching the number of words, and yet he turned (...) the
whole City great and (...), rich and poor, king and al. We be many prea (...)
here in England, and we preach many long sermons, and yet the people will not
repet nor convert. This was yt frut, the Jonas sermon was not curious.
(...) and the good that his sermon did, yt all the whole City at (...)
preaching converted and amended their evil living and did (...) in sakcloth.
And yet here in this Sermon of Jonas is no great curiousnes, no great
clerklines, no great (...) of (...), (...) of painted eloquence, it was none
other bat Ad huc quadraginta dies, and (...) subuertitur. Yet fortye days et
Niniue subuertitur, and Niniue shall be destroyed, it was no more. This was no
great curious Sermon, but this was a nypping Sermon, a pinching Sermon, a
biting (...) it had a full byte, it was a (...) Sermon, a rough Sermon, and a
sharp biting Sermon. Do you not here maruayle (...) these Ninevites cast not
Jonas in prison, that they did not (...) him, and rebuke him? They did not
(...) him nor rebuke him, but God gave them grace to hear him, and to convert
and amend at this preaching A strange matter, so noble a City to give place
to one (...) Sermon. Now England cannot a bide this gear, they ca^ Niniue and
England compared.
not be content to hear Gods Minister and his threatnyng for their sin:
Though yt Sermon be never so good, though it be never so true. It is a naughty
fellow, a sedicious fellow, he makes trouble and rebellion in yt (...), he
lacks discression, but the Ninevites rebuked not Jonas that he lacked
dyscression, or that he spoke out of time, that his Sermon was out of season
made: But in England, if Gods Preacher, Gods minister be anyething quick, or
do speak sharpelye, then he is a foolysh fellow, he is rash, he lacks
discression, Now adays if they can not reprove the doctrine yt is preached,
then they will reprove the preacher that he lacks dew consideration of the
times, and that he is of learning sufficient, but he wants discression. What
a time is this picked out to (...) such things, he should have a respect and a
(...) to the time, and to the state of things, and of the Common weal. It
rewyceth me some times when my friend (...) and tells me that they find fault
with my dyscression, for A sign of true (...)
by lykelyhood (think I) the doctrine is true, for if they could find faut
with the doctrine, they would not charge me with the lack of discression, but
they would charge me with my doctrine, and not with the lack of discression,
or with yt inco^ueniency of the time, I will now ask you a question: I pray
you when should Jonas have preached against yt Couetousues of Niniue, if yt
covetous men should have appointed him his time? I know that preachers ought to
have a discression Preachers must consider time and place.
in their preaching, and that they ought to have a consideracion and respect
to the place and to the time that he preaches in, as I my self will say here
that I would not say in the country for no good. But what then? syn must be
rebuked, sin must be plainly spoken against. And when should Jonas have
preached against Niniue, if he should have forborne for the respects of the
times, or the place or the state of things there? For what was Niniue, a
noble, a rytche and a welthy City. What is London to (...)? like a village as
(...) or (...) burning, if I were in the fire, shall I run into it therefore?
Ordinary means must be (...) sed.
no no, I must keep yt way that God has ordained, and use the ordinary means
yt God has assigned, and not seek new ways. This office of preaching is the
only ordinary ways that god has appointed to save us al (...). Let us
maintain this, for I know none other, neither think I God will appoint or
devise any other. Pay therefore to Ceasar that which is dew to Ceasar. And
this said Christ by an heathen king, a painym, Caesar was (...)
how much more ought we to pay to our Ceasar, our liege Lord and king a
Christen King, and so Godly and virtuous a learned King. And pay to God that is
due to God, tithes and al duties longing to the ministers and preachers of this
office of salvation, give it them without (...), without withdrawing or
abridging of their duties. Take heed of lying, and setting thy self at les
then thou art. Mark the example of Ananias and (...) his wife. They dyed
suddenly Beware of lying.
for their lying and dissimulacio^ in the like matter, well this was Christ's
doctrine. This was his answer: give to Caesar that which is Cesars, and to God
that which is Gods. Et non potuerunt reprehendere uerbu^ eius coram populo, and
they could not find fault in his word before the people, it was so (...), so
consonaunt with scriptures and with reason. Yet afterward they falsyfied his
word before Pilate accusing him: Hune deprehendimus euertentem gentem, et
uetantem tributa dari Cesari. We fonnd this fellow turning a way the peoples
hearts and (...) the tribute to be given to Caesar. These be (...) (...) people.
people to meddle withal, malicious and uncharitable, yt (...) not what
slander they accuse a man of, deny? they are ready to accuse, affirm? they
will yet falsify his word. Then it is best to say nothing at al, nay not so.
Let us speak Gods truth and live according to his commandment, he shall
deliver us from the hands of our adversaries, and make us To do frulye,
diminishes not our stock.
safe in his heavenly kingdom. Let us I say do Gods bidding and commandment,
give to our King our duties, truly we shall have never the less, it shall not
(...) our stock, we shall rather have the more. For God is true of his promise,
let us maintain the necessary office of salvation, pay to the ministers, the
things appointed them, maintain scholars and (...), help the poor widows
and fatherles children, study to do good while we have time in this present
life, so shall the Lord in this life bless us, and after this life give us
eternal life, through Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost
be al laud, and honor. Amen.

Meruel not that I use at the sermons end to make prayer, for I do it not of
syngularyty, but when I am at home, and in the country where I go, sometime
when the poor people come and ask at me, I appose them my self, or cause my
servant to appose them of the Lords prayer, and they answer some, I can my
latin pater noster: some, I can the old pater noster but not the new.
Therefore all that can it not may learn. I use before the Sermon and after to
say it. Wherefore now I beseech you let us say it together. Our Father which art.
etc.

A most faith full Sermon preached before the Kings most excellent Majesty, and
his most honorable Council, in his Court at Westminster, by the reverend Father
Master Hughe Latymer. Anno Domini. M. D. L.
Videte and cauete ab auaricia.
Take heed and beware of covetousness, take heed and beware of covetousness,
take heed and beware of covetousness, take heed and beware of covetousness. And
what and if I should say nothing else these. iij. or. iiij. hours (for I know
it will be so long, in case I be not commanded to the contrary) but these
words: Take heed and beware of A strange (...).
covetousness, it would be thought a strange Sermon before a King to say
nothing else Cauete ab (...). Beware of Covetousness. And yet as strange as it
is, it would be like the Sermon of Jonas that he preached to yt (...), as
touching the shortness, and as touching the paucity or fewenes of the words: For
his Sermon was, Ad huc quadraginta dies, et Niniue subuertetur. There is yet
forty days to come, and (...) shall be destroyed. Thus he walked from street
to street, and love beware where you marrye, choose your wife in a faithful
stock. Beware of this wordly policy, mary in god, mary not for the great
respect of alyaunce, for thereof comes all these euyls of breakyng of
wedlock, which is among Princes and noble men. And here I would be a Suter
unto your Majesty, for I come now rather to be a Suter and a peticioner, then
a Preacher, for I come now to take my leave, and Latimers (...) vale.
totake my, Vltimum uale, at least wise in this place, for I have not long to
line, so that I think I shall never come here in to this place again, and
therefore I will ask a peticion of your hyghnes:

For the love of God, take an order for meryages here in England. For here is
marriage for pleasure, and (...) A buse in marriage.
and for goods, and so that they may join land to land, and possessions to
pessessions they care for no more here in England. And that is the cause of so
much adultrye, and so much breach of wedlock in the noble men, and gentle
men, and so much deuorcynge. And it is not now in the noble men only, but it
is come now to the inferior sort. Every man if he have but a small cause, will
cast of his old wife, and take a new, and will mary again at his pleasure, and
there be many that have so done. I would therefore wysh that there were a law
provided in this behalf for adulterers, and that adultry should be punyshed
with death, and that might be a remedy for all this matter. There would not
then be so This (...) die did God devise.
much adultry, whordome and lechery in England as there is. For the love of God
take heed to it, and se a remedy provided for it. I would wyshe that adultry
should be punyshed with death. And that the woman being an offender, if her
husband would be a suter for her, she should be pardoned for the first
time, but not for the second time. And the man being an offender should be
pardoned, if his wife be a suter for him for the first time, but not for the
second time, not if he offended twyse.

If this law were made, there would not be so much adultryenor lecherye used
in the Realm as there is. Well I trust once yet as old as I am, to se the day
that lechery shall be punished. It was never more need, for there was never more
lechery used in England as there is at this day, and maintained. It is made but
a laughing matter, and a trifle, and it is a sad matter and an earnest matter.
For leacherye is a great sin, Sodom and Gomore was destroyed for it. And it
was one of the syns raygning in Niniue, for which it should have been
destroyed. But think you yt lechery was alone? No no covetousness was joined
with it. Covetousness follows leche One sin wayteth up on another
ry, and commonly they go together. For why? they that be given to
voluptuousnes, and to the vice of lechery, must have wherewith to maintain it,
and that must be gotten by coue tousnes. For at the first when men fell to
sin, and cheifelye to lechery, wherefore the world should (...) destroyed (the
book says) there were Giauntes in thearth in those days. And after that yt
sons of God had come to the daughters of men, and (...) had engendered with
them. The same became mighty men of the world, and men of renoune. etc. This is
covetousness, for yt book says: terra erat repleta iniquitate, the earth was
repleate What Giaunts are.
with iniquity, for they oppressed the poor. They made them (...), pesauntes,
villains and bondmen unto them. These were Giauntes, so called of the property
of Giauntes, for they oppres the weak, and take (...) them what they list, by
force, vyolence and oppressyon. They were Giauntes of the property of Giauntes,
not that they were greater men of stature and strength of body then other men
were. For (...) writers speaking of this matter, say: that they were Gya^tes
for their cruelty and covetous oppression, and not in stature or procerity of
body. For there is no reason why Sethes children could beget on Caines
daughters greater men then others were in stature of body. But they were
Gyauntes in yt property of Giauntes, for oppressing of others by force and vi
olence. And this was covetousness wherewith God was so Covetousness caused God to
repent. This speech is after the (...) of men
displeased, that he repented that he had made men, and resolved utterly to
destroy the world, and so called to Noe, and told him of it. And I will not
dispute the matter with them (says God) from day to day, and never the
near, but if they will not amends within an hundredth and twentye years, I
shall bring in an universal floudde over their ears and destroy them all.
such a another in comparison of London. Such a City was London but a village
in comparion.
Niniue, it was three days iourny to go through ouery street of it, and to go
but from street to street. There was noble men, richmen, welthy men, there was
vicious men and couetousmen, and men that gave them selves to all voluptuous
living, and to worldlynes of getting riches. Was this a time well chosen and
discritely taken of Jonas, to come and reprove them of they sin, to declare
unto them the threatninges of God, and to tell them of their Covetousness, and
to say plain ly unto them, that except they repented and amended their evil
living, they and their City should be destroyed of Gods hand within. xl.
days? And yet they heard Jonas and gave place to his preaching. They heard
the threatninges of God and (...) his stroke and vengeance, and believed God,
that is, they believed Gods Preacher and Minister, they believed that God would
be true of his word, that he spoke by the mouth of his prophet, and there upon
did pennaunce, to turn a way the wrath of God from them. Well what shall we
say? I will say this and not spare, Christ says: Niniue shall arise against
the Jews at the last day and bear witness against them, because that they
hearing Gods threatenings for syn. Ad predicationem Ione in cinere and sacco
egerunt penitentiam, these did penance at the preaching of Jonas in ashes and
sackloth Niniue shall arise against England.
(as the text says there) and I say Niniue shall arise against England (thou
England) Niniue shall arise against England, because it will not believe God,
nor hear his preachers that cry (...) unto them, nor amend their lives, and
specially their Covetousness. Covetousness is as great a sin now, as it was
then, and it is the same sin now, it was then. And he will as sure stryke for
sin now, as he did then. But ah good God that would give them a time of
repentance after his threatnyng. First to se whyther they would amend or not
or he would destroy them. For even from the beginning of the world they fell
to sin. The first age from Adam which was about two thousand years they
fell ever to sin and they had preachers Noe and Enoch and other holy fathers.
And in that time a great multiplycation was that grew in two thousand years.
For that Scripture says: The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
were fair, and they took them wives from among all that they had chosen. This is
is a long matter to speak of all. But what means this the sons of God
saw the daughters of men? who were these The sonns of God and daughters of men.
sons of God?

Thesons of God were those that came of the good men, of the good Preachers, of
the holy fathers yt were Gods men, as they that came of Seth and Enos, that
were good men, and of others. For our graudmother Eve, when Cayne had killed
Abell, and then she had a another sone by Adam, who was called Seth. What did
she? She gave thanks to God for him, and acknowledged that God it was which
had given him unto her, for she said: Dedit mihi deus semen pro Abel quem
occidet Cain. God (said she) has given me a (...) sede in (...) of Abell whom
Cayne slew. Here is a long matter to talk on. Some wilsay: was this a
natural mother, was this naturally done to puplish the sin of her ownsonne?
What neded she to speak of that matter, or to make any rehersall of that
matter, to open the sin of her son? what neded she this to do? Yes, she was
now a good woman, when she believed the serpent, she was not good. But now she
has repented Eve was a good woman
that deed, and had taken hold of the promise of God, that there should come
of her a seed, that shouldetread (...) and destroy the head of the Serpent.
She had taken (...) of this promise and was now a good woman and a godly
woman, she opened the fault of her son and hid it not. Here could I say some
what to them ((...) I would) that speak so much Who be the sons of God.
against me for my preaching here the last year. But to return to Eve, and
declare that the sons of God are to be understood those yt came of good
men, as of Seth and Enos, and the same good part of generation. And the
daughters of men are to be understood of them that came of Came and of his
seed. And therefore our grandmother Eve badde beware of marying with (...), for
fear of falling from God to wyckednes thereby. And here I would say a thing to
your mayesty, I shall speak it of good will to your hyghnes, I would I were
able to (...) your grace good service in anything, ye should be sure to have
it. But I will say this: For Gods This was preached by Noe to them, and so that
God of his goodness, patience and long sufferaunce, gave them a time to repent
and amend after his threatenings, because they should se their evil doings, and
return to God. So they had an hundredth and. xx. years to repent. This Noe
was laughed Noe is laughed (...) skorn.
to scorn, they like doddypoles laughed this godly father to scorn. Well, ye
think little of the history, yfye will know the meaning of it, it is a great
thew what anger God has to to sin. But how long time have thou England thou
England? I can not tell, for God has not revealed it unto me, if he had, so
God help me I would tell you of it, I would not be (...), nor spare to tell
it you, for the good will I bear you, but I can not tell how long time ye have,
for God has not opened it unto me: But I can tell you that this lenitye, this
long for bearing and holdyng of his hand, provoke us to repent and amend.
And I can tell that whosoever contemns this riches and treasure of Gods
goodness, of his mercy, (...) patience and long suffering, shall have the more
grievous condempnacion. This I can tell well enough, Paul tells me this, and
I can tell that ye have time to repent as long as you live bear in this
world, but after this life I can make no warrant of any further time to
repent. Therefore repent and amend while ye be here, for when ye are gone
hence, ye are past that. But how long that shall be whether to (...) must be in
this life.
morrow or the next day, or xx. (...), or how long, I can not tell. But in the
mean time ye have many Ionasses to tell you of your fautes, and to declare unto
you Gods threatninges, except England has many Ionasses.
ye repent and amend, therefore to return to my matter I say as I said at the
beginning: Videte et cauete ab auaritia. videte, First se it, and then amend
it. For I promise you great complayntes there is of it, and much crying out,
and much preaching, but none amendment that I see. But cauete ab auaritia,
beware of covetousness. And why of covetousness? Quia radix est omnium malorum
quaritia et cupiditas. For (...) The (...) of al mischise.
is the (...) of al evil, and of al mischief. This saying of Paul took me
away from the Gospel that is read in the Church this day, it took me from
the (...), that I would preach upon neither of them both at this time, I can
not tell what ayled me. But to tell you my (...): when I was appointed to preach
here, I was new come out of a sickness, whereof I looked to have dyed, and weak
I was. Yet nevertheless when I was appointed unto it, I took it upon me, how be
it I repented afterward that I had done. I was displeased with my self, I was
teasty as Jonas was when he should go preach to the Ninevites. Well, I looked
on the Gospel that is red this day, tut it liked me not, I looked on the
Epistle: tushe I could not a way with that neither. And yet I remember I had
preached upon this Epistle once before King Henry the. (...). but now I could
not frame with it, nor it liked me not in no sauce. Well, this saying of Paul
came in my mind, and at last I considered and wayed the matter deepelye, and
then thought I thus with my self: Is Covetousness the root of all mischief,
and of all evil? then have at the root, and down withal covetousness. So this
place of Paul brought me to this text of Luke: See and beware of covetousness.
Therefore you Preachers out with your swords Preachers must strike at the root
and strike at the root, speak against covetousness, and cry out upon it.
Stand not tyckyng and toying at the branches, nor at the boughs (for then
there will new boughs and brau^ ches spryng again of them) but strike at the
root, and fear not these Giauntes of England, these great men and men of
power, these men that are oppressors of the poor. Fear the^ not, but strike
at the root of all evil, which is myscheuous covetousness. For covetousness is
the cause of rebellion. I have forgotten my logyke, but yet I can iumble at a
Silogisme, and make an argument of it to prove it by. Covetousness is the root
of al evil: Rebellion is an evil, Ergo Covetousness is the roots of rebellion.
And so it was in deed. Covetousness was the cause The cause of rebellion
of rebellion this last Summer, and both parties had covetousness, as well the
Gentlemen as the Commous. Both parties had Covetousness, for both parties had an
inordinate desire to have that they had not, and that is (...), an inordinate
desire to have that one has not. The Commons would have had from the
Gentlemen such things as they desired. The Gentlemen would none of it, and so
was there covetousness on both sides. The Commons thought they had a right to
the things that they inordinatly sought to have. But what then? they must not
come to it that way. Now on the other side the Gentlemen had a desire to
keep that they had, and so they rebelled to against the kings commandment,
and against such good order as he and his counsel would have set in the
realm. And thus both parties had covetousness, and both parties did rebel. I
heard say that there was godly ordinances devised for the redress of it.
But the Giauntes The frou ning of a Giaunt.
would none of it in no sauce. I remember mine own self a certain Giaunt, a
great man, who sat in commission about such matters. And when the tounsemen
should bring in what had been enclosed, he frouned and chafed and so nere
looked and threatened the poor men, tha they durst not ask their right. I red
of late in an Act of Parliment: and this Act made mention of an act that was
made in king Henry's days (the (...). I trow it was, yea and such an other
busynes there was in king (...) time the second also.) In this parliment that
I speak of, the Gentlemen and the Commons were at variaunce, as they were now
of late. And there the Gentlemen that were Landlordes, would needs have away
much lands from their tenauntes, and would needs have an Act of parliment
that it might be lawful for them to enclose and make several from their
tenauntes and from the Commons such porcions of their lands as they thought
good, much a do there was about this Act. At last it was concluded and
granted An argument meant mete to be marked.
that they might so do: Provided always that they should leave sufficient to
the tenant. Well, it was well that they were bound to leave sufficient for
them. But who should be the Judge to lymite what was sufficient for them.
Or who shall now judge what is sufficient? Well I for my part can not tell what
is sufficient. But me thought it was well that the tennaunts and poor commous
should have sufficient. For if they had sufficient (thought I) they had cause
to be quiet. And the^ (...) I to make this argument within my self: If at that
time it were put in their will and power, that they might enclose, leaving to
the tennaunt that were sufficient for him, if they had it then in their power
(thought I) that they might this do, they would leave no more then
sufficient. If they lest to the tenauntes and poor commons no more in those
days but sufficient: then if they had any more taken from them since that
time, then had they now not sufficient. They in Christ are equal with you.
(...) of the realm must Al are equal in Christ.
needs be. The poorest plowman is in Christ equal with the greatest Prince
that is. Let them therefore have sufficient to maintain them, and to find
them their necessaries. A plow (...) must have sheep, yea they must have
sheep to dunge their ground for bearinge of corn (for if they have no sheep
to healpe to fat the ground, they shall have but bare corn and The plowma^s
venso^
thyn). They must have swyne for their food to make their veneryes or bacon
of, their bacon is their venison (for they shall now have hangum tuum if they
get any other veneson) so that bacon is their necessary meat to (...) on,
which they may not lack. They must have other catels, as (...) to draw their
ploughe and for carriage of things to the markets, and kine for their milk and
chese, which they must live upon and pay their (...). These cattle must have
pasture which pasture if they lack, the rest must needs fail them. And
pasture (...) can not have, if the (...) be taken in and enclosed from the^. So
(as I said) there (...) in both pactes rebellion. Therefore for Gods love
restore their sufficient unto them, and search no more what is the cause of
rebellion. But se and (...) of covetousness, A good request.
for covetousness is the cause of rebellion. Well now, if covetousness be the
cause of rebellion, then preaching against covetousness is not the cause of
rebellion. Some say that the preaching now a days is the cause of all (...)
rebellion, for since this (...) preachinge has come in, there has been much
sedicion, and therefore it must needs be that yt preaching is the cause of
rebellion hear in England, (...) our preaching is the cause of rebellion,
much like as Christ was cause of the destrucion of Jerusalem. For (says
Christ) Si non uenisse Preaching is cause of rebellion.
and locutu fuissem eis, (...) non haberent. etc. If I had not com says
Christ) and spoken to them, they should have no sin. So we preachers have
come and spoken to you: we have drawn ourswerdes of Gods word, and stryken at
the roots of al (...) to have them cut down, and if ye will not amend, what
can we do more. And preaching is cause of sedicion bear in England, much like
as Ely was the cause of trouble in Israel, for he was a preacher there, and
told the people of all degres their faults, and so they wynched and kycked at
him, and accused him to Achab the King, that he was a sedicious fellow, and a
troublous preacher and made much (...) in the Realm. So the King sent for
him, and he was brought to Achab the King, who said unto him: Art thou he that
troubles al (...) and Ely answered and said: nay, thou and thy Fathers house
are they that trouble al Israel. Ely had preached Gods word, he had plainly
told the people of their evil doings, he had showed them Gods threateninges:
(In gods behalf I speak, there is neither King nor Emperor, be they never
in so great estate, but they are subject to Gods word) and therefore he was
not afraid to say to Achab: it is The cause of trouble.
thou and thy fathers house that causes all the trouble in Israel. Was not
this presumptuously spoken to a king? was not this a sedicious fellow? Was not
this fellows preaching a cause of all the trouble in Israel? was he not worthy
to be cast (...) bocardo or little ease? No, but he had used Gods sword which
is his word, and done nothing else that was evil, but they could not abide it,
he never disobeied Achabs sword which was the regal power. But Achab disobeyed
his swerd, which was the word of God. And therefore by the punishment of god
much trouble arose in the Realm for the sins of Achab and the people. But
Gods preacher, Gods prophet was not the cause of the trouble. The^ is it not we
Preachers that trouble England. But here is now an argument to prove the matter
against the preachers. Here was preaching against covetousness Preaching against
covetousness
all the last year in Lent, and the next somer solowed rebellion: Ergo
preaching against covetousness, was the cause of the rebellion. A goodly
argument. Hear now I rememan argument of master (...), which he brings in
a (...) that he made against Bilney and here by the way I will tell you a merry
toy. Master (...) was once sent in (...) into (...), to help to triout (if it
might be) what was the (...) of Good win sands, and the shelfe that stopped up
Sandwich (...). Thither (...) master More, and calls the (...) before him,
such as were thought to be men of experience and men that could of lykelyhod
best certyfy him of that matter conserning the stopping of Sandwich haven.
Among others came in before him an old man with a white head, and one that was
thought to be little less then an hundereth years old. When master Moore saw
this aged man, he thought it expedient to hear him say his mind in this matter
(for being so old a man it was (...) that he knew most of any man in that
presence and company.) So Master (...) called this old aged man unto him, and
said: Father (said he) tell me if ye can what is the cause of this great arising
of the sands and shelues here about this haven, the which stop it up that no
ships can ariue here? Ye are the eldest man that I can espy in all this
company, so that if any man can tell (...) cause of it, ye of lykely hode can
say most in it, or at leastwyse more then any other man here assembled. Yea
forsooth good Master (quod this old man) for I am well nighe an hundredth years
old, and no man here in this company any thing (...) unto mine (...).

Well then (quod Master Moore) how say you in this matter? what think ye
to be the cause of these shelues and flattes that stop up Sandwiche haven?
Forsooth sir (quoth he) I am an old man, I thyncke that Tenterton (...) is the
cause of Goodwyn sands. For I am an old man sir (quod he) and I may remember
the (...) of Tenterton (...), The cause of Goodwin (...).
and I may remember when there was no steeple at al there. And before that
Tenterton steeple was in building, there was no manner of speaking of any (...)
or sands that (...) the haven, and therefore I think that Tenterton steple is
the cause of the destroyng and decaying of Sanwych haven. And even so to my
purpose is preaching of Gods word the cause of rebellyon, as Tenterton steple
was cause that Sandwich haven is decayed.

And is not this a gaye matter, that such should be taken for great wise men,
that will thus reason against the Preacher of Gods word? But here I would
take an occasion by the way of a digression to speak somewhat to my Systers
the women to do them some good too, because I would do al folks good if I
could, before I take my (...) (...) (at least wise here of this place) for I
think I shall no more come here. For I think I have not long to live. So that I
(...) I take my leave now of the court for ever, and shall no more come in this
place. Achab was a King, but (...), (...) was the perilous woman. She would
rule her hnsband the King, she would bear a stroke in all things, and she would
order matters as pleased her, and so will many women do, they (...) rule (...)
husbands, and do al things after their own minds. They do therein against the
order by God appointed the^. They break their (...) yt God gave unto them.
Yea, it is now come to the lower sort, to mean men's wives, they will rule and
apparel them selves (...), and some of them farce above their degrees, whyther
their husbands will nor no. But they brake their (...), and do (...) The
woman's iniu^ tion.
contrary to Gods ordinance. God says: Subdita exis subpotestate (...). Thou
shalt be subject under the power of thy husband. Thou shalt be subject.
Women are subjects, ye be subjects to your husbands.

At the first the man and the woman were equal. But after that she had given
credit to the serpent, then she had a iniunction set upon her: Subdita eris
sub potestate uiri, thou shalt be subject under the power of thy husband. And
as for one (...) of her iniunction (...) takes, and she takes one part of
her penance, because she cannot avoid it: and that is: in dolor paris: Thou
shalt bring forth (...) with pain and traueil. This part of their iniunction
they take, and yet is the same so Gods (...) naunce.
(...), that Chrysostom says: if it were not for the ordinance of God which
cannot be made frustrate by man, they would (...) come to it again for no
worldly good. But God has provided here in. And (as Christ says in the
Gospek) Mulier cum parit tristiciam habet. etc. The Woman when she bears
Child has sorrow, but afterward she remembers not the pain, because there is
a soul brought fourth into the world.

But as it is a part of your penance ye (...) to travel in bearing your
Children: so is it a part of your pennaunce to be subjects unto your
husbands, ye are underlings, underlings, and must be obedient. But this is
now made a trifle and a small matter. And yet it is a sad matter, a godly
matter, a gostly matter. A matter of dampnacion and salvation. And Paul faith
that a woman ought to have a power on her head. What is this to have a Why
Women be covered.
power on her head? It is a manner of speaking of the scripture, and to have her
power on her head, is to have a sign and token of power, which is by covering
of her head, (...) that she has a superior above her, by whom she ought to
be ruled and ordered. For she is not immediately under God, but mediately. For
by their iniuncion the husband is their head under God and they subjects unto
their husbands. But this power that some of them have is disgysed gear and
strange facions. They must wear Frenchhoodes, and I can not tell you I, what
to call it. And when they make them ready and come to the coueryng of their
head, they will call and say, give me my French hoode, and give me my Bonet or
my cap and so forth. I would with that the women would call the coueryng of
their heads by the terms of the scripture. As when she would have her cappe I
would (...) would say: give me my power, I would they would learn to speak,
as the (...) ghost speaks, and call it by such a name as Saint (...) learn
to speak.
Paul does. I would they would (as they have much (...) king) when they
put on their cap, I would they would have this meditacion, I am now putting on
my power upon my head, If they had this thought in their minds, they would
not make so much pryckynge up of them selves as they doos now a days. But
now here is a vengeance deuit: we must have our power from Turkey of Ueluet,
and gay it must be. Far fet, dear hought, and when (...) comes it is a false
(...) I had rather have a true English sign then a false sign (...) Turkey.
It is a false sign when it covers not their heads as it should do. For if
they would keep it under the power as they ought to do, there should not any
such Tussockes nor tuftes he seen, as there be, nor such laying out of the
(...) Tussockes and tuftes.
nor braydynge to have it open. I would merueile of it how it should come to
be so abused and so far out of order, saving that I know by experyence; that
many will not be ruled by their husbands, as they ought to be. I have (...)
desired to (...) some, and with some I could do little in that matter. (...)
Adams in (...) world.
But there be now many Adams that will not displease their wives, but will in
this behalf let them have all their own minds and do as them lists. And
some others again there be now adays that will defendit, and say it may be
suffered well enough because it is not expressed in (...), nor spoken of by
name. Though we have not express mention in scripture against such laying out
of the hear in Tussocks and Tuftes: yet we have in scripture express menciou:
De tortis crinibus, of writhe^ hear, that is for the nonce forced to (...).
But of these tussocks that are laid out now a days, there is The cause why
Tussoks be not in scriptur.
(...) mention made in scriptures, because they were not used in scripture
time. They were not yet come to be so far out of order, as to lay out such
tussocks and tufftes, but I will tell thee, if thou wylt needs lay it out, or
if thou will needs show thy hear and have it (...): go and pole thy head or
round it, as men do, for to what purpose is it to pull it out so, and to lay
(...)? some do it (say they) of a simplicity. Some do it of a pride. And some
of other causes. But they do it because they will be quarter master with their
husbands, quarter masters? Nay, half masters yea some of them will be whole
masters and rule the roast as they list them selves. (...), half, and whole
(...) sters.
But these defenders of it will not have it evil, because it is not spoken of
in Scripture. But there be other things as (...) as this, which are not spoken
of in scripture expressly, but they are employed in scripture, as well as
though they were there expressly spoken of. For the Prophet Esaias says. Ve qui
consurgitis mane ad comessandum, ad Ebrietatem (...) et potando usque ad
uesperam, ut uino (...). Woo unto you that arise early in the morning, and go
to drincking until (...), that ye may swymme in wine.

This is the scripture against banqueting and dronkennes. But now they banquit
al night, and lie abed in the day time till noone, and the scripture speaks
nothing of that. But when then? the Devil has his purpose this way, as well
as the other, he has his purpose as well by (...) and keeping (...) rule al
night, as by rising early in the morning and banqueting all day. So the Devil
has his purpose both ways. Ye noble me^, ye great men I wot not what rule ye
keep: For Gods sake hear the co^plaintes and (...) of the The devil has his
purpose.
poor. Many complain against you that ye lie a bed til. viii. or. ix or. x.
of the clock, I cannot tell what revel ye have over night, whether in (...), or
dycing, or carding, or how it is. But in the morning when poor Suitors come to
your houses ye cannot be spoken withal. They are kept some times without your
gates, or if they (...) let into the hal or some utter chamber, out comes one
or other. Sirre, ye cannot speak My Lord is a sleep.
with my Lord yet, my Lord is a sleep, or he has had business of the Kings al
night. etc. And thus poor Suitors are (...) of from day to day that they
cannot speak with you in. iii. (...). iiii. days, yea a whole month, what
shall I say more: yea a hole year some times err they can come to your
speech, to be hard of you. For Gods love look better to it, speak with poor
men when they come to your houses, and dyspatch poor suitors, as in deed
some noble men do, and would Christ that al noble men would so do. But some do.

I went one day my self be time in the morning to a great man's house, to
speak with him, in busynes that I had of mine own. And me thought I was up
(...), but when I came thither, the great man was gonne fourth, about such
affairs as behooved him, or I came. Well, yet (thought I) this is well, I like
this well. This man does The prayer of a noble man.
somewhat regard and consider his office and duty. I came to late for mine own
matter, and lost my journey, and my early (...) to, and yet I was glad that I
had been so begyled. For Gods love follow this example ye great men, and (...)
in the morninges, and be ready for men to speak with the^, and to dyspatch
Sewters that resort unto you. But all these I bring to dysproue them that
defend evil things, because they be not expressly spoken against in the
scripture. But what forces that? when the (...) has his purpose and is served
as well one way as an other way: though it be not expressly spoken against in
scripture, yet I reken plainly (...) employed in the scripture. But now to
come to my matter again. Videte et cauete ab auaricia. See and beware of
covetousness, and (...), (...) to (...).
I shall desire you to consider. iiii. things. Quis dicat, quid dicat (...),
(...) quare dicat, who speaks it, what he speaks, to whom he speaks, and
wherefore he speaks it. As here Christ speaks to a rich man against
avarice. And why against (...)? what shall be the end of all couetouse persons?
eternal damnacion. For the covetous persons (says Paul) shall not posses ne
enter into the Kingdom of God. Here therefore I shall desire you to pray. etc.

Uidete et cauete ab (...). Se, and beware of covetousness. First who spoke
these words? (...) Christ spoke the^, if I had spoken them of my self, it
had been (...) worth. But Christ spoke them, and (...) a good (...): The story
is Duo litigabant inter se. There were two at (...) between them selves. Luc.
xii. and by this it appears that Christ spoke them well. Christ spoke these
words at that time, and now he speaks them by (...) preacher, whom ye ought,
to believe and so it is al one. But upon what occasion did he speak it, there
were? ii. brethren at strife together for lands, welthy men (as it appears)
and the rich fellow would not tarry (...) Christ had ended (...): but
interrupted it, and would needs have his matter dispatched by and by. He was at
Christ's Sermon, but yet he would not differ his worldly cause till Christ had
made an end of his Godly exhortacion. This was a (...) brother, he was a
gospeller, he was a carnal gospeller (as A (...) broother, wors (...) a papist.
many be now adays for a piece of an Abbey, or for a portion of chauntry lands)
to get somewhat by it and to serve his comodity: He was a gospeller one of the
new brethren somewhat worsse then a rank papyst. How be it a (...) papist now
adays shall (...) have promotion, then a true Gospeller (...) have, yt more
pity. But this was a thorny gospeller, he heard Christ's preaching and followed
him for company, and heard his words. But he was never the (...) for it, but yt
care of yt world, so choked (...) word of God in him, yt he could not hear the
sermon to the end, but interrupted the sermon for his worldly matter (...) it
were aldon. And what was Chrst then Christ (...) good seed.
doing? forsooth he was sowing of good seed, but it fell upon (...) ground, so
yt it could not take any rote in this fellow to bring forth good fruit in him.
And let me tell you of the seed yt Christ was then sowing. Bear (...) me a
while, and seeing that I come now to take mine vltimum uale of this place, hear
me (...) and give me leave a (...) while and let me take my (...) honestly. At
the time when this fellow interrupted Christ's sermon, he was preaching a long?
Sermon to his Discyples, and to the people being gathered together in a
wounderfull great multitude as appears in the. xii. Chapter of Saint Lukes
Gospel, and there he first of all taught his Disciples a good lesson, saying:
Cauete uobis a farmento Phariseorum. Beware in any wise (says he) from the
(...) of the Pharisees. What is (...) eauen is (...) taken.
this leven of the Pharisees? Leaven is sometimes taken for corrupt living, which
infecteth others by the evil example there of, and against such corrupt living,
Gods preacher must cry out earnestlye, and never sease till it be rooted up.
In the City of Corinth one had married his stepmother, his fathers wife. And he
was a (...) follow, a great rich man, an alderman of the City, and therefore
they wincked at it, they would not meddle in the matter, they had nothing to do
with it, and he was one of the head men, ofsuche rule and authority that they
durst not, many of them. But. S. Paul hearing of the matter, writ unto them,
and in Gods behalf charged them, to do away such abhominacion from among
them. Saint Paul would not leave them, till he had excommunicated the Paul
exco^ (...)
wicked doer of such abhominacion. If we should now excommunicate all such
wicked doers, there would be much a do in England. Ye that are Magestrates,
(...) favor for affection to such, and will not suffer they may be rooted
out or put to shame. Oh, he is such a man's servant, we may not do him any
shame. Oh, he is a gentleman. etc. And so the thing is not now any thing looked
unto. Lechery is used through out England, and such lechery as is used in none
other place of the world. And yet it is made a matter of sport, a of matter no
thing, a laughing matter, and a tryfle not to be passed on, nor not to be
reformed.

But beware ye that are Maiestrates, their sin does leaven you all.
Therefore for Gods love beware of this leaven. Well, I trust it will be one day
amended. I look not to live long, and yet I trust (as old as I am) to live so
long as to see Lechery punyshed. I would wysh that Moses law were (...) for
punishment of Lechery, and that the offenders there in might be punyshed
according to the (...) of (...) law. And here I will make a suit to your
hyghenesse to restore unto the Church the discipline of Christ. In
excommunicating God can make best laws.
such as be notable offenders, nor never (...) any other way. For no man is
able to devise a better way then God has done, which is excommunicacion to put
them from the congregation (...) they be confounded. Therefore restore Christ's
discipline for excommunicacion. And that shall be a mean both to pacifye Gods
wrath and indignacion against us, and also that less abommacion shall be used,
then in times past has been, and is at this day. I speak this of a
conscience, and I mean and move it of a good will to your grace and your Realm.

Bring into the Church of England open Discipline of excommunicacion, that
open sinners may be stricken with all. Sometime Leaven is taken for corrupt
Doctrine, and so it is here taken in this place when (...) says: Beware of
the leaven of the Phariseis. For Christ intended to make his disciples (...)
manglers, and (...)
teachers of all the world: and therefore to beware of corrupt doctrine. And
that that he said to them, he says also to us. Receive no corrupt doctrine,
no mingle mangle: Yet there be Leaueners yet still and mingle manglers, that
have sowred Christ's doctrine, with the (...) of the Pharisees. Yea and where
there is any piece of Leaven, they will maintain that one (...), more then
all the doctrine of Christ, and about that purpose they occupy and bestow all
their wits. This was the first seed. The second seed was Nihil occultum,
quod non reuelabitur. There is nothing (...) or hidden that shall not be
revealed and opened: It parteyneth all to one purpose, for there he taught his
disciples too beware of the leaven, which was hypocrisye, declaryng unto them
that hypocrisye would Gods (...).
not be always hydden, but such as were not sincere should be known atthe
last day, and all that was taught should at length be known. It has also an
other meaning, for it is Gods proverb. There is nothing so pryuye but it shall
be opened, at least wise in the great day of (...). In the dreadful day of
general account, in the day of reuelacion. Then shall it be openly known
what so ever is done: be it never so pryuely done. These follows that have
there (...) and their (...) Fetchers of (...) compasses.
to bring things to their purposes, woork they never so privily never so
covertly: Yet at yt last day, their doings shall be openly revealed. vsque ad
sacietatem (...) ((...) the Prophet (...)) that is, till all the world shall
see it, to their shame and confusyon that are the doers of it. As the Phrophete
(...) says: Sicut confunditur fur qui (...). etc. Even as a thief that is
taken with the manner when he (...): So shall (...) be openly confounded, and
their evil doings opened. Yea and though it be not known in this world, yet
it shall be kno wen at the last day to their dampnacions. In deed God has
(...) his (...) from time to time. Nothing is so preuy the which shall not be
(...).

When Cayne had killed his brother Abell: he thought Caines falt (...) not be
bid.
he had conveyed the matter so (...) and so closelye, that it should never
have been known nor have come to light, but first God knew it well enough,
and called unto him saying: Cayne where is thy brother Abel? tut he thought he
could have begyled God to. And therefore he answered. I can not tell, what
(quod Cain) am I set to keep my brother? I cannot tell where he is. But at last
he was confounded, and his murder brought to light. And now all the world
reads it in the Bible. Iosephes brethren had sold him a way: they took his
Iosephes brethren wrought se (...).
motely (...) and be sprinkled it over and over with blood, they thought al
was cock sure, they had (...) the matter so secretly, that they thought all the
(...) never have espied it. And yet out it came to their great benefit. And
now it is known to us all as many as can read the Bible. David (...) a fair
woman wash her (...). Though he (...) straight (...) ravished, he (...) clean
gone by and would (...) have her. He sent for her. Yea he had gentlemen of his
chamber about him that went for her by and by and fet her. And here I have an
other suit to your highness. When you come to age beware what persons ye have a
boute you. For if ye be set on pleasure, or dysposed to wantonness.

Ye shall have ministers (...), to be furtherers and instruments of it. But
David by his wisdom and pollicye (...) po licy.
thought so to have cloked the matter, that it should (...) (...) been known.
He sent for for her husband Urias, and showed him a (...) countenance, and
looked merely on him, and sent him forth to (...) that he might do his
pleasure with (...) afterward, and he thought he had wroughte wondrous
(...). He thought all the matter cock sure. But the Prophet of God (Nathan)
came and laid his fault (...) before his face, and who is now that knows
it not? (...) servant (...), a brybing brother, he (...) coulourably A brybing
brother.
to Naaman the Sirian: he fained a tal of his Master Elie (...), as all
brybers will do, and told him that his Master had (...) of this and that, and
took of Naaman certain things and brybed it a way to his own be hoof
secretly, and thought that it should never have come out, but Elizeus knew
it well inoughe. The servant had his bribes that he sought, yet was he
stricken with the (...), and so openly shamed.

Think on this ye that are brybers when ye go secretly about such things,
have this in your minds when ye devise your secreate fetches and conuciaunce,
how Elizeus servant was served and to be openly known. For Gods proverb
will be true: there is nothing hidden that will not be revealed. Gods prourb
(...) true.
He that took the silver basen and (...) for abrybe, thinks that it will
never come out, but he may now know that I know it, and I know it not
alone, there be mo beside me that know it. Oh bryber and (...), he was never a
good man that will so take brybes. Nor I can never believe that he that is a
bryber shall be a good Justice. It will never be merry in England till we have
the (...) of such. For what needs brybynge where men do their things
uprightly, as for men that are officers and have a matter of charge in their
hands. But now I will play Saint Paul, And translate the thing on my self.
I will become the Kings offycer for a while. I have to lay out for the King
twentye thousands pou^des, or a great sum whatsoever it be, well (...) will
be (...) Kings officer for a while.
when I have laid it out, and do bring in mine account, I must give. iii.
hundredth marks to have my bills (...). If I have done truly (...) uprightly,
what should need me to give a penny to have my qylls (...)? if I have done my
office truly, and do bring in a true account. (...) should (...) be (...) one
(...) for (...) of my (...) nothing in this: what needs any (...) to be (...)
(...) geuyng, except the (...) be false? No man gives brybes for warrantyng
of his bylles, except they be false (...).

Well such practice has been in England, but beware, (...) wylout one (...).
Beware of Gods proverb: there is nothing hydden that shall not be opened. Yea
even in this world, (...) ye be not the children of dainpnacion. And here now I
speak (...) you my masters Minters, Augmentacioners, Receivers, (...), and
Auditors: I make a peticion unto you: I beseech (...) necessary suit.
you al be good to the King. Be good to the King, he has been good to you,
therefore be good to him, vea, be good to your own souls. Year known well
enough what ye were, before ye came to (...) offices, and what lands ye had
then, and what ye have purchased since, and what buyldinges ye make daily. Well
I pray you so build, that the Kings workmen may be paid. They make their
moan that they cannot get no money. The poor Laborers, Gunmakers, Poudermen,
Bowmakers, Arrowmakers, Smithes, Carpenders, Soldiers, and other crafts (...)
out for their duties. They be unpaid some of them three or. iiii. months:
yea some of them half a year: yea and some of them (...) up (...) this time.
xii. months for their monye, and can not be paid yet.

They cry out for their monye, (and as the Prophet says) Clanior
operariorum assendit ad aures meas. The cry of the workemanne is come up to
myneeares. Oh for Gods (...) let the workmen be paid, if there be money
enough, or else there will whole showers of Gods vengeance rain down upon
your heads. Therefore ye Mynters, and ye Augmentacioners, serve the King
truly. So build and purchase that the King may have money to pay his (...).
It seems evil fauouredly that ye should have enough wherewith to build
superfluously, and the King lack to pay his poor laborers. Well, yet I
doubt not but that there be some good officers. But I will not swear for all,
I have now preached three Lentes. The (...) I preached restitucion, restitucion
((...) some) what should he preach of restitucion let him preach of (...) sion
(quod they) and let restitucion alone. We can (...) make restitucyon, (Then
sape I) if thou will not make restitucion, thou shall go to the (...) for it.
Now choose the either A chose for disceyuers.
restitucion, or else endless dampnacion. But now there be two manner of
restitucions, secret restitucion, and open restitucion whither of both it be,
so that restitucion be made it is all good enough. At my first preaching of
restitucion, one good man (...) remorce of conscience, and acknowledged him
(...) to me, that he had deceived the King. And willing be was to make
restitucion, and so the first Lent came to my hands twenty pounds to be
restored to the Kings use. I was promised. xx. pound more the same lent, but
it could not be made, so that it came not. Well the nert Lent came three
hundredth and twenty pounds more. I received it my self, and paid it to yt
Kings Counsel. So I was asked, what he was that thus made restitucion. But
should I have named him: nay they should as sone have this (...) of mine. Well,
now this lent came one hundredth and fore score pou^ds. x. s. which I have paid
and delivered this present day to the Kings counsel. And so this man has
made a Godly restitucion. And so (quod I to a certain noble man that is one of
the Kings Counsel) if every man that has beguiled the king should make (...)
after this sort, it would cough the king. xx. M. pounds I think (quod I) yea
that it would (quod the other) a whole. C. M. Let not (...) at your (...).
pounds. (...) alac, make restitucion for Gods sake, make restitucion, ye will
cough in hell (...), that all the (...) there will laugh at your coughing: There
is no remedy but restitucion open or secret, or else hell. This that I have now
told you (...) was a secret restitucion. Some examples has (...) of open
restitucion, and glad may he be that God was so friendly, unto him to bring him
unto it in this world. I am not a frayd to name him. It was Master Sherington,
an honest gentilman and one that God loves. He openly (...) that he had
deceived the King, and he made open restitucion. (...) what an argument (...)
he haus against the devil, when he shall (...) to (...), God brought this out to
(...) amendment. It is a token that he is a chosen man of God, and one of his
elected. If he be of God, he shall be brought to it, therefore for An argu me^t
of gods election.
gods sake make restitucion, or else remember Gods proverb: There is nothing so
secret. etc. If you do either of these two in this world, then are ye of God,
if not, then for lack of restitucion, ye shall have eternal dampnacion. Ye
may do it by means, if you dare not do it your selves, bring it to an other
and so make restitucion. If ye be not of Gods flock, it shall be brought out to
your shame and dampnation at the last day, when all (...) sins shall be laid
open before us. Yet there is one way, how al our sins may be hidden: which is
The way to (...) syn.
repent and amend, Recipiscentia, recibiscentia, repenting and amen ding is a
sure remedy and a sure wai to hide al, yt it shall not come out to our shame and
confusion. Yet there was an other sede that Christ was sowyng in that sermon of
his, and this was the seed: I say to you my friends (...) not him that kylleth
the body: but fear him, that after he has killed, has power also to cast
into hell fire. etc. And there to put his disciples in comfort and sure hope
of his healpe, and out of all doubt and (...) of his assistaunce: he
brings in unto them the example of the Sparrowes, how they are (...) by Gods
mere providence and goodness, and also of the hears of our heads, how that
not so much as one hear falls from our heads without him, fear him (says
he) that when he has killed the body, may also cast into (...) fire. Matter
for all kinds of people here, but specially for Kings. And A suit to the
King.
therefore here is an other suit to your hyghnes. (...) not him that kylleth
the body: (...) not these (...) Princes and forayne powers. (...) shall make
you strong inoughe. Stycke to God, fear God, (...) not (...), God has sent
you many (...) in your youth. But forsake not God, and he will not forsake you.
(...) ye shall have that shall (...) you, and say unto you: (...), oh such a
one is a great man, he is a mighty Prince, a King of great power, ye can not
be without his (...), agree with him in (...), (...) else ye shall have him your
enemy. etc. Well, fear (...), but cleave to God, and he shall defend you.
(...) not as King (...) did, that was afraid of the (...) King, and for fear
least he should have him to his enemy, was content to forsake God, and to agree
with him (...) Religion, and worshyppyng of God. And a none sent to (...) the
high Priest, who was ready at once to (...) the (...) of the Assirian King.
(...) not your highness (...), fear not the best of them all, but fear God.
The same (...) was Capellanus ad manum, a Chaplayne at hand, (...) chaplayne.
If ye will turn, ye shall have that will turn with you, yea even An (...)
Chapiain.
in their white rotches. But follow not Achab: Remember the hear how it
falls not without Gods providence. Remember the Sparrowes how they build in
every house, and God provided for them. And ye are much (...) precious to me
(says Christ) then Sparrowes or other birds. God will God will defend (...).
defend you, that before your time comes, ye shall not dye nor myscary. On a
time when Christ was going to Jerusalem his Disciples said unto him: They there
would have stoned thee, and wylt thou now go thither again? What (says he
again to them) Nonne duodecem sunt hoar die. etc. Be there not twelve hours in
the day? (says he). God has appointed his times, as pleases him, and before
the time comes that God has appointed, they shall have no power against you.
Therefore stycke to God and forsake him not, but fear him, and fear not men.
And beware chiefly of two affections fear and love. Fear as A chab, of whom I
have told you that Two affec tions to (...) eschued.
for fear of the (...) King he changed his religion, and thereby purchased
Gods hie indignation to him and to his realm. And love, as Dina Jacobs
daughter, who caused a change of religion, by (...) and (...) who were
contented for lust of a wife to the destrucion and spoylyng of all the whole
city: Read the Chronicles of England and France, and ye shall see what
chaunges of religion has come by marriages, Read chronicles.
and for marriages. Marye my daughter and be (...), and so fourth, or else. etc.
(...) them not (...) the (...). And this rule should al estates and (...) of
men follow, whereas now they fear me^ and not God. If thor be a judgment (...) a
great man and a poor (...): Then must there be a corrupcion of justice for
fear. Oh he is a great man, I (...) not displease him. etc. (...) upon (...),
art you a Judge and wilt be afraid to give right (...)? (...) him not be (...)
great a man but vpryghtly do true justice. Likewise some pastures go (...)
(...).
their cure, they are (...) of the plage, they dare not com nigh any sick body:
but hyer other, and they go away them selves. Out upon (...). The Woulfe
comes upon thy flock to devour (...), and when they have most need of thee,
thou run nest away from them. The soldier also that should go on (...), he
will draw back as much as he can. (...) I shall (...). Oh such and such went,
and never came home again: Such men went the last year into Northfolke, and
were slain there. Thus they are (...) to go. They will labor to tarry at
home. If the King command thee to go, (...) bound to go, and (...) the King,
thou (...) God. (...) serve God, he will not shorten thy days to thine hurt.
Well says some, if they had not gone they had lived unto this (...). How
know thou that? who made thee so pryuy of gods council? follow thou thy
vocation, and serve the king when (...) calls thee. In seruyng him thou shall
serve God. And (...) thy time come, (...) shall not die. It (...) that (...)
(...) dies not before (...) time.
escaped in such a city, what then? Yet God preserved him, so that he could
not perish. Lake therefore an example of (...), and every man follow his
vocation not fearing men, but (...) God. An other seed that Christ was
sowynge in the Sermon was this: Qui confessus me fuerit hominibus, confitebor
et ego illum coram patre meo. He that confesses me before men, I shall also
confess him hefore my Father. We must confess him with mouth. It was of a
Byshope not long agoo asked (...) saying
as touching this: Laws (says he) must be obeyed and ciuyll ordinance, I
will follow outwardlye, but my heart in religyon is fre to think as I will,
So said Friar Forest half a papyst, yea worse then a whole Papist. Well an
other (...) was: he that sins against the holy ghost, it shall not be (...)
him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. What is this same sin
against the holy (...)? an horrible sin that never shall be forgeuen, neither
in this world, nor in the world to come: What is this sin? final (...), and
some say impugning of the truth. One came to me (...), yt dispayred, because of
sin against the holy ghost. (...) was sore troubled in his conscience, that
he should bedamned, and that it was not possible for him to be saved, because
(...) had sinned against the holy (...). I said to him: what man (quod I)
comfort your self in these words Comfort (...) dispeare
of the Apostle: Christus est propiciatio pro peccatis nostris, And again: Ideo
me misit pater in mundum, vt qui credit in me non (...), sed habeat vitam
eternam. My father has for this purpose sent me into the world, that he which
believes in me, may not pearish, but may have the life everlasting. Also:
Quaqumque hora ingemuerit peccator saluus erit. In what hour soever the sinner
shall mourn for his sin, he shall be saved. I had scriptures inoughe for me (as
me thought) but say what I could say, he could say more against him self,
then A man in (...) pear c^an (...) much against him selfc.
I could say at that time to do him good with all. Where some say that the
sin against the holy ghost, is original sin: I allcdged against that, the
saying of S. Paul. Sicut per vnius delictum. etc. And siquis egerit
penitenciam. If a man had don all the sins in the world, and have true
repentance, with faith and hope in Gods mercy he shall be forgeuen. But (...)
I said, he could still object against me and aduoyde my reasons. I was feign to
take an other day, and did so. Let me go to my book (quod I) and go you to
your prayers, for ye are not all together without faith. I got me to my study,
I red many doetours, but none could content me, no expositour could please me
nor satisfye my mind in the matter. And it is with me as it is with a schol
ler of Cambridge, who being demanded of his Tutoure how he understood his
lesson, and what it mente: I know (quod he) what it means, but I can not
tell it, I can not express it. So I understood it well inoughe, but I can not
well declare it. (...) I will boungle at it as well as I can. Now to tell you
by the way what sin it was that he had committed, he had fallen from the
truth known, And afterward fell to mocking and scorning of it. And this sin
it was that he thought to be vnforgeueable. I said unto him, that it was a
behement manner of spcakyng in Why some (...) is called (...).
scripture, yet (quod I) this is not spoken universally, nor it is not (...)
that God doothe never (...) it, but it is commonly called irremissible,
vnforgeueable, because that God does seldom forgive it, but yet there is no sin
so great but God may forgive it, and does forgive it to the repentant heart,
though in words it sound that it shall never be forgeuen: No sin that is
repented, is (...).
As priuilegium paucorum non destruit regulam vniuersalem The priuelege of a
few persons does not destroy an universal rule or saying of scripture. For
the scripture says: Omnes moriemur. We shall dye every one of us, yet some
shall be rapt and taken a live, as S. Paul says. For this privilege of a
few, does not hurt a generalty. An irremissible sin, an vnercusable sin, yet
to him that will truly repent, it is forgeueable, In Christ it may be
remitted, if there be no more but one man forgeuen, ye may be that same one
man that shall be forgeuen. Vb abundauit delictum, ibi abundabit et gratia.
Where iniquity has habounded, there shall grace habounde. Thus by little and
little this man came to a settled conscience again, and took comfort in Christ's
mer (...). Therefore despair not though it be said it shall neucr be forgeuen.
Where Lain said, my wickedness is so great that God cannot forgive it. Nay thou
lie says Auste^ to Cain. Mayor est dei misericordia, quam iniquitas (...).
The mercy of God is greater then thine iniquity. Therefore despair not but
this one thing I say: beware of this sin that ye fall not into it, for I have
known no mo but this one man this (...) rare (...),
one man that has fallen from the truth, and has afterward repented and come
to grace again, I have known many se^ce: god has opened mine eyes to see a
little, I have known many (I say) that knew more then I, and some whom I have
honored, that have afterward fallen from the truth, but never one of them
(this man except) that have returned to grace and to the truth again. But yet
though God does very seldom forgive this sin, and although it be one of the
sins that God does hate most of all others, and such as is almost never
forgiven, yet it is forgeueable. In the blood of Christ, if one truly repent,
and lo it is universal. As there is also an other scripture, Voe (...) cuius
rex puer est. Woe be to the Land, to the Realm, whose king is a child, which
some interpreate and refer to childish conditions. But it is commonly true
the otherwaye to, when it is referred to the age and years of childhod. For
where the king is with (...) age, (...) that have governance about the king,
have much liberty to live voluptuously and lycencyously, and not to be in
fear how they govern, as they would be if the king were of full age, and
then commonly they gonerne (...) be well governed (...) a child.
not well. But yet Josias and one or two mo though they were children, yet had
their Realms well gouerncd and rayned prosperously, and yet the saying. Vae
terroe euius rex puer est, nevertheless true for all that. And this I gather of
this irremissyble sin against the holy Ghost, that the Scripture says, it
is never forgeuen, because it is seldom forgeuen. For in deed I think that
there is no (...) which God doothe so seldom nor so hardely forgive, as this
sin of falling away from the truth, after that a The best per swation for
a desperate person.
manne once knows it. And in deed this took best place with the manne that
I have toulde you of, and best quyeted his conscience. An other seed was this:

Be not careful (says Christ) what ye shall say, before Judges and
Magistrates, when ye are brought before them for my names sake, for the holy
Ghost shall put in your minds even at the present hour, what ye shall
speak.

A comfortable saying and a goodlye promise of the holy Ghost. That the
adversaries of the truth (says he) shall not be able to resyste us, what?
shall the adversaries of the truth be dumme? nay, there (...) no greater
talkers nor bosters and sacers then they be. But they shall not be able to
resyst the truth, to destroy it.

Here some will say what needs Uniuersities then, and the preseruacion of
schools: the holy Ghost will (...) always what to say. Yea, but for all that
we may not We may not tempt God.
tempte God: we must trust in the holy Ghost, but we must not presume on the
holy Ghost. Hear now should I speak of Uniuersytyes, and for preferryng of
Schools. But he that preached the last Sunday, spoke very well in it, and
substauncyally, and like one that knew the estate and condycion of the
Uniuersityes and Schools very well. But thus much I say unto you Magistrates.
If ye will not maynteyne Schools and Unyuersyties, ye shall have a brutalytie.
Therefore no we a suit again to your highness. So order the matter that
preaching may not decay. For surely if A another neces sary suite.
preaching decay, ignorance and brutishnes will enter again Nor give yt
preachere livings to seculer men. What should seculer men do with the livings
of preachers? I think there be at this day ten thousand Studients, les then were
within these (...). years, and fewer preachers and that is the cause of
rebellion, if there were good bishops, there should be no rebellion. I am now
almost come to my matter, saving one saying of Christ which was an other seed.
Date, et dabitu^r vobis. (...) and it shall be given unto you. etc. But who
believes Gods promise is not (...).
this? if men believed this promise they would give more the^ they do (...) at
least wise they would not stick to give a little, but now a days men's study is
set rather to take gifts and to get of other men's good then to give any of
their own, so all other the promises are mistrusted and vnbeleued. For if the
rich men did believe this promise of God, they would willingly and readely give
a little to have the overplus. So where Christ says of iniuryes or offenses and
trespasses. Mihi vindictam et ego reoribuam. etc. (...) the aduengyng of
wrongs a lone unto me, and I shall pay them home, etc. If the rebels had
believed this promise, they would not have don as they did, So all the promises
of God are mistrusted. Noe also after the flood feared at every rain, least
the world should be drowned and destroyed again, til God gave the rain bow.
And what exercise shall we have The rainbowe (...) teach us
by the rainbow? we may learn by the rainbowe that God will be true of his
promises, and will fulfill his promises. For God sent the rainbow and. iiii. M.
years, it is, and more (...) this promise was made, and yet God has been true
of his promise unto this day. So that now when we see the rainbow we may learn
that god is true of his promise. And as God was true in this promise, so is he
and will be, in all the reast, but the covetous man does not believe that god is
true of his promise, for if he did, he would not stick to give of his goods
to yt poor. But as touching that I spoke before, when we see the rainbow, and
see in the rainbow that that is like water, and of a watrie color and as we
may and ought not only to take thereof hold and comfort of Gods promise, that
he will no more destroy the world with water for sin but also we may take an
example to fear god, What the rain bow teaches.
who in such wise hates sin. Likewise when in the rainbow we see that that is
of firye couloure, and like unto fire, we may gather an example of the end of
the world, that except we amend, the world shall at last be consumed with
fire for sin, and to fear the judgment of God, after which they that are
damned, shall be burned in hell fire. These were the seeds that Christ was
sowing, when this covetous man came unto him. And now I am come to my matter.
While Christ was this preaching, thus covetous fellow would not tarry till all
the sermon was done, but interrupted the sermon, even suddenly chopping in.
Master (quod he) speak to my brother, that he may divide the inheritance with
me. He would not abide till the end of the Sermon. But his mind was on his
halfepeny, and he would needs have his matter dispatched out of hand, Master
(quod he) let my brother divide with me. Yet this was a good fellow he could be
contented with part, he desired not to have all together alone to himself, but
could be content with a diuisyon, and to have his part of the inheritance,
and what was the enheritance? Ager. So that it was but one piece (...) ground,
or one farm. This covetous man could be content (...) men love no (...).
with the half of one farm, where our men now a days cannot be satisfied
with many farms at once: one manne must now have as many farms as will serve
many men, or else he will not be contented nor satisfied. They will (...) now a
days one with an other, except they have all. Oh says the wise man: There be
three things wherein my soul (...): Concordia fratrum, amor proximorum, et vir
ac mulier been sibi consentientes. The unity of brethren, yt love of
neighbors, and a man and wife agreing well together. So that the concord of
brethren and agreeing of brethren is a gay thing. What says Solomon of this
matter? Frater qui adiuuatur a fratre quasi ciuitas firma, et turris fortis.
The brother that is (...) of his brother, is a sure and well fenced city, and
a strong Tower, he is so strong. Oh it is a great matter (...) brethren love
and hold well together. But if the one go about to pulle down the other, then
are they weak both of them, and when one pulls down his fellow, they must
needs down both of them, there is no (...) to hold them Two brethren have
reigned in England.
up. Mark in the Chronicles of England. Two brethren have raygned jointly
together, the one on thissyde Humber, and the other beyond Humber in Scotland
and all that way. And what has come of it? So long as they have agree ed well
together, so long they have prospered. And when they have ierred they have
both gone to wrack. Brethren that have so raygned here in England have
quarelled one with a another, and the younger had been contented with his portion
(as in deed the younger brother commonly ierreth first) but by the contencion
both has fared the wors. So when there is any contention between brother and
brother for land, commonly they are both undone by it. And that craf ty merchant
(what ever he be) that will set brother against brother, means to destroy
them both, but of these ii. brethren whether this man here were the elder or
the younger I cannot say, scripture tells me not whether of these (...). was
the younger. But a likelihod this was yo^ger, for once it was aplain law that
primo genitus, that is to say the elder brother had duplicia, and therefore of
likelyhod it should be the young est brother that found him self agreued, and
was not content: but Christ said unto him, thou man who has made me a judge
or a deuider between you? Christ answered him by a question, and mark this
question of Christ, thou man. Quis The intent of a question asked.
me constituit iudecem aut diuisorem super vos. It is no small matter (says
Austen) of what intencion one asks a question, as Christ in an other place
of the gospel, asks who was neighbor to the pilgrim that was wounded.
There was (says Christ) a man that went from Jerusalem to Hierico, and fell
among thieves, and they wounded him and left him for dead. And a priest came
by, that was his own contreyman and let him lie, a Leuit came by and would
show no compassion upon him: at last a Samaritane came by, and set him on his
horse, and conveyed him to the city, and provided surgery for him. etc. Now
who was neighbor to this wounded man (says Christ?) Qui fecit illi
misericordiam (quod the Lawyer.) He that showed mercy unto him. He that did the
office of a neighbor, he was neighbor. As ye may perceive by a more familyer
example of the bishop of Exceter at Sutto^ in Staffordshire. Who is Bishop of
Exceter? forsooth master (...). What? do not al me^ know who is bishop of
Exceter? what he has been bishop many years. Well, say I: master Couerdale is
Bishop of Exceter, master Couerdale puts in execution the Bishops office,
and he that doothe the office of the Bishop, he is the Bishop in deed.
Therefore say I Master Couerdale is Bishop of Exceter. (...) there is a thing
that makes my heart sorye. I hear that Master (...) This was but by hear
say.
is poisoned. Alack a good man, a godly preacher, an honest fatherly man, and
if it be true, it is a great pytie and a lamentable case, that he feding them
with gods word they should feed him a gain with poison. But to the purpose
of Christ's question, who made me a judge between you? here an Anabaptist will
say: (...) Christ refused the office of a judge, ergo there ought to be no
judges nor magistrates a mong Christian men. If it had been a thing lawful,
Christ would not have refused to do the office of a judge, and to have
determined yt variau^ce between these ii. brethren. But Christ did thereby
signify, that he was not sent for that office. But if thou will have a trial
and a sentence of that matter according to the laws, thou must go to the
temporal judge that is deputed therefore, but Christ's meaning was, that he was
come for an other purpose, he had another office deputed unto him, then to be a
judge in temporal matters, Ego veni vocare peccatores ad penitenciam, I am com
(says he) to call sinners to repentance. He was come to preach the Gospel,
the remission of sin, and the kingdom of God and meant not thereby to disalow
the office of temporal ma The (...) is answered.
gistrates. Nay; if Christ had meant that there should be no magistrates, he
would have bid him take all, but Christ mente nothing so. But the matter is,
that this covetous man, this brother took his mark amiss, for he came to a
wrong man to seek redres of his matter, nor Christ did not forbid him to seek
his remedy at the magistrates hand, but Christ refused to take upon him the^
office that was not his calling. For Christ had an other vocation then to be a
judge between such as contended about matters of land. If our rebels had had
this in their minds, they would not have been their own judges, but they would
have sought the redres of their grief at the hands of the king and his
magistrates The canse of (...).
under him appointed. But no marvel of their blindness and ignorance: for the
Bishops are out of their dioces, that should teach them this gear. But this
man perchance had heard, and did think that Christ was (...), whose reign in
words sounds a corporal and a temporal raygne, which should do justice,
and see a redres in all matters of worldly controuerly. Which is a necessary
office in a christian (...), and must needs be put in execucyon for mynistring
of (...). And therefore I require you (as a suter rather then a preacher) look
to your office your felfe, and lay not all on your officers backs. Receive
the bills of supplycation your self, I do not see you do so now a days, as ye
were wont to do the last year.

For Gods sake look unto it, and see to the ministering of justice (...) own
self, and let poor Suitors have answer. There is a king in Christendom, and it
is the king of Den The king of Denmark.
mark, that sits openly in justice, thrice in the weke, and has doors kept
open for the nones. I have hard it reported of one that has been there and seen
the proof of it, many a time and often. And the last justice that ever he saw don
there was of a priests cause, that had had his glebe land (...) from him (and
now here in England (...) go about to take away all) but this priest had had
his glebelande taken from him by a great man. Well, first went out letters for
this man, to appear at a day: process went out for him according to the order
of the law, and charged by virtue of those letters, to appear before the (...)
at such a day. The day came The (...) sat in his hall ready to minister
justice: The priest was there present: The gentleman this Lord, this great
man, was called, and commanded to make his appe raunce according to the write
that had been directed out for him. And the Lord came, and was there, but he
appeared not: No quod the king? was he sommoned as he should be? had he any
warning to be here? It was answered, yea, and that he was there walkinge up and
down in the hall, and that he knew well enough that that was his day, and also
that he had al ready been called, but he said he would not come before the king
at that time, allcoginge that he neaded not as yet to make an answer, because
he had had but one summoning. No quod the king? is hehere present: yea forsooth
sir said the priest. The king commanded him to be called, and to come before
him. And the end was this. He made this Lord, this great man to restore unto ye
priest not only the glebeland which he had taken from the priest but also the
rent and profit thereof, for so long time as he had withholden it from the
priest which was viii. years or therabout (says he) when ye can show better
cuidence the the priest has done, why it ought to be your land, then he shall
restore it to you again and the profyts thereof, that he shall receive in the
mean time. But till that day come, I charge ye that ye suffer him peaceably
to enjoy that is his. This is a noble king, and this I tell for your example,
that ye may do the like. (...) upon the matter your self. Pore men put up bills
every day, and never the nere. Confyrme your kingdom in judgment, and begin
doing of your own office your self, even now while you are young, and sytte
once or twice in the week in council among your Lords, it shall cause things
to have good success, and that matters shall not be lingered for the from day
to day. It is good for every man to do his own office, and to se that well
executed and discharged. Ozias king in Judah, he would needs do thoffice of the
priest, and he would needs offer incense in yt sanctuary, which to do, was ye
priests office. But he was so de^ly (...) with the lepry for his labor, and so
continued a lepre None may me dle with others office.
al dais of his life. S. Jhons disciples would have had their master to take
upon him yt he was Christ. But what said Jho^? Nemo sibi assumit quicqua^, nisi
datu^ fuerit ei desuper. No man may take any thing upon him self, except it be
given unto him from above. If the Devonshire men had well (...) sidered this,
they had not provoked the plages yt they have had light upon them. But
vnpreching prelacy has been the chyefest cause of all this hurly burly and
commotyons. But if Christ may challenge any kind of men for taking his office
upon them, he may say to the massemo^gers. Who gave you commissyon to offer up
Christ? who gave you au Masmongers bsury Christ's office.
tority to take mine office in hand? for it is only christ's of fice to do
that. It is a great matter to offer christ, if Christ had offered his body at yt
last supper, then should we so do to, who is worthy to offer up Christ? an
abominable presum cyon Paul says Accepit panem, postquam gracias egissit
fregit ac dixit, Accipite, edite. He took bread and after that he had given
thanks, he bralie it, and said. Take ye, eat ye. etc. and so said: Hoc est
corpus meum, He gave thanks, well the^ in thanks giving there is non oblation,
and when he gave thanks it was not his body.

When I was in examination. I was asked many questions, and it was said to me:
what Christ did, that should we do: a bishop gathered that upon these words.
Hoc facite inmei recordacionem. Then said he to me, how know ye that they eat
it before he said, Hoc est corpus meum. I answered again and said: how know
ye that they did not eat it. etc. So I brought into him the place of Paul
above said, and that in thanks giving is none oblation, and when he gave
thanks it was not his body, for he gave thanks in the beginning of supper,
before they eat any manner thing at all, as his accustomed manner was to do. I
wonder therefore that they will or dare by this text, take upon them to offer
Christ's body. They should rather say: Quis me constituit oblatorem? Who made
me an offerer? But when Christ said: Quis me constituit iudicem aut diuisorem
super vos? Who has made me a Judge, or a deuider of lands among you? Christ
did refuse an other mansoffice, an office that he was Christ (...) another
man's office
not of his father deputed unto. Christ's (...) was a spiritual kingdom, and
his office was a spiritual office and he was a spiritual judge. And therefore
when the woman (...) in ad ultery was brought befere him, he refused not to
play the judge, but said: Quis te accusat? and she said again Nemo domine. No
man lord (says she) then said he, Nec ego te conde^no. Nor I (...) thee not.
Vade et noli amplius peccare. (...) thy ways, and sin no more. Here he took
vpo^him his own office and did his office, for his office was to preach and to
bid sinners a me^d their evil living, and not to be a temporal judge in
temporal causes. And here is an other occasion of a suit to your highness, for
yt punishment of lechery. For lechery (...) in Eng (...) to the king.
la^d like a flood. But now to make an end in temporal causes he said. Quis me
constituit iudicem. etc. Who made me a judge of te^porall causes among you, and
of worldly matters: Thus came this fellow in here with interrupting of Christ's
sermon, and received the answer which I have rehearsed. Thou man thou fellow
(quod he) who has made me a judge, among you? And he said unto all the
audience: Videte, et cave te ab auaricia. See and beware of covetousness. Why
so? Qui a non in abundancia cuiusquoem vita eius est, ex his que possidet. For
no man's life stands in the habundaunce of the things which he possesses,
we may: have things necessary, and we may have habouudaunce of things, but
the haboundance does not make us blessed. It is no good argument. Quo plus
quisque habet, tanto beatus viuit. The more riches that a man has the more
happelly and the more blisfullye he lives. For a certain great man that had
purchased much lands a thousand marks by year: or I wot not what, a great
porcio^ he had. And so on the way as he was A terrible example.
in his journey toward London, or from london, he fell sick by the way. A
disease took him, that he was constrained to lie upon it. And so being in his
bed the disease grew more (...), upon him, that he was by his friends, that were
about him very godly advised to look to him self, and to make him ready to god,
for there was non other likelyhod but that he must die without remedy. He
cried out, what? shall I dye (quod he) wounds, sides, heart, shall I dye, and
thus go from my goods? go fet me so^ physician that may save my life, wounds
and sides shall I thus die? There lay he still in his bed like a block with
nothing but wounds and sides shall I dye? With in a very little while he died in
deed, and the^ lay he like a block in deed. There was black gowns, torches,
tapers and ringing of belles, but what is become of him, God (...) and not I.
But hereby this ye may perceive that it is not the ha boundaunce of riches that
makes a man to live quietlye and blisfully. But the quiet life is in a
mediocrite. Mediocres optime viunt. (says he) they that are in a mean do live
best. A true (...).
And there is a proverb which I red many years ago. Dimi dium plus toto. The
half sometimes more then the hole. The mean life is the best life, and the most
quiet life of all. If a man should fill him self up to the throat, he should
not find ease in it, but displeasure, and with the one half he might satisfy
his greadye appetite. So this great richesse never makes a man's life quiet,
but rather troublous I remember here a saying of Solomon, and his example.
Coaceruaui mihi argentum and aurum. I gathered silver and gold together (say
the he) I provided me singers, and women which could play on instruments to
make men mirth and pastime, (...) gate me Psalteries and songs of music etc.
And thus my: heart reioysed in all that I did. But what was the end of all this?
Cum co^uertissem me ad omnia, when I considered (says Solomon) all the works
that my hands had wrought etc. lo, all was but vanitye and vexatyon of mind,
and nothing of any value under the sun. Therefore, leave covetousness, for
believe me if I had an enemy. The first thing that I would wish to him, should
be, that he might have abundance of richesse, for so I am sure, he should
never be in quiet. But think ye there be not many yt would be so hurt? But in
this place of the gospel. Christ (...) and declared this unquietness and
vncerte^ty of great richesse, by a similitude and parable of a great rich man,
who had much land that brought forth all fruits plentifully. And he being in a
pride of the matter, and much unquiet by reason that he had so much, said to
him self: What shall I do, because I have not roum enough where to bestow my
fruits that have grown unto me of my lands, I will thus do (says (...)) I
will pull down my barnes, and build greater barnes, and I will say to my
soul. My soul thou (...) much goods laid up in store for many years, take
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God said to him. Stulte hac nocte
amimam tuam repetunt abs te. Thou fool, thou fool, this night will they take
thy soul from thee again. and the^, whose shall those things be, which yt have
provided Even so it is with him (says Christ) yt gathers riches un to him
self, and is not rich toward God etc. But yet the covetous man can never be
content. I walked one day with a gen tlema^ in a park, and the man regarded not
mi talk, but cast his head and eye this and that way, so that I perceived he
gave no great ear to me, which when I saw: I held my peace. At last, oh (quod
the gentleman) if this park were mine, I would never desire more while I
lived. I answered and said: Sir, and what if ye had this Park to, for there
was an other Park even hard by? this gentleman laughed at the matter. And
truly I think he was diseased with yt dropsy, the more he had, the more
covetous he was to have (...) (...) gentlemen.
more and more. This was a farmer that had a farm hard by it, and if he might
have had this Park to it, he would never have desired more. This was a farmer
not altogether so covetous a man, as there be many now a days, as for one
gentleman to rake up all the farms in the country together in his hands all
at ones. And hear one suit more to your highness. There lacks one thing in
this realm, that it has need of, for Gods sake make so. (...) promoters.
Lack of promoters.
There lack promoters, such as were in king Henry the seuenthes days your
graundfather. There lack men to promote the kings officers when they do
amiss, and to promote al offenders. I think there is great nead of such men
of godly discretion, wisdom, and conscience, to promote transgressors, as
rentraisours, oppressors of the pore, extor tioners, (...), vserers. I here
there be vserers in England, that will take xl. in the hundredth: But I hear
of no promoters to put them up. We read not this covetous farmer or landed
manne of the gospel, bought corn in the markets to lay it up in store, and
then sell it again.

But and if it please your highness? I hear say that in Eng land, we have
land Lords (nay step Lords I might say) are become grasiers, and
burgesses are become regra ters, and some Farmers, will regrate and bie up all the corn (...)
that comes to markets, and lay it up in store, and sell it again at an
higher price, when they see their time: I heard a merchant man say that he
had travailed all the days of his life, in the trade of marchaundise, and had
gotten iii. or iiii. thousand pounds by byinge and selling, but in case he
might be licensed or suffered so to do, he would get a thousand pound a year
by only bying and sellyng of grain heave within this realm. Yea and (as I
hear say) Aldermeu are now a days become Colliers. They he (...).
both Woodmongers and makers of cooles. I would wish he might eat nothing
but coals for a while, till (...) had amended it. There cannot a poor body bye
a sack of coals, but it must come through their hands. But this rich man
that the Gospel (...) of, was a couetouse man. God had given him plentye, but
that made him not a good man. It is another thing that makes a good man. God
says: Si non (...) vocem (...). If thou obey not my voice etc. (...) therefore
worldly riches do not declare yt favor or disfauor of God. The scripture says:
Nemo scit an sit amore dignus, an odio. God has ordained all things to be
good. And the devil laboreth to turn al things to man's evil. God gives men
plentye of richesse to exercise their The (...) is contrary to god.
faith and charity, to confirm them that be good, to draw them that be naught,
and to bring the^ to repentance: and the devil works al together to the
contrary. And it is an old proverb, the more wicked the more fortunate. But yt
(...) of this covetous rich man, declares thunqui etnes of the mind, that
richesse brings with it. First they Riches bring (...) of mind.
are al in care how to get richesse, and then are they in more (...) how to
keep it still. Therefore the (...) says. Qui volunt ditescere incidunt in
tentationes varias. They that study to get great richesse, do fall into many
diverse temptatyons. But the rote of al evil is covetousness. What shall I do
says this rich man.) He asked his own brainlesse head what he should do, he
did not ask of the scripture. For if he had asked of the scripture, it would
have told him, it would have said unto him: Frange esurienti panem tuum. etc.
Break thy bread unto the hungry. All the affection of men now a dais, is in
building gay and (...) houses, it is in setting up and pulling down, and ueuer
have they done building. But thend of al such great ritchesse and covetousness
is this: (...) this (...) spoken.
This night thou fool thy soul shall be taken from thee. It is to be understand
of all that rise up from little to much, as this rich man that the gospel spoke
of did. Ido not despise richesse, but I (...) that men should have ritchesse, as
Abraham had, and as Joseph had. A man to have riches to help his neighbor, is
a godly riches. The worldly richesse is to put al his trust and confidence in
his worldly richesse, that he may by them live here gallantly, plesantlye, and
voluptuouslye. Is this godly richesse? No no, this is not godly richesse. It
is a common saying now a dais among many. Oh, he is a rich man, he is well
worth five C. pounds. He Who (...)
is well worth v. C. pounds that has given. v. (...). pound (...) the pore,
otherwise it is none of his. Yea, but who shall have this v. C. pounds? For whom
have thou gotten that fiuehundred pounds? What says Solomon.

(...). v. Est alia infirmitas pessima, quam vidi sub sole diuitioe conseruatoe
in malum domini sui. Another evil (says he) and an other very naughtye
imperfection, richesse horeded up and kept together to the owners own harm,
for many times such richesse do perish and consume away miserably. Such a one
shall sometime have a son says he, that shall be a very beggar, and live al in
extreme penury. O goodly riches that one man shall get it, and an other come to
devour it Therefore Videte, and cauete ab auaritia. See and beware of
covetousness. Believe Gods words, for they will not deceive you, nor lie.
Heaven and earth shall perish: but Verbum domini, manet in oeternum. The wordof
the Lord abides and endures for ever. Oh this leauened faith: this
unseasoned faith. Beware of this unseasoned faith. A certain mau asked me this
question: (...) thou ever see a man live long that had great richesse?
Therefore says the wise man, if God send thee richesse, use them. If God send
thee about dance, use them according to the rule of Gods word, and study to
be rych in our savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and the holy
ghost, be al honor glory and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.


Imprinted at London by John Day, dwellinge over Aldersgate, beneath S.
Martyns.

And are to be sold at his shop under the gate.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Ma. iestatis perseptennium.


