LATHAMS NEW AND SECOND Book of FALCONRY; concerning the ordering and training
up of all such HAWKS as was omitted or left unmentioned in his printed Book
of the HAGGARD FALCON and GERFALCON, namely, the Goshawke and Tassell, with the
Sparhawke, the Lanner and Lanneret, as they are divided in their generation:
the Hobby and Marlyn in their kinds: Teaching approved Medicines for all such
infirmities and diseases as are incident to them.

Published for the delight of Noble minds, and instruction of young Falconers
in all things pertaining to this Art.



AT LONDON Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
near Fleet Conduit. 1618.

FAVLCON
1. book.

GOSHAWKE.
SPAROWHAWKE
LATHAMS new and second Book of Falconrie, concerning the training up of all
HAWKS that were unmentioned in his first Book of the HAGGART FAVLCON and
GERFAVLCON, formerly printed; teaching approved Medicines for all their
diseases.

By SIMON LATHAM, Gent

AT LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
near Fleet-Conduit, 1618,

GERFAVLCO^
1. book.

LANNER.
HOBBY.
MERLIN.


To the right Worshipful and Noble-minded Gentleman Sr Patrick Hume Knight,
Mr Falconer to the Kings most excellent Majesty: S. L. wishes all increase of
Honors in this life, and eternal happiness in the world to come.
WORTHY SIR:
THe wings of my undeserving Muse (improued on with the good opinion of her
Patron) heretofore presumed to so are Hawke-hie; yet as then I spoke
particular: but now (as well for the propagation of the noble sport, as for the
explanation of the effects of nature) J presume to dedicate to your noble
Judgment in that sport, a generality of definitions in Hawks, both in Names
and Natures: the perfection of my pains (like a Diamond set in gold) rests in
the truth of your opinion. And as in the natural motion of the heavens, the
greater circumference ever moves the lesser; so (I make no question) if your
deserving judgment give me approbation, all other censures will consequently
leuill with your Aim: I so far took aquaintance of presumption to choose you
for my Patron, being assured your Judgment will give a more luster to my
labors. Virtue J do make my Mistress; and finding her keep open house in your
addicted inclination; I thought no toil laborious to attain rest in such a
harbor. Jf your charity refuse to patronize this poor expression of a well
wisher, J wish it had been still borne* but my hope is, your noble Nature will
both give it life, and nourish it; for which I shall ever rest,

Not more devoted then indebted to your virtue, S. L.

To the Courteous Reader.
IT is now four years past (gentle Reader) since importuned by some of my
special friends, J took upon me in satisfaction of their earnest request, to
write my first Book of the Haggart Falcon Gentle; for which they then showed
me many lykelyhoods and reasons how much the same might profit; and how well of
diverse sorts of people, especially of young men and learners, the labor might
be accepted. Nevertheless, by advertisement of the Printers, and also through
the report of others, I have understood the contrary; and that being but as it
were a book in particular, treating of on Hawke, it was refused and slightly
accounted of by many; whose wills and affections were formerly fixed on other
subjects. For which cause I have here, although vnskillfully and unwisely,
undertaken a course quite contrary to my own disposition, and altogether
disagreeing with my former will and affection; as unto things for the most part
of little or no deserving, to prescribe rules of Art, words of praise and
commendation. Yet on the former considerations, as also at the earnest suit and
reimportunitie of my friends, I do intend to persevere in my purpose, and in a
short Treatise once again to lay down a Hawke, not as the only subject of my
professed Art, but a work of my device. And the Goshawke is she, the which I
am determined to speak of, with show and declaration of her properties and
nature; and generally of all such other Hawks as were omitted, and are amongst
us ordinary at this present day, namely, the Tassell of the Goshawke, the
Sparhawke, and her excellent properties; the Lanner, and Lanneret, as they are
divided in their kinds, the Hobby, and the marlin; the one belonging to the
young man; the other pertaining to the Lady. But first, I purpose to begin with
the Ostringer him self, and with his Hawke as she is wild, compared with
other fowls of the air; and of their natural awe they have of the man, and
fearfulness above all other creatures. Secondly, of the Spanyell, and the
society there ought to be between the man, the Hawke, and him self.
Thirdly, with directions to the Ostringer, and instructions to the nouice.
Fourthly, of the difference in the manner of flying of the Goshawke compared
with the longwinged Hawke, which the Ostringer ought to observe. Fifthly, of the
Goshawke, compared to the Lanner, for her soundness and long lasting; the
which depends upon the well ordering and governing of her keeper. And lastly,
how the best and skilfullest Ostringer ought to join both care and continual
attendance with his best skill and knowledge, to preserve his Hawks health and
life withal.

An acknowledgment of the Authors love and thankefullnesse to his first Master
and founder.
ANd furthermore, let me condemn my self of former forgetfulness, and not
be unmindful again of the right worshipful master Henry Sadler of Euerly,
who was my first and loving master, and from whom I had my art and
understanding kindly showed me, obscuring no rules or skill from me, wherein
he was nothing inferior then to any gentleman whateuer of his reputation or
reckoning. He, I confess, it was that taught me the way to live, although I
had had no other means: For which, in all love and thankefullnesse, I submit
my self unto him, and (if he be yet living) ought also daily to pray for him,
so long as it shall please God to alot him time in this world.

Jn commendation of the Author and his Book.
NAture a Table of delightful cates,
Has richly furnished out for all estates.
He is a sullen guest, that when he may
Feed at his choice, hungry departs away.
Hawking is one fair Dish, if rich men would
Use it, not as they do, but as they should.
But because circumstances make or mar
Pleasure, that in themselves indifferent are:
Wrong not your selves in that which you allow;
Which to observe you may here study how.
Consult it, practice it: and so you shall
Well man your Hawks, manage your selves withal.
Never has English man in public sort
Given fairer orders for so noble sport.
T. A.

A TABLE OF the Chapters and PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED in this Book.
CHAP. I.
OF the Ostringer, and first of the Goshawke compared with other Fowls of the
air, as they are vnreclaimed and wild, and of the awe and fearfulness they
have of the man above all other creatures. page 1
CHAP. II.
Of the Spaniell, and the society there ought to be between the man, the
Hawke and himself. p. 3.
CHAP. III.
Instructions for the Ostringer to observe. p. 5 He that gives not due
attendance, shall never attain to perfect knowledge. ibid: A young man to lie
long in bed, and be slothful, is a vice detestable. ibid.
CHAP. IIII.
Of the difference in the manner of flying of the Goshawke, compared with the
other, which the Ostringer ought to observe. p. 6 Difference in their flight.
ibid.
CHAP. V.
Of the nature of the Goshawke compared with the Lanner for her soundness and
long lasting, the which depends upon the well ordering and governing of the
Keeper. p 7 She is ever free of diverse infirmities that other Hawks are
subject unto. ibid. The power of her natural heat. p. 8 Care in the Keeper
preserves life. ibid: The nature of the Goshawke. 9 The gentle disposition of
the Lanner. ibid.
CHAP. VI.
Of the skillful Ostringer, and how he may through negligence as soon destroy
and kill his Hawke, as one of more slender judgment. p. 10 The fruits of
carelessness in the skillful Keeper. ibid.
CHAP. VII.
Instructions for the young man from the Mew p. 11 Of the Mew. ibid. Necessary
instructions. p. 12
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Goshawke taken from the cage, with other observations for the young
man. p. 13. If they rest long on the cage there will be great damage in the
sudden dealing with her. ibid. Instructions for the young man. p. 15 Of
casting. p. 16 The nature of the stomach. p. 16 The casting. p. 17 Disorder in
the giver of casting. p. 18 More of casting. p. 13 The effects of woollen
casting. p. 19 The natural casting. p. 20 Of bloody meat given to flying
Hawks. p. 21 The effects of gross feeding. p. 21 Difference between the
Hawke in the Mewe, and the other that is flying. p. 21 Order in the inseaming.
p. 22. What she gets by the labor of the body, and use of her wings and
thriues best with her. p. 22 Frank feed with rest breeds imperfection and
lets the stomach. p. 22 Of the stomach. p. 23 Of the Couart. p. 23 The
inconvenience of long fasting. p. 23 That your Hawke be not kept fasting too
long for her flying. p. 24 Of cold meat. p. 24 The benefit of good meat. p.
24 Of setting your Hawke down to rest. p. 25 Of taking her up again. p. 25
The patience of the Ostringer toward his Hauk. 26 An order to be used at the
first reclaiming. p. 26 An observation at the first entrance. p. 27 The fruits
of an imperfect stomach. p. 27
CHAP. IX.
Of a Hawke that will not endure or abide the sight of the hood. p. 28 An error
in the keeper. p. 28
CHAP. X.
To make the the Goshawke gentle, and to love the hood, that has with ill
usage been beaten cut of love withal before. p. 30 An order to be observed.
p. 30
CHAP. XI.
To reclaim the Hawke from the cage. p. 33 An order to be observed. p. 34 A
good caveat. p. 35 Observe the nature of the Hawke. p. 36 Have care of her
stomach. p. 37 Mark well how she ought to be called. ibid. Over sight in the
keeper. ibid. The fruits of hastiness. p. 38 Of vaineglory. ibid. The low and
poor Hawke is evermore subject to infirmity. ibid.
CHAP. XII.
How and in what manner the Goshawke ought to be called loose, and taught to
draw, and in what places for the better avoiding of such inconveniences as she
is subject unto. p. 40 The spoil of the Hawke. p. 41 Flying to a town. ibid.
An order to be observed at first teaching to draw. ib. Why you ought not to
call her aloud. p. 42
CHAP. XIII.
To make love and unity between the Ostringer himself, his Hawke and his
Spaniels, which is a special thing to be observed. p. 43 The breeding love
between the Hawke and the Spaniels, p 44 To know when your Hawke is ready to
fly. p 45
CHAP. XIIII.
How you shall first enter your Hawke, and teach her fly to the field, and to
order and manage her there during that season. p. 46 Of the Spaniels. ibid. Of
the bushe. p. 47 Some words of custom ibid. Of the Partridge. ibid. An
observation. p. 48 An order to be observed. p. 49 A necessary example. p. 50 An
ill quality to fall on the ground. p. 53 How to amend the fault. ibid. A great
error. p. 54 A good condition. p. 55 Faults in the Eyas Hawke. p. 56 Of the
Ramage Hawke. ibid. A necessary example. ibid. An inconvenience belonging to
the Hawke that will not take the hood. p. 57 Often bating at Partridges sprung
to other Hawks discomforteth and discourageth the Hawke. p. 59 Of Hawks that
have true mettle. p. 66
CHAP. XV.
How to enter the Goshawke to the Couart. page 61 To teach the Goshawke fly to
the Couart. ibid. Every one not fit to keep the Goshawke. p. 62 The man cannot
follow by view to serve the Hawke. p. 63 It is the nature of a Hawke to have
her prey in private. p. 64 Of the Hawke and the Pheasant. p. 65 Of the Hawke
and the Spaniels: ibid. The time to enter a Hawke. ibid. To beware of the
Spaniels. p. 66 Showing of true love. ibid. Hawks must have no discouragement
at their entering. ibid. A good observation for young men. ibid. A great error
or oversight. p. 67 More faults. p. 68 Why Dogs are sent before. p. 69 Halter
fittest for thieves. ibid. A good observation. ibid. The Spaniels must know
what they hunt for. p. 70 There must be a continuance of careful usage. p. 71
Hawks angry, and her keeper not well pleased. ib. To embolden the Hawke, and
make her take the Pheasant from the pearche with courage. p. 72 To keep dogs
in awe. ibid. To beware of strange dogs. p. 73 A great inconvenience. p. 74 An
excellent dish. ibid. Of entering to the Cock. ibid. To seek out the nature of
the Hawke. p. 75 Of great indiscretion. ibid. A dastard Hawke will kill the hen
Phesant. ibid. What Is worthy commendations. p 76
CHAP. XVI.
A note worthy of observation for the imboldning of any Hawke that has been
rebuked or discouraged by the Spaniels. p. 77 An order perfectly to imbolden
her. p. 78
CHAP. XVII.
Of the Haggart Goshawke in particular. p. 80 Of the Haggart. p. 81 Of Crows,
Kites, and other such vermin. p. 83 Great inconvenience. ibid. A Hawke must be
always pleased from the hand. 85 Of the thick Couart. ibid.
CHAP. XVIII.
That the Hawke being well entered, and in love with the Partridge, ought not to
be flone to the Couart at all. p. 86 Of a toling and tempting bird. p. 87 Of
the Phesant. ibid. The true nature of the Hawke. p. 88.
CHAP. XIX.
To teach the Goshawke to fly to the wild Ducke or Mallard that frequents the
ponds or private pits, which is a good sport, and a good prey when it is taken.
p. 89 The nature of the Foul. 90 Spurs to prick the Hawke forward: p. 91
CHAP. XX.
To fly to the wild Goose or Hearne, to the Rooke, the Mew or any other such
short flight; which are to be killed at the sudden sound by the policy of the
Hawke that is not swift of her wing to take them otherwise. p. 93 The Hawks
love. p. 94 An addition and example. ibid. Of the train. 96 A good condition.
p. 97
CHAP. XXI.
Of the Sparrow-hawke. p. 99
CHAP. XXII:
Of the Lanner and Lanneret. p. 102
CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Haggart Lanner. p. 104
CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the Ramage Lanner to the field. p. 106
CHAP. XXV.
Of the Ramage Lanner for the River. p. 111 The nouice or young Hawke. p. 113
Neither too much at one time, nor too little at at another. p. 116
CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Ramage Lanneret either to the River or Field. p. 118 Of the Partridge:
p. 119
CHAP. XXVII:
Of the Eyas Lanner or Lanneret. p. 121 Of Haggart or Ramage Hawks. p. 122
CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the cold in the head, or the Rye. p. 129
CHAP. XXIX.
For the Rye, or stuffing in the head. p. 132
CHAP. XXX.
Of the Craye. p. 134
CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Eye. p. 139
CHAP. XXXII.
A medicine for the eye that shall have any hurt by accident, or otherwise be
grown upon it. p. 140
CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Hobby and the Marlion. p. 141
LATHAMS new, and second Book of FALCONRY.
GO SHAWKE.


CHAP. I. Of the Goshawke compared with other Fowls of the air, as they are
vnreclaimed and wild; and of the awe and fearfulness they have of man above
all other creatures.
MAny an Osteringer accounts that so soon as he has reclaimed his Hawke,
taught her to draw and come again to his fist, that even so soon he may
presume and be bold to go with her to the field or covert, and make her do
his will; but it is not so. And he, whatsoever he be that so thinks, shall be
deceived in his expectation: for I have known my self diverse and sundry of
the best mettelled Hawks, with that slight and and simple conceit to have
been utterly spoiled, even quickly, and for ever beaten out of love with their
Keeper, his Spaniels, and the game he has flone and entered them first unto;
which shall hereafter more plainly appear, and be proved unto you.

First, you are to understand, that all Hawks whatsoever in their own nature
and kind, do of all other creatures, that God has made and framed to
perfection, most dread and fear the man. As for example, do but observe the
wild Hawk, or other Fowls that are bred in strange or foreign Countries,
where as few or no people be; let those birds that comes at passage into these
parts or other places, and in their own desires being moved thereunto, do
offer to fall or light whereas diverse and sundry sorts of beasts or cattle
be, yet without much timeritie or fearfulness, they will very often and
amongst them all even make their stay: on the contrary part, whenever they
do but fix their eyes on one ma^s very proportion, they will not abide; no,
they will hardly by any art, with stale annexed thereunto, be drawn or tempted
to stoop within his view: which strange behavior of theirs does manifestly
prove, and show how timorous and dreadful they be of him. Therefore if he do
covet to have, or will have one or any of those kind of wild Creatures to be
at his command and familiar with him, that by nature and kind are altogether
shye and fearful of him; he must first when he has them, draw and win them
by his continual loving and courteous behavior toward them, in his art and
outward manner of dealing with them. For of all Hawks in the world (the
Goshawke) as she is a stately and brave bird to behold; so is she also as
coy, nice, and curious to be handled and dealt withal. And will as soon
observe and unkindly except against any rough or harsh behavior from the man,
toward her* on the contrary, being artificially and kindly reclamed and used,
she will be as loving and fond of her Keeper, as any other Hawke whatsoever.

CHAP. II. Of the Spaniel, and the society there ought to be between the
man, the Hawke, and himself.
THe Spanyel is so kind a creature, that of all other, Of the Spaniell.
the man does most respect and choose to attend and wait upon him every where,
as well at home in his chamber, as at his table and trencher. And further, for
his delight abroad in all other places, so well he does accept and account of
his company: and truly no marvel why; but that he should be of him so well
esteemed and delighted in. For it has been affirmed of him for verity, that
if in the nightime there has been or should be, any evil thing near unto
his master, whom he does wait on, although he is not bound or tied unto him,
but might therefore take to his feet and run quite from him, yet otherwise
he will be so exceeding fond in his love toward him, as that instead of that,
he will stay still with him, and with lamentable moan and whining, will even
creep and crawle about his legs to give him warning. Furthermore, if in the
daytime any evil fall through tempest of thunder, lightning, or any other
evil blast, the poor loving Spanyel is sure of it to taste, to set his master
free. And therefore of all other creatures, I hold him in his own nature and
kindly love, to be most near familiar and in true subjection with the man,
ever desirous to be with him, and never willing to be absent, or out of the way
from him, but still watchful and diligent to do him service. So likewise, of
all other things, the Hawke in her own inclination does as much fear, and is
terrified at the sight of him, he being one so near as in continual society
or company keeping with the man. Wherefore it behooves every one that loves
and desires to keep the Goshawke, to be so careful, that by his art and
best endeavor, he do frame and fashion, as it were, a league of love and
familiar unity, between them, I mean the Man, the Hawke, and the Spanyel;
the which to accomplish and bring to perfection, I will according to my own
judgment and understanding hereafter show you.

CHAP. III. Instructions for the Osteringer to observe.
I Would have you understand, that as many a Falconer passes over the time he
has with his Hawke, He that gives not due attendance, shall never attain to
perfect knowledge.
and for want of true knowledge and understanding, never finds out that goodness
in her, which in her own nature and disposition she is able to perform. So
also ofttimes the Osteringer with his Goshawk does spend his time in vain, for
want of the like knowledge and perfect experience in his art; For a young man
to lie long in bed, and be slothful, is a vice detestable.
for there is very few of that kind, but through skill and painful practice
may be made good: if neither for Fesant nor Partridge, the which are most men's
usual delights, yet for some other thing, whereby her Keeper may be pleased,
and she her self deserve a due reward. For all of them, as they are wild and
vnreclaimed, are able sufficiently to shift for themselves, and kill sundry
kinds of prey to sustain their own wants withal. If that be so, wherefore
then should not a skillful Keeper, by his art, pains and discretion, cause
any of them to do the like for him?

CHAP. IIII. Of the difference in the manner of flying of the Goshawke,
compared with the other, which the Osteringer ought to observe.
GO SHAWKE.


Difference in their flight.
HEre is further to be noted, that as in the observation of every Falconer,
there is much difference in the manner of flying of their long winged Hawks to
be marked: so also is there by the Ostringer with his shortwinged Hawke, as
great a matter to be observed: for as some Falcon or long winged Hawke being
flone to the field, is as it were, unable to overtake the Partridge at the
first flight on forhead, but is taught by nature, and also enforced further by
nurture, to clime and mount aloft upon the mark, for her better advantage, and
after that manner kill it at the down come: so on the contrary there is some
others, that only trusts to their swiftness, to prey at their will and
pleasures on what they lists. Likewise for the short-winged Hawks, they are
as much different in their kind; for the swift and fast flying Hawke does
master her prey, when she is disposed, and forces it to yield through the
swiftnes of her main wings: contrariwise, the flower flying Hawke or slugge
does win what she gets most by her policy, wherein being reclaimed, she
ought to be taught and furthered by the industry and art of her Keeper.

CHAP. V. Of the nature of the Goshawke compared with the Lanner, for her
soundness and long lasting; the which depends upon the well ordering and
governing of her Keeper.
THe Goshawk is a Hawk of a hot nature, She is ever free of diverse infirmities
that other Hawks be subject unto.
and stronger co^stitution the^ any other Hawke that I my self have known, of
what kind soever: for in my observation she is seldom, or not at al, subject to
be liver shot, neither ever to have the fella^ders, both which infirmities are
very rife and familiar with our other ordinary Hawks, and also proceeds from
much coldness, the one of the liver, the other of the stomach; from cold, but
of heat from cold: because when the Hawke is once liuershot, at that time the
liver is both cold and rotten; which for the most part, first does proceed of
some violent heat taken by extraordinary means and evil usage; and
therefore, I say, from immediate and present cold, and of foretaken or former
heat. Also, when she is in the meanest and poorest estate of her body, what
meat soever passes through her, is ever converted and turned into a liquid and
thin substance; which shows plainly the power of her natural heat and
strength of body, The power of her natural heat.
so long as life remains in her.

The Lanner and Lanneret are accounted hard Hawks, and the very hardiest of
any kind that are ordinary, or in common use amongst us at this present time:
for whensoever co^mendations shall be by many men given of the Goshawke or
Tarcel for their long lasting, or living; they will simply say they be as hard
as the Lanner. But that ought not to be so affirmed or believed, but with some
exception, as touching the judgment and skill of their Keeper, Care in the
Keeper preserves life.
to be performed toward them in good rule and order, at al times fitting for
them; and then I will join with them, and say indeed, they be sound Hawks,
and as sound and hard of ward as the Lanner; for you are to understand thus
much of her natural inclination, which is, that she is a Hawke full of
stoutnesse and courage, and will not incline her self, neither be forced to be
conformable in any reasonable and mean temper unto her Keepers will, in the
time of her pride and fullness; when as she ought by labor and practice, to
be inseamed and made ready for his purpose, but is and will be frowardly
disposed, The nature of the Goshawke.
and prone to unruliness and extreme bating in that season; which is the
cause generally that one of them requires more labor and attendance of her
Keeper, then any other Hawke whatsoever of contrary kind: nevertheless,
ofttentimes through these extremes, and in those times, they do haste and
shorten their own days.

Contrariwise, as touching the Lanner, for the most part she is as meek and
gently disposed, The gentle disposition of the Lanner.
and seldom or never will of her own accord, or through other provocation be
made to bate, or forced to any extraordinary unruliness during the time of
her inseaming; but will wholly dispose her self to quietness, and endure all
things continually with patience; which is the only cause, and wherefore those
kind of Hawks by all reason must needs ouerlast the other.

CHAP. VI. Of the skillful Ostringer, and how he may through his negligence as
soon destroy and kill his Hawke, as one of more slender judgment.
HEre is the difference in their several kinds, and it rests to be
confirmed, as I have said before; by the skill; and not only that, but also
the care and diligence of their Keeper: for if he be never so good a Faulconer
or Ostringer, yet may be through negligence and mutable affections, oft-times
suffer the soundest and hardiest Hawke to decay and perish for want of due
attendance.

The fruits of carelessenesse in the skilful Keeper.
For I have my self been acquainted with some special Falconers, whom, if I
were disposed, I could name; who, for their skill and experience in their art,
have been perfectly able first to reclaim, inseame, and make their Hawks to
fly; and after with great skill and judgment to order and manage them in
their flights during that season: but afterward having finished and concluded
the same, being returned to their home, would there set them down, and as it
were, utterly disclaiming all former acquaintance had with them, would there
let them sometimes sit, and other sometimes hang by the heels, betaking
themselves for that day or night wholly, to Tables, Cards, Tobacco, or some
other such vain delights, whereby and through which cause they have wanted
their dues, their days have been shortened, and their lives even wilfully
hasted on to an end.

CHAP. VII. Instructions for the young man from the Mewe.
IT is meet the young man that wants experience should have such light and
understanding showed him by rules and direction, as that in his first lesson he
may be taught to discern and know what difference there ought to be in the
diet and manner of feeding, with the order belonging to his Hawke in her flying
time, as also when she is in the Mew, and during the time of her being there.

Therefore, if she be a Hawke that has been formerly stone, and is to be
taken from thence, The Mew.
it is like she will be fat and full in the highest degree with rest and
francke feeding; and there would be great danger in the sudden drawing of her,
and it is unusual with men of any judgment so to do: wherefore it is
necessary that she be fed in the Mew twice every day, with clean dressed and
washed meat, for the space of sixteen or twenty days before the intended time
of her drawing, to the end she may be at that time well inseamed of her body,
Necessary instructions.
and have scoured forth of her pannell and guts such glot and fatness, with
other drossie substance, that was engendered and harbored there; by means
whereof she will be perfectly freed from any danger that otherwise might have
happened afterward unto her, through her bating or other forcible motion of
body, as struggling, striving, or such like at her drawing, or other times.
Then will it be good time to take her from the Mew, when as you must have a
rufter hood in a readiness very fit for her; from which time forwards she must
be continually fed on the fist, after the manner formerly prescribed; also to
have casting every night duly bestowed on her.

This course, with continual carriage on horseback and on foot, must be taken
with her in her rufter hood some eight or ten days longer, and then take if
off when you shall find her to be well reclaimed and inseamed, and free from
all danger, and ready to be called: and with diligence and pains therein, the
next week will be as ready to fly; and after two or three flights at her
first entering, may be put even to hard flying, and she will receive no harm
thereby, she will be so perfectly inseamed; whereas otherwise with more haste
she may surfeit on heat, or with hard and short feed, lose her flesh, and so be
spoiled for two whole years.

GO SHAWKE.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Goshawke taken from the Cage, with other observations for
the young man.
IF she be newly taken from the Cage, If she rest long in the cage, there
will be great danger in the sudden dealing with her,
or those that fetches them from foreign and strange Countries, and takes no
more care in their travel and carriage, but only to dispose and deliver them
alive here amongst us, for their own benefit and commodities; There is very
few or none of those Hawks ever so ouerfraught with fat or fullness of
body, whereby she may take harm with any reasonable or ordinary bating, or
stirring on the fist, for that she has been formerly and usually acquainted
with the same in her long and restless journey: wherefore you need not doubt
or fear, but even so soon as your leisure will permit, after you have her, to
begin to practice and deal with her, and by your art and best endeavor,
together with your labor to man and reclaim her after the manner as shall be
showed hereafter; only noting and observing by the way these things. First, you
are to reclaim and make a wild Hawke and a bird of the air, that only
fears you, to become loving and gentle unto you, and also, as it were, to be
sociable and familiar with you. Likewise she being by unskillful and careless
former bad usage, with unnatural diet and gross feeding, suffocated and
filled full of uncleanness and imperfection; you are through your skill and
painful practice, to purge and cleanse her of those gross and superfluous
humors, and make her a perfect Hawke, and ready with fitness to be reclaimed,
and framed for what purpose soever you intend to make her for.

And that these things may well be accomplished and brought to perfection
without any artificial medicine or scouring: you shall have the certain and
sure way delivered unto you by rule and instruction: yet I know there be many
men otherwise affected, and will hardly be persuaded to be thereto conceited.
But let them be well advised, for I speak not by hearesay or imagination, or
from any other printed tradition, but by my own experience and approved
conclusion, as shall appear hereafter; yet I may imagine I should not need to
use many words for persuasion, knowing that many experienced Ostringers
understands the same: and for my own part I can justly affirm that I have
kept some few of the kind, whereof one of them lived with me above a dosen
year, and never had, during that time, any kind of physic given unto her; and
therefore so far, as out of my own knowledge I may, I do wish the young man,
that these following directions may be his direct and settled course in the
reclaiming, inseaming, and keeping his Hawke.

Use only a right and good order in her diet, Instructions for the young man.
with sweet meat at all times clean dressed, and reasonably washed, or
according as he shall find her of gentle or stubborn nature; and also a
measurable quantity to be given unto her so often as hereafter he shall be
further instructed: likewise with casting duly bestowed on her, if he finds
her to be sound, and to like of casting of woollen, then let her have it; but
otherwise let it be such as agrees best with her own nature; for there be
many right sound Hawks of that kind, that will on every great gorge, through
the long keeping of such woollen castings, much distaste them; the hot stench
and savor of them will be so noisome and disagreeing with the stomach, that
works and strives for the time to digest what it receives into it, The nature
of the stomach.
until it finds, as it were, a certain contending or unnatural working
against it self; and being in nature vanquished and overcome by the same, it
is constrained to yield and free it clearly of it, by restoring or returning
it back to him that gave it.

And to prevent this loathing, or dislike of this kind of casting, or any
evil that might inge^der or grow thereby: I have many years past left off to
give any of them to my Hawke at the nightime, neither at any time to keep
within her body above one hour, or two at the most, by my good will. Which
course I have found to be very agreeable with any Hawke in health, or in mean
estate, and to prevail as much with her, in scouring or clensing the place
that harbors or contains it, of all superfluous matter therein contained, to
the desired wish or contentment of the beholder: for whose further
satisfaction, I will here briefly make it plain unto you.

If you have read over my other book of Falconrie, you may remember, or if you
do read it, there you shall find, that I have written and discoursed of
Castings sufficiently; and showed the young Falconer, how he may at the first
making of his Hawke, either make her therein to love her casting ever after; or
otherwise for want of knowledge cause her everlastingly to hate the same, or at
least always to be nice and unwilling to take it; which is one most vile
condition, and does condemn the Keeper, The casting
either in his judgment or carfulness, or both; for the best or skilfullest
that is cannot govern such an Hawke as she ought to be. And because I have
written so largly before, I will now briefly let you understand, that at the
first reclaiming and making, is the time to teach her, when as with good meat
clean dressed and washed, and reasonable gorges of the same, with the like
time adjoined, you must get her a good stomach before you proffer her one
casting, and then she will not be nice or curious to take it; always being
mindful that it be no more in quantity, but that she may well and easily
swallow; and then when she has so done, presently put on her hood, and
suddenly give her one bitte or two of meat to please her withal; then make a
little stay, until you perceive assuredly that she has put it down into her
pannell; which being perceived put on her hood again, and give her a
reasonable supper: and this course it is fit should be taken with her
continually, as after the receipt of her casting, as you have heard, to let her
sit in her hood until she has put it into her pannell, and you shall see it
will not be long before she will understand what she should do; and in all
love unto it, will hasten without any niceness to take it even of it self,
expecting a present reward after she has received it; also otherwise it is
very necessary to hold this course. For I have seen my self some men, that
before their casting were any whit down their Hawks throat, Disorder in the
giver of casting.
would follow her so hastily with meat, that she has been almost choked:
but howsoever, it will oftentimes very much molest her in her putting over and
imbowelling; the which you way perceive by her often writhing, and great
trouble in traversing with her neck and whole body.

On these considerations, after my Hawke is well in seamed, and in flying, I
fail not, so near as I can, to give her plumage every night when I feed her
up: contrariwise, when she does rest from her labor, then I feed her very
clean without any casting at all, and so do set her up to rest: Of casting.
then do I cut and fashion a casting of woollen to my liking, and lay it in
fair water all night, and the next morning do rise very early, and do offer
her the same, well soaked, cooled and washed; the which she will not refuse to
take willingly, sitting still on her perch, being formerly wonted and
accustomed unto it, and will put it down into her pannell; and within some
hour, or thereabouts, when her stomach has wrought upon it, and finds little
or no commodity gained thereby, then does her emptiness and eager appetite to
her breakfast, naturally provoke her by casting to make her ready to prepare
her self for the same: at which time, for your further experience, you may
behold what a fair and delicate casting it will be, without any ill sign or
show in it; which otherwise would have appeared, by the length of time
continued.

Thus in my own observation I have gathered, that this kind of casting is not
fit to be given usually at the night time unto the soundest Hawke of this
kind, especially with any store of meat that may give cause unto her to keep
it long: for trial whereof, you shall perceive in the morning that it has
vexed her in her stomach, and hindered her digestion, and that she has been
weary of it with detaining it so long. For trial whereof, oft-times it
forces her to cast before her due hour, or that she has perfectly endued
her supper, The effects of woollen casting.
which will appear in the color of it, that will be of a black burnt or
tawnie, and withal clammie, with muddie and bloody water in it very often,
even in the soundest Hawke that is.

Thus do I leave it to your considerations, whether it can be fit or meet to
be given unto a sickly or crasie Hawke, or no, when the soundest that is cannot
well nor always brook it. Therefore, by my advice, if any man will needs give
it at the night, let it be but with small store of meat, and also let her have
some plumage with it. There be some men that use to give stones with
saliendine, and castings of hassell, that will swell dangerously, and grow too
big without great care be had in the vndersizing of it; the which many are
much ouerseene in, and oftentimes ouerstraine their Hawks with too great
castings of such kind, as will not with her inward and natural working be so
fashioned and mollified, as that she may cast it again with any reasonable
easines, or without much prejudice to herself.

Also others do use to give quilles and such like unto these kind of Hawks,
both in their inseaming and flying time: but for my own part I join not with
them in the like opinion, but rather do esteem of them as vain and
superfluous imaginations, and conceits proceeding from mutable and unconstant
affections, then from any effects of certentie or probable conclusions: only
this has been mine own course, when I have found my Hawke any whit to distaste
or dislike of such kind of unnatural cotton castings, I suddenly left them,
and did betake my self to Iukes, and sometimes to Hares or Conies feet, the
bones and wool well broken together; the which I never found to disagree any
whit with her, The natural casting is best.
but always has wrought to good purpose, and the like effects in her. And
whosoever he be that is cleanely in his manner of diet or feeding, and for the
quantity, with the careful ordering of the same, most assuredly shall never
have any occasion to use such kind of extraordinary courses. Yet I know there
be many men that would have their Hawks to fly well, and be at their
command, with gross and bloody meat given and continued unto them, Of bloody
meat given to string Hawks.
even as if they were still in the Mew; and they will not through any counsel
be advised from that course, although they plainly perceive what inconvenience
belongs unto it: as first, they will seem and make show to be, as it were,
blind and careless, when they should be most careful and watchful to see and
fly for their own reward, and content of their keeper: also they will loyter and
sit drowsily behind, when they should be most diligent to attend and draw after
the^, The effects of gross feeding.
nay although they fall to raling or soring quite away from them, yet they will
be so shallow witted or otherwise selfe-wil conceited, as either they cannot or
will not judge of the true cause of their idleness or disobedience toward them,
which is nothing but the imperfectnesse of the stomach, that is grown so cold,
and glotted with foul feed unwashed, and great gorges. I do not deny, but that
hot and bloody meat is necessary and good, if he that gives it knows when it is
fit to bestow it, otherwise it avails nothing toward the effectual working
of his desire. For example, take the wild Hawke from the Cage, Difference
between the Hawke in the Mew and the other that is flying.
or otherwise from the Mew the Hawke that has been flone, and continue your
former wonted manner of feeding with bloody meat unto her, although dividing
the same with your best discretion, and taking away the fat and grossest
substance from it; also to plye her with casting, carriage, and all the pains
with watching, and whatsoever else belonging, until you have made her so
familiar and gentle, as you can devise or desire, in the house in company, or
abroad in hold. Yet nevertheless, if you omit, and be slack to take the blood
away with well washing, you shall be new to seek; for your labor is all in
vain, and she will not be reclaimed or forced to be subject to your will,
but will continue in a manner toward you both wild and ramage still,
whenever you shall cross her loose abroad: and therefore I would have to
understand, Order in the inseaming.
that the vnreclaimed and unclean Hawke, of this kind or any other, ought to
be reclaimed, inseamed, and made to fly, with good meat clean dressed and
washed, and for these Hawks, the water dried out again with a fair cloth,
and a continual course held in the same all their flying time, unless on due
consideration and just cause being moved to the contrary; as unto a sick or
crasie Hawke, with due respect unto the eyes, What she gets by the labor of
her body and the use of her wings thriues best with her. Francke fed with
rest breeds imperfection and glots the stomach.
or hot and eager mettelled Hawke; as also unto the soundest and hardest Hawke
that is, as when she shall have continual hard flying, and kills often, then
may you with boldness, and discretion in the quantity, give unto her bloody
rewards, and three or four times in the week suppers of the same, as of
Partridge or Fesants heads and necks, or any other good meat; always being
mindful in time of rest, that then you fail not to feed with meat clean
dressed, hard washed and dried again, to hold the stomach right and sharp
withal; The stomach.
for otherwise (that) being dulled and taken away, there is no content to be
had, nor subjection to be looked for abroad, when she is at liberty and her
own disposing, but altogether offensiuenesse and vexation. For as I have often
told you (that) is the only mark you ought to aim at, it ties and binds her
to all other conditions you can desire to have her furnished withal. And on
the contrary, it seuers and separates asunder the one from the other, and makes
her as a wild and untamed Hawke. Also it is very necessary that this one thing
be well observed all the flying time, either to the field or couart, but
especially during that time, The cou^^.
because then for the most part, the weather is disposed to sharpness and
cold: for which cause you ought not to suffer any Hawke of that kind to be
fasting too long; The inconvenience of long fasting.
for it breeds much wind in them, the which they are all subject unto, and
will appear often with a rising in the gorge, and a noise withal of croking;
the one may be felt with the hand, and the other heard with the ear; and
therefore both are as easy to be judged of: likewise the rye and the cray
very much attends on the same, and it is a special means, with cold
adjoined, to take off her flesh, which at that time of the year will not very
easily be put on again, unless she be a right sound Hawke: and on this
impouerishment attends many other infirmities. Therefore to prevent these or
any other that may grow thereon; you ought to provide for every Hawking-day a
reasonable meal of clean dressed meat, the which you must keep in a fair
cloth: then in the morning, That your Hawke be not kept fasting too long for
her flying.
suddenly after she has cast, give her one bit when her hood is on. Also if
you chance to spend an hour more before you find your flight, give her
another bit; and so after this manner in your own discretion. Afterward,
during the time of your recreation and sporting abroad, compare or equal so
your meat with the length or shortness of time, as that she shall never be
over empty, yet nevertheless shall ever have a perfect appetite, and good
courage to fly after the best manner, and a well able and strong body to
maintain the same withal, which otherwise through long fasting would soon
be weakened and brought to poor estate. Also, as touching cold meat, Of cold
meat.
whenever you do feed with any of it, it shall profit you nothing to wash
it, so be it be clean; for the blood therein being cold, the strength thereof
for the most part is decayed, by which means it has lost the principal force
and vigor of it, through the which it would the better have fed and nourished:
I will advise no man to use it, but as seldom as he may, for a continuance of
it breeds poverty and many other diseases. On the contrary, to feed with hot
meat, The benefit of good ^eate.
although at that time to be reasonably well washed and dried, it holds
health and strength together, withal preventing the most, and continual
striving against all manner of diseases. And forget not whenever you set your
Hawke down off your fist hoodded or vnhoodded, to rest, to weather, to bathe,
Of setting your Hawke down to rest.
or for what cause else soever, that you come not to take her up again to your
fist, without using your voice in whistling or chirping unto her, also with
some bit of meat or a stumpe to please her withal; for so shall you work in
her an everlasting love and desire of your coming and company: whereas
otherwise to come unto her stilly or silently, suddenly or rashly to take her
up to your fist from her natural desire of quiet rest, Of taking her up again.
and to be alone without such kind usage and loving content, it stirs up in
her, her own natural disposition, which is unto anger and fear, and to hate
the society and company of the man, desiring always to be at libetie, and
out of his possession.

Also remember at all times you set your Hawke on her perch hoodded, that she
may not have understanding or perfect knowledge where it stands; for if she
have, she will always have an unquiet longing to be there, and will not rest
quietly on the fist after she is once within the doors; and especially until
she be thoroughly reclaimed and made flying, and has been well flone, your
fist for the most part must be her perch, and she ought to know no other; for
they be Hawks that in their first making, with a little rest will quickly
forget what formerly they were taught, and return to their wildenesse again.

Also, whenever you shall preceiue her to be untoward or frowardly disposed,
An observation by the Hawke.
you ought not to resist her with the like behavior, as many a choleric and
hasty man will do; for she will quickly perceive and observe it, and her love
will abate and be turned into disdain, The patience of the Ostringer toward
his Hawke.
which at the present time you shall perceive to appear by her strange and
scornful countenance in beholding you; but you must always be prepared and
armed with patience and gentleness to endure her unquietness, and evermore
have some stumpe in a readiness to appease her anger, and quiet her withal,
when you shall see her addicted thereunto, until you have reclaimed and made
her gentle indeed. And whereas I formerly advised, not to carry your Hawke
fasting too long for her flying, but to distribute her portion unto her by
bits, as time and occasion should serve: so likewise I do wish that in the
time of in seaming and reclaiming, An order to be used at the first reclaiming.
you do not at any time give her, her dinner altogether at one time, for
thereby you shall prolong and defer so much the more the time of her making;
for so soon as her stomach is satisfied and filled, her appetite and desire
toward you is choked, and until the hour of feeding grows near again, her
mind and remembrance is clean off on you; whereas otherwise, as I have said,
to divide it in the forepart of the day, and let her iumpe often to the fist
for it, she will still be mindful on you, and never forgetful, but always,
and inwardly in her mind attending and listening for your voice, and some
other pleasing reward from you, and she will so much the sooner be made a
perfect Hawke. There is no man that can at the first sight of his Hawke truly
judge of her nature and disposition, but therein shall be much deceived, they
are so different in their kind; wherefore it behooves every one to be careful,
and remember, at that time when she is first to be entered, An observation at
the first entrance.
that then he sets or puts her upon the highest point or pin of hunger,
doubting, as it were, the worst of her, or making question of her good or bad
inclination; for thereby he shall suddenly perceive and plainly see, all the
spirit and mettle that naturally is in her; for when she has once taken her
prey, whatsoever it be, although she should be of a dull disposition; yet by
that means she will rather choose to die then forsake it, she will be so
pinched with appetite and desire to enjoy it; whereas otherwise the stomach
being imperfect, the least occasion that may be, The fruits of an imperfect
stomach.
as the approach of her own Keeper, or any other man, the appearing either of
horse or dog, or what strange sight else soever, will be sufficient to cause
her to forsake it, and go her way; which ill condition she will remember
afterward, and be always apt on the least occasion to do the like again.

CHAP. IX. Of the Hawk that will not endure or abide the sight of the hood.
EVery man, though he would never so feign, cannot be so exquisite, as to
perform the slight and nimblenesse of that art, by quick and cleanely
conueying the hood on, above the hand, in regard that those kind of Hawks be
naturally more coy and curious to be handled about the head then any other be;
for which cause there be many men, that when they do assay to put on their
hood, do either quite miss them, or otherwise put it half way or loosely on,
An error in the Keeper.
which greatly offends the Hawke; nevertheless to add more anger and
vexation to her, they will use the art of bobbing with their hand or finger,
until they have even almost caused her to fall backward for fear, before she
can be hoodded: this is a most vile quality, and unseemly to be used to any
Hawke, and especially to one of this kind; for it will in the end beat her
quite out of love with the very sight of the hood, or with the moving but of
the hand toward her head, although she were never so gentle before.

And therefore I do wish every one that would have his Hawke gently disposed
that way, to forsake that one unseemly quality or indecent order, and accept
of another rule at my hand, which here I shall express plainly and truly
unto you; and with the which I have my self made diverse Hawks, that has
been frighted and feared in the highest degree, to become most loving and
gentle again.

I doubt not but there be many will think this to be a very hard matter to
perform, considering it nevertheless is a thing unusual, and has seldom or
never been seen. For trial whereof, let him that has such a Hawke, if he
cannot do it himself, send her unto me, and if I do not make her as gentle
as he can desire she should be, then for twenty shillings I will forfeit
unto him twenty nobles; and I will here show you the manner and way how to
perfect the same.

CHAP. X. To make the Goshawke gentle, and to love the hood, that has with ill
usage been beaten out of love with all before.
GO SHAWKE.


DVring the time by day or night, that you do carry one of these kind of
Hawks on your fist, that has bin bobbed with the hood, as we may term it:
do you also carry a hood of some note, Observe well this order.
I mean for the color, on your finger, that may well be seen and viewed by
her, as it hangs there* but beware that you do not show it as yet with your
other hand unto her, but there let it rest daily for a week together in her
sight, that she may also feed close by it: then this being so done, always
after when you feed take it gently in your other hand, and move and stir it
about her meat, that she may touch it as she eats; do thus another week:
ever remembering, that after she has fed, it may rest on your little finger
again in her sight, till the next time, and yet not to be feared with it. You
shall use this course, until you see that without any fear she will but thus
endure it; which being perceived, you must then hold your meat in the hand that
she sits on, and with the other hand hold the hood by the tassel upon her
meat, moving and stirring it, as though you would keep her from feeding; but
it must be done softly and gently, when as you shall perceive that she will
then strive to feed besides it: then with less show or appearance of meat in
the hand, you shall hold the hood by the tassell just over the meat, that you
may see in your own discretion, that she must needs eat clean through it:
do thus so long, as until you see that she will feed and search boldly
clean through the hood for her meat, and eat it without any snatching or
fear, always being mindful of the stomach, then may you be bold, as she
feeds, a little with your hand to move the hood off and on the meat, and she
will take no offense at all.

Also, as she is feeding, and does thrust through the hood for her meat, do
you bear the hood a little against her, and she will hood and vnhood her
self as often as you will have her: then whereas before you ought to have
restrained her, from taking too much hold of her meat; on the contrary, now
when she has with your assistance put on her own hood, let her cat freely
until she has done, and take it off no more until feeding time again; and
in this manner, within the month and less, she will be won to hood her
self with the least stump you do carry about you, as often as you shall have
occasion.

And for those Hawks, there is none that keeps them, but ought always to
have some such thing about him: And then do but judge whether he were better
to use this ready course that will never fail him, then to bobbe at her above
the hand until he has quite spoiled her.

And forget not, that if she be a Hawke taken from the Mew, or otherwise, that
you never begin to practice this course with her, until her stomach be
perfectly come to her; for if you do, it will mar her for ever, and she
will never be reclaimed again; for it is that especially that draws, and
also forces her to become loving and friendly to that which she formerly
hated.

Thus have I heretofore in some sort showed you, how strange and coy a Hawke
the Goshawke is; nice and curious to be handled; how apt she is to take
dislike at any trifling toy: and therefore as I have formerly advised for other
Hawks, so especially for her, you had need to to be more circumspect and
careful with all diligent heed at her first reclaiming and making; for as she
is then fashioned, she will ever after with reasonable pains and government
frame her self toward you in all her actions. And I will here, according to
mine own simple skill and order used in mine own practice, show you the way
unto the same.

CHAP. XI. To reclaim the Hawke from the Cage.


WHen you shall have one of these Hawks brought first unto your hand, it is
meet that by your art and best endeavor, you do then prepare and make her
ready to be reclaimed after this manner.

Give her a fortnights carriage or more as she is in her rufter-hood, Observe
this order.
always stroaking and playing with her, with your hand, or a feather in stead
thereof; and also in her diet, to be as careful to feed clean with washed
meat, by which means she may be brought the sooner to have a good stomach,
and be gentle and well pleased to be handled, which you shall find afterward
to be a great benefit and furthering in her reclaiming and making: then when
you have so done and taken that pains with her, and that you do find her to
be gentle indeed, and pliable to your will; (the which you shall perceive by
her griping and listening to your voice, whistle or chirping, or eager feeding:)

Then having one evening your water with pepper provided, and when you have,
according to the order and accustomed manner, well washed and peppered her,
take off her rufterhood, being sure to have another that is fit and easy to be
put on; and likewise afterward now and then, as you shall see just cause, when
as you shall find her so meek and gently disposed, that you may do what you
list with her: whereas otherwise without this former pains and preparation,
she would altogether have wanted a stomach, and continued so much the longer,
both rammage and wild, the which would have deserved much more pains and
labor of her Keeper. But to return, as she grows a little to be dry, put
on her hood, and give her a bit of good meat upon it, to please and refresh
her withal; and so holding this course to hood gently and vnhood, now and then
not forgetting her reward ever after it is on, until she be thoroughly dried,
and afterward the most part of the night; then you may set her down bare
faced, to have two or three hours sleep or rest; and be sure it be in a
special warm place, A good caveat.
and on a dry and warm perch on high, for those kind of Hawks be very
subject to take cold, and apt to have the crampe on such occasions.

Thus when she and your self has taken a little rest, then see that you do
draw by degrees softly unto her, with show of meat in your hand, withal using
your voice or tongue, with chirping and whistling unto her, until you have
taken her gently to your fist; when as dividing one meal into several parts,
bestow it so on her for the most part after her hood is put on: and to continue
this order with her in the day time for a while, it will be very good, until
you do find her well reclaimed; for it will cause her to look for the hood,
and take delight to have it put on, when she shall find her self always so
well rewarded and pleased afterward.

And as I have heretofore given you to understand, that every Hawke is not
alike in their natural disposition, but are much differing the one from the
other: so also and therefore you ought to be the more careful to observe and
mark diligently how she is disposed, and to order and rule her according to
the same. For example, Observe the nature of the Hawk.
if you do find her to be tutchie or nicely addicted, and curious to
entertain and accept of your hand and the hood to come near her head; then
must you forbear to practice and be doing often in the day time with her: but
as I have showed you, seldom, but at her feeding, or else late in the night
time, when as you shall find her more willing to take the same.

Thus having so well and perfectly accomplished your desire in her reclaiming
familiarity and imboldening: it will now be good time to teach her to iumpe and
come to the fist, ever being mindful of the stomach that it may be perfect;
for as I have let you to understand, how coy and stately a bird the Goshawke
is, and whereas other Hawks of contrary kind are used to come to a Lure,
thrown some distance from the man: contrariwise, she being a Hawke of the
fist, must, if she be used and taught as she ought to be, be made to come home
close to the body of the man, with boldness to his hand, and stoutly with
great familiarity, and without any fear to seize and sit upon the same,
during his pleasure; which she will never be forced to do with all the art
in the world, if her stomach be any whit imperfect.

But to return; Have care ever of the stomach.
when you have taught her to iumpe readily to the fist, which is a thing so
easy and ordinary with the simplest to be effected, as that I shall not need
to prescribe any rule or order for the same. But afterward, let the next
step or lesson be not much more further from you, then that which we call
iumping to the fist: Mark well how she ought to be called.
but, as I have said before, divide one meal into more, and let her come and
be called oftentimes in a day, if it be possible, and not above twenty or
forty yards at the most from the man, for a week or a fortnight together;
which will so quickly and surely make her perfect, with such boldness and
familiarity, as that she will never understand what it is to check at the
fist: but with this order and due time taken and joined together, will prove a
certain and bold commer, which is a special good quality in one of those
Hawks: besides, it will cause her to come and draw at any time of the day; for
it is the tying and holding of those kind of Hawks, to one meal, and one
hour, which is toward the evening, that causes them not to come or draw
until that time, An oversight in the keeper.
which vile condition the most of them be subject unto. Also, as I have showed
you, to take good time in the making and teaching of her to come and to draw,
before you offer her to fly, is the only means to show her self what she
is, and what mettle she is of, and through which you may keep her full lusty
and strong, whereby she may be sufficiently able to perform what she is put
unto. Many a man, The fruits of hastines.
I know, is of a contrary opinion, and will not stay the time until his Hawke
will rightly own himself, and be also haile-fellow well met with his
Spaniels; but even so soon as she will come a little way to his fist, although
she never looked upon a dog in all her life before, will bid let her go, for if
she will go well, I care not for her coming; but he, whatsoever he be, let
him assure himself he shall repent him of his speed.

And whereas many a man glories and deemeth himself worthy of great praise
and commendation, for his extraordinary haste and expedition: I do maintain
the contrary, saying, there is no such cause of deserving, for he comes on
blindly and rashly, Vain glory.
without judgment or consideration of what mark he aymeth at; and when he
thinks he has made a sound and a good conclusion, afterward it shall be
found imperfect, The low and poor Hawke is evermore subject to infirmity.
and he shall be new to seek, for his Hawke has hardly bin taught one good
quality or artificial condition.

Also he cannot choose but pull off her flesh, whereby her haughtiness is
abated, which depriueth her of her mettle and courage, and absolutely spoileth
the Hawke: for there is not any one of that kind that will fly well, how good
soever she either was or is, being any whit impouerished or brought low;
neither will they last healthful, but will be always subject to sickness,
through one infirmity or other that arises thereon.

Therefore whosoever coueteth to keep a Hawke of that nature and kind,
expecting pleasure and contentment from her, with health and strength together
to maintain the same, must not fail to take good time to teach her, and then
by his art and diligent endeavor he shall not be any way deceived, but most
assuredly shall find all the spirit and mettle that naturally was carried or
bred in her.

CHAP. XII. How and in what manner the Goshawke ought to be called loose, and
taught to draw, and in what places, for the better avoiding of such
inconveniences as she is subject unto, and may befall in that time.
GO SHAWKE.


NOw will it be good time to let her be called loose, when as it is expedient
that you do shun all places near unto your own home, other houses or towns,
to avoid such inconveniences, as through temptations may grow thereon, as
Powltering or Doue-houses, and such like places, the which all those Hawks be
subject unto; and having once caught such an ill property, The spoil of the
Hawke.
they will very sedome or never be reclaimed from it, but will follow it, how
far soever from any town she shall be flone; yet if she be not suddenly
served and pleased, she will not stay, but forthwith will fall to raling;
never once looking back to her Keeper, until she comes there whereas she
will serve her self too soon. To a town.


And thus to consider what a toil and vexation this must needs bring to him
that shall follow her; it would make any man care and covet with all diligence
to prevent such a mischief at the first, before it do come: the which to
effect, this course you must take; walk with her to the young woods or groves
betimes in the afternoon, having before prepared her stomach fit and ready
for the same purpose, Observe this order at her first teaching to draw.
and there put her up into a tree, walking along from her into the wind, using
your voice unto her softly, as though you had Spaniels with you, and spoke to
them, but let it be especially with your tongue in whistling and chirping unto
her; by which means to cause her draw and follow after you with little noise,
which if she shall so do, as there is no doubt, but that she will frame her
self according to your expectation; then suffer her not too long, but call her
to your fist again, and reward her a little with some bit of meat to please
her withal; the which it is fit you should have in a readiness wrapped in a
fair cloth, unless you have either Pigeon, Rooke, or some other such like
thing about you, out of the which you may draw a leg, and so content her.

After this, you shall put her up again, and so by your softest voice or
whistle draw her along after you again; for it is not good, neither convenient
to use a loud voice or noise unto her for diverse respects. Why you ought not
to call her alowde.
For first, it will be a means to teach her sit and loyter behind you, so
far as she can hear you, which is one ill quality; otherwise sometime a man
will go with his Hawke where he would be loath either to be heard or seen, as I
must confess, I have done my self many a time; which he cannot do with such a
one as first has been taught, and is still wonted to loud voices; but he
must make, as it were, proclamation where-abouts he goes, and where he is:
whereas otherwise he may go safely and securely, and his Hawke will draw and
follow him, as diligently and attentively, by means she was at the first
tutored and taught with a still voice or whistle.

Also your Spaniels will hunt within your command, and so near you and your
Hawke, as they shall never spring any thing out of her danger, but still where
she may command it: whereas otherwise in hearing of loud noises they will
range far off, and at randon, springing out of the way far from you; which will
be much displeasing both unto the man and the Hawke.

CHAP. XIII. To make love and unity between the Ostringer himself, his Hawke,
and his Spaniels; which is a special thing to be observed.
GO SHAWKE.


NOw that you have after this foresaid rule and order prescribed unto you,
taught your Hawke to draw diligently after you, and to come again as readily
to your fist: It is as meet and necessary that you do provide you of such
Spaniels as you intend to Hawke withal: and because this Hawke is a bird very
observing, and will quickly learn to know her Keeper, and be familiar with
him, and seem as strange and coy to let another man come near her: also to
have such understanding of Spaniels, as to know and love one that shall be
continually in company with her, and as it were to hate or be fearful of
another that comes but seldom to her: also many of the kind will be very
fearful, nice and coy of al dogs, and at the first sight will not abide or
endure any.

Wherefore now that you have formerly in all other points of perfection, by
your art, labor, and discretion, accomplished your desire with her: it is now
that you ought through all diligence, to practice and labor to breed a
familiar league of friendship, love and unity between your self, To breed
love between the Hawke and the Spaniels.
your Hawke, and your Spaniels; the which to accomplish and bring to
perfection, take this course. At every feeding time draw you all conveniently
together, whereas you must let your Hawke feed amongst the dogs on your fist
very often; not one dog or two, as I have said before, for she will learn too
soon to know him too well; but amongst two or three couple, or as many as you
have, and also to have the dead pelt of a Pullet or Hen in a short cruce, and
throwing it oftentimes from you in the thickest amongst them, that she may
fly from your fist, and eagerly choppe amongst them and seize upon the same;
there suffering her to plume awhile, then take her up again with a stumpe to
your fist, immediately throwing it, as before, again and again even in the
midst of them: and this course you must use every day, until you do find
that she will venture very boldly, and without any fear, By this you shall
know when your Hawke is ready to fly.
amongst them all; and then you shall perceive that she will have
pereeiuerance and understanding by the dogs removing and giving way with fear
unto her, that she has even gotten the upper hand and mastery of them;
whereas otherwise to have flone, or offered to enter her before, without these
former preparations and necessary courses, it had been done rashly without
judgment; and there is not one Hawke amongst twenty, but would have been
beaten out of love both with the man, the Spaniels, and whatsoever besides he
had flone her unto. And so I will omit to speak any more of this point in
this place, because I purpose to enlarge it further, as I shall proceed
hereafter.

CHAP. XIIII. How you shall first enter your Hawke, and teach her fly to the
field, and to order and manage her there during that season.


WHen you have, as I formerly advertised, well reclaimed, imboldened and taught
your Hawke to know and understand her own superiority and command over her
servants: The Spaniels.
it will be good to prepare and make her ready to fly, and it is meet to enter
her first to the field, when as she ought especially to be skilfully ordered,
flone, followed, and assisted; for commonly a direct and perfect beginning,
does give proof and cause of good effects and conclusion. Therefore your
surest course is, to provide, if it be possible, three or four hand
Partridge, with a companion, friend, or servant, and one couple of stanch
Spaniels; then go into the fairest field, having before prepared and armed
your Hawke, with appetite and courage to fly after the best manner, for her
own reward, and give content to the beholder; sand being there in a
readiness, one of you shall go near hand from the other, The bushes.
to some bushes or other small couart of obscurity to be shadowed, whereas he
shall spend his voice to the dogs, after the accustomed manner, using some
blows with his pole, and beating his harmless enemy withal, as from forth
the same; he shall secretly let the Partridge spring, with such judgment in
the delivery, that the Hawke may discern and see it, and crying with a loud
voice, How, Words of custom.
how, how, that she may have understanding, and learn to know the word of
advertisement or warning, when she should at any other time look about her,
or be watchful to take the best opportunity offered at an instant unto her,
for her best advantage.

This being well effected, and that the Hawke does with spirit and mettle fly
after and take it, The Partridge.
be ye sure with all expedition and swiftness, that your Horse, or own
supporters may afford to get into her, and thereby stand and guide or guard
her, that no dog nor other cause may fright or fear her, whereby to deprive
her of the prey she has so hotly pursued, so lately taken, and desires so
much to enjoy and keep within her own possession; but with your license and
good leave do suffer her to plume and take her pleasure on the same: And with
your further aid and assistance, to take blood thereon, still having the
Spaniels in sight close by her. All this well practiced, then you must teach
her to take the head in her foot, and eat it on the ground; and when she
has so done, and looks about her: having your Spaniels by you, throw the
Partridge pelt, as before you had used to do in her first teaching, once
amongst the dogs, and let her take it, being in her leash, that she may not
carry it from you; and whilst she sits there and plumes, make her supper
ready; take her gently to your fist, and there content her: then walking
toward your home, with joy in your success, and much good likelihood to have
no worse thereafter, you may well consider and determine of the next
opportunity, and after the same manner how to order and use her; by which
means, no doubt but you shall very suddenly attain to your own expected
desire, and have an excellent Hawke, and by all means fly her to the field
all the first year, and let her not see the Fesant at all, for that will draw
her love from the Partridge, and make her give them over; nay, he that will
have a good Hawke to the field of this kind, Observation.
must never let her see the Fesant at all, nor fly one flight thereunto; for
the best of them will take more delight in the one, then in the other, and grow
quite out of love with the one for the others sake.

Now when you have thus well and luckily entered and bloudded her with these
Partridges, and also killed some three or four more from the mark, at the
reteriue, and that you do perceive by her, that she once knows a Partridge
by sight; the whoorr, and other accustomed terms used, and will go readily
from the fist thereunto:

Be ye sure after, that all the forepart of the year you let her go no more one
flight in ten, near unto the rising of her game; for that will cause her to
girde and master them, as it were, at the sowce, within a short space, being no
way able in that season to make wing, to hold out before such a Hawke; Observe
well this order.
and also she will afterward remember and look for the same order, and
without it will not fly toward the latter end of the year; no, she will
make you believe she sees them not at all, neither will fly after such a
Partridge as shall be sprung far from her, but to the next tree she meets
withal, and being never so good a mettled Hawke, this course will spoil her;
for she will as well understand the difference between the one and the other,
as your self; and what she cannot do at hand, she will never do.

And therefore considering that this order and course held long at the
beginning of the year, while Partridge be but weak, is sufficient to make
slothful, and to mar the best mettelled Hawke that is, you ought to be more
careful when you meet with another that is but of a dull disposition, and as
sluggish of her wings: yet I have seen such a one, through the art and well
ordering of her Keeper, has proved a special Hawke.

An example.
It was once mine own chance to have such a one in my custody, that in her
falling I perceived to be very sluggish and heavy, which soon altered my
opinion of her, and withdrew my former affection almost quite from her: yet on
further consideration I began to think with my self, that seeing I had gone so
far with her, I would not so leave her, for a little more pains, until I
had had some further trial of her; and then this direct course I took
presently with her.

It was very early of the year when as I showed her marked Partridge, that I
sprung, and suffered to rest long after: of the which, and after this manner,
she killed me, in two or three days, some two or three brace, even at the
catch, in a very little space; in so much as I perceived by her ready going,
that she knew them well, and also was very hot on them, and as busily disposed
with them, when she had any one in her foot: which also showed, as I deemed,
some good love in her toward them, and gave me some further comfort besides,
and hope of a good conclusion. Afterward in process of time it was my hap to
show her diverse Partridge, that were sprung further from me, then she was
used to fly, to the which I offered my Hawke; but after the old proverb, Who so
blind, as he that will not see? and so my Hawke would none, but cast her
regards another way.

After which, I began to call to mind and consider of her ill nature, and also
of my own foolish and former error, how that I had too long at first taught
her to snatch and catch them up at sowce, and nuzled her too much therein:
Likewise, that I observed no times, but flew her at adventure and out of
season, as too early, or in the heat of the day: neither had I any due respect
unto her stomach.

And thus all things being thought on, I determined to rest her two or three
days: and whereas at the first, when she pleased me, I was too loving and
fond on her, and also did too richly reward her (which has been a fault in my
self, I am sure, and, I think, in many another.)

But to return, during the time of rest that I gave her, I fed her very
clean, and soaked her meat all the day or night in urine, the which is a
special. thing for a hard and dull mettelled Hawke of this kind, to whether a
good stomach withal.

And when I had so done, I showed her another couie of Partridge late in the
evening, or toward the evening, for too late is as bad as to early for a Hawke
to fly; but these sprung a great way from me, and went all whole together:
she being at that time well armed with an eager appetite, and a good edge set
on her, spurs sufficient to put her on, and prick her forward after the best
manner; she well perceiving of them, thrust her self up from my fist a great
height, and went after them, but altogether on playnes, even Bussard like, yet
nevertheless she did rightly mark them; and at my coming in to the reteriue,
the Spaniels sprung one to her, the which she flew very hard and killed: and
after this, having good respect unto her stomach, and also for a while
observing well the time toward the evening, she proved an excellent Hawke,
yet never mended the manner of her first flights, but always flue them very
jadishly, and made no haste at all: yet afterward, when Partridge were sprung,
although she went a furlong behind, she would not fail to have one often in
her foot, the which I imagined she did ever take coming cunningly; and
especially after the leaf were off, you might have ventured ten to one, in the
woodlands she would not fail to have one in her foot.

By this appears, that this Hawke did know her own unableness, and that
she were not fit nor able through the wightnesse of her wings, to make yield
or master the fast flying Partridg, and that if she had been wild, to have
shifted for her self, she must have used her policy to have caught her prey,
or else oftentimes to have fasted.

Also this shows as plainly, how easily this or any other dull mettelled
Hawke might or may be marred, for want of judgment and skill in her Keeper, or
otherwise by his art and pains taking, be make and taught to do him right
good service; although not altogether out of her own spirit and mettle, yet
through his art and her policy.

Also you must have this respect, and be mindful of one ill property that
many of those Hawks be subject unto, which is, that when they have flone a
Partridge hard to any couart, An ill quality to fall on the ground.
and takes it not at the first flight, there will they sit still on the ground,
and will not get up to any stand for their better vantage; which is a most
vilde, foolish, and dull condition.

Wherefore, as I have before advised at the first entrance, it is meet that
you take but a few Spaniels abroad with you, and also to be such as you may
command unto you after you have flone, until you have sought and found your
Hawke again: for otherwise you shall never enter her; they will evermore
retriue the Partridge, that she shall never see it as she sits on the ground.

Therefore, to prevent the one in the dogs, To amend this fault.
and to amend the other in the Hawke, take this course: when your Hawke has
flone a Partridge, make after with all speed that you can, taking your dogs
with you, by your command, and when you have found her, be sure to take her up,
but not on your fist by any means, if there be either hedge or tree near
hand, but take her by the body or shoulders suddenly with both your hands, and
throw her upon either hedge, bush, or tree, and then beat for the Partridge,
when as it is impossible but she must needs see it, if it do spring then; if
she fly after and kill it after that manner, you can desire no more; for one
so killed, is worth ten at the first flight, or otherwise from the ground. This
course being well followed, will certainly reclaim her from that fault, and
teach her to rise her self; for she will quickly learn to understand, that
else she shall be caught and toste up; and so having some little fear of that
one thing, and also knowledge that afterward she shall enjoy some pleasure and
content thereby, she will so much the sooner grow perfect, and jumpe up her
self.

Some man when he comes in to his Hawke, and finds her after that manner, on
the ground, will presently draw forth some meat or other, A great error.
to take her to his fist withal, and there will hold her, expecting the rising
of her game: but surely it is great indiscretion in him so to do; for there he
teaches her with encouragement to sit still attending his own coming to her,
and also a present reward expected from himself, never minding the prey, she
had so hotly pursued before: but without his future care and best
consideration, does clean forget the same: thus is she quite overthrown, and
ten to one will never after learn nor care to know her best advantage.

But some man may answer and say again, Why? this course to take and throw
her up after that fashion, must needs fear her, and make her unwilling to come
to her Keeper another time, when he shall be most desirous of her. But it is
not so, for you are to understand that it is not the Haggart, or right Rammage
Hawke, that I mean; for you shall not once in your lifetime know any of those
Hawks to have that foolish condition.

But if it should so fall out in some one eager and hot mettelled Hawke, A good
condition.
that out of her exceeding love to the thing she has flone, do at her first
entrance a little sit, and hunt or seek for it; and therefore to serve her so,
it will be no whit displeasing unto her, but she will so much the sooner
(being luckily served and pleased after) rightly understand the fruits and
meaning of the same, and also will love her Keeper never the worse, but learn
to know her better advantage: and whenever you shall find a right Ramage
Hawke to have this quality, as at the fall of a Partridge to be down and up,
to fly and to run amongst the dogs and men with business, you may be
assured, that with care now and then to use her after that manner, with other
good government duly extended toward her by her Keeper, she will most
certainly prove a special Hawke, for in that kind of behavior she truly
shows her good nature; her hot love and eager desire to her game, and that in
respect of (that) for the present time she owneth neither man, horse nor
dog, nor any other thing, her mind is so bent of her pleasure.

A fault in the Eyas.
But to leave her, and return to the Eyas, Brancher, or Puler, unless they be
bred of the better cry; you shall have many of them, nay, the most part of
them will have that one condition, lasting and continuing with them a long
time; and without this one remedy or means lately expressed, even many years:
which then I refer unto you to be censured, whether a man were better to
terrify and fear her clean out of her wits, then so long to wait and
stay, expecting her future and uncertain deseruings.

But to return back again to the Ramage Hawke, Of the Ramage Hawke. An
example.
I will give you an instance by the example of (one) the which I had of late
time in my hand, and kept under my own government at the least a dozen years,
and free from any one ill property or condition, during that time; but as I
made her at the first, so I kept her to the end, and she was a special Hawke
for either Partridge or Fesant.

And this course, which here I shall prescribe, I took with her in her first
making, keeping, ordering and flying. In the beginning I perceived her to be
very tutchie and coy to be handled, for which cause I took extraordinary
pains with her, and made her very loving and gentle to the hood, even as any
Falcon was: also to the dogs I found her, in my practice, inclined according
to mine own desire and expectation: And so to omit other circumstances,
course or order, as touching her calling, coming, or drawing.

To proceed, when I came to show her Partridge, I found her as forward to fly,
and be entered, when as for a season I always took off her hood, thereby to
have her both fit and ready to see and fly to the Partridge, that were to be
sprung unto her: but before I had used her long to that order of carrying
barefaced, which I thought to be the most sure and best way to afford her the
more quick and speedy sight, she was grown so vigilant with overmuch
stirring and unquietness on the fist, that unless the Partridge did spring
very fair before me, or that directly I knew by mark where it was, and
carefully attended for the rising, it was ten to one the flight was in danger
to be lost, An inconvenience belonging to the Hawke that will not take the
Hood.
or as good it had so been; for her trouble and business on the fist were
such, as that it were able with great vexation to draw the eye and mind of any
man awrie from his desired pleasure: neither could there any dog suddenly
stir, but she would as suddenly bate; nor bird rise, but she would be as
busily disposed, that it were altogether impossible to order and govern her as
she ought to have been. In this plainly appears, what quietness, security
and content of mind still attends on him that has his short-winged Hawke
taught to take the Hood gently; and also what benefit, strength and courage it
affords to her self, that may be always safely kept, flone and governed:
contrariwise, what diversities of inconveniences waits upon her that will not
endure the Hood to come near her, but is accustomed evermore to be carried
barefaced when she should be flone, especially to the field: for if she be a
right mettelled Hawke of spirit, desiring her sport and prey, it may be said of
her to have more eyes, then he of whom it has been affirmed to have an
hundred lights; for her continual vigilancie will be such, for the appearing
or rising of her desired pleasure, that she will offer most continually to go
for her advantage unawares to her Keeper suddenly. And therefore, in my
opinion, for many considerations, it is the most commendable and safe way,
after one of these Hawks be first entered, and only knows a Partridge: then
immediately to teach her, and use her to fly from forth the Hood, often bating
at Partridge sprung to other Hawks, Observation.
discomforts and discourages her; so that when her turn is to fly, her edge
is off, and her courage is lost. Therefore the melancholy man is fittest to be
her Keeper, who best can brook to walk or ride alone, which she will suddenly
learn to do, and as readily as a man can wish or desire; and also daily to
sit and weather in the Hood, the which she will be as well pleased withal,
and never to take it off, as in custom: but when she shall either fly,
feed, bathe, or is to take her rest at night: And this course directly I took
with this Hawke the whole time I kept her.

Also at the same time I had in charge at the least two cast of Riuar-Hawks,
and ordered them in their diet my self; for which cause I did very seldom
fly her, sometime not in the week and more, during which time, she sat for
the most part in a rufter hood; and if I had not a very convenient place both
day and night in the same, nevertheless that time of rest being expired,
having occasion to use her, either to the field or couart, and giving her but
one hour or two to weather abroad in the air, though still in the Hood, with
consideration always of the stomach, she would fly to content you. And this
Hawke was so hot and eager at her first making, that she would at the reterine
always be down among the dogs, as it were, scambling for the Partridge; and
whenever I came in, I would take her by the shoulders, between my hands, and
throw her up; nay, over and above, when a Partridge has sprung on the other
side the hedge, where she could not see it, I have after the same manner
thrown her clean over the same, and she has killed it in the foot at the
same flight. This Hawke very quickly proved very cunning, and as long as she
lived, when she knew that she had mastered a Partridge, and that the dogs
and men came in and took it, or else scambled for it, she would never fail
to make one, and be a chief stickler in the combat; and what dog soever
took it, he should be sure to leave it, with some taste of her displeasure and
correction for it.

Such hauks has the true mettle.
Thus having, according to my best understanding, showed how to enter the
Goshawke to field, and to order and govern her during that season, I will now
proceed to the Couart, and out of the like knowledge appoint by prescription
how she ought to be entered, flone, followed, and manned, during that time.

CHAP. XV. How to enter the Goshawke to the Couart.
GO SHAWKE.


ANy man whose skill and knowledge by time and experience is approved to be
good, To teach the Goshawke to fly to the Couart.
may be fit and sufficiently able of himself to take the wild Hawke from the
Cage, or otherwise to reclaim her and make her ready in due time to be flone;
and also to fly her himself, or let her go from his fist unto her flight:
nevertheless, when she is once gone or departed from him thereunto, he may be
then as much insufficient or unable to govern her during that time; for there
be many men that are expert in their art, and through their own knowledge
well able to teach one of those kind of Hawks to fly, yet afterward is no
way able to follow and man her in her flight: whereby and through which cause,
as she was at first artificially and well made, so she will be then
altogether as soon, or more sooner clean spoiled and marred.

Every one is not fit to keep the Goshawke.
If this be true, then it appears that every one is not fit to keep the
Goshawke, although his judgment be great; nor otherwise any one that has not
a well able body to follow her, as she ought to be.

But some man may answer, and say again, that his body shall be well mounted
and carried forward on horseback; to the which I allow also, so far as
until he comes to the Couart, but no further, unless he will always make
choice of his desired or wished place, the which no man can ever do, to find
his game with speed: neither in most Countries or places is there any choice to
be had; but to that sport and with that Hawke, he must altogether trust to his
feet, or else tarry behind; which, as I think, there is few men but would be
loath so to do, that bears any love to their Hawke, or the game they have
flone her unto.

Therefore it is most certain that there is no one man can order and manage
the Goshawke to the Couart, but he that has a strong and able body, with
spirit, mettle, and courage adjoined thereunto, to follow her withal; and unto
such a one, I will here according to mine own experience and opinion show the
way, how and in what places is best and meetest first to enter her in, and how
to follow and manage her, until he has made her a perfect Hawke.

You may well remember that you have already passed one good step forward on
your journey, and as you would think, escaped all the danger in your further
pretended way, in respect that you have so artificially reclaimed, framed and
flone your Hawke all this long time to the field, and have ordered and governed
her with good success in all your proceedings: but you ought to consider
nevertheless, Mark well.
that this has been wrought, practiced and brought to good conclusion, for
the most part in the open and champane fields, where was the assistance of men
on horseback, and on foot, that might and have come in at their pleasures, to
guard the Hawke, and prevent any ill accident that might befall by the Spaniels
in their haste or rashness, or otherwise happen unto her.

Therefore you are to consider, that now you otherwise intend to make her to
the Fesant; and for that those kind of Fowls do altogether frequent and
haunt the woods, The man cannot follow by view to succor his Hawke.
and other places of obscurity, the which must needs be a blemish and
hinderance to the sight which should give directions in the flight; for the
better effecting of your desire, you ought to make good choice and be charie of
what place you do first enter her in, and especially that she may be there
well guarded and kept from taking any dislike or offense at the dogs, the
which if she should do in the beginning, she will never endure them again;
for as I have said before, it must be considered that the former familiarity
between them was bred in the field, whereas the Hawke for the most part might
always see them before they came at her, and also (they) were rebuked and
terrified by the man in such sort, as that they never came rushing or over
rashly upon her, whereby she might take any fright or sudden fear, but had
imboldening and encouragement to stand or sit still in her own defense. I have
known diverse coy Hawks my self, that through good following and well manning
in the field, have proved very bold and stout, to resist the rash and hasty
encounters of very rough and unruly Spaniels, that although through their own
hotnesse, and also the lightness of the Partridge, they have caused her to
carry it to some hedge or bush out of the way, It is the nature of the Hawke to
have her prey in private.
to shrowde her self from them, yet would never quite forsake it:
nevertheless, the same Hawke at her first entrance to the Couart, for want of
the like government, has been so suddenly feared and frighted, that she
would never after suffer any dog in a thick to come near her, unless her
Keeper were first in with her. And therefore to avoid this inconvenience and
ill quality at the first, it is meet that she be better manned, followed and
governed, then formerly in the field she was, where most commonly she might
look about her, and behold the dogs some space before they came at her; and
also (they) might see and know her, and therefore so much the better shun and
go beside her, for it is the rash and sudden rushing of the Spaniels upon her,
their sight by means of the Couart being obscured, and having an uncertain
and unknown mixture of sents in their noses, The Hawke and the Fesant.
and not discerning at an instant any difference between them, unless the
bells give warning, that breeds this vilde offense between those friends, that
should be of one union.

Therefore, if you will have her made a perfect Hawke, and to be bold, valiant,
The Hawke and the Spaniels.
and venturous in the thick woods, with the man, dogs and her game, as she
was in the plain champaine fields, you ought to make good choice both of time,
place, and dogs at her first entrance; for the time, that would be early
before the leaf do stir, The time to enter the Hawke.
for then the Fesant flies not far: also afterward, the nature of them is to
forsake the young shootes and small groves, and draw to the high and thickest
woods: also when the leaf does fall, it is hard to reteriue with many or few
dogs, and those you shall use in number would be but few, and also very easy
to be commanded.

Then when you have made good choice of your place to fly your Hawke in, and
that you have let her go unto her flight, you must be sure to command your
dogs behind you, Beware of the Spaniels.
until you have found her; then if she have killed it, you have your desire;
if not, and that you chance to find her on the ground, as it may well be you
may, for many of them at the first entering will be very hot and eager of that
sport, It shows her true love.
and oftentimes seeking for it on the ground: but if there be any tree
neare-hand, that she may well see from it, put her up into the same, otherwise
keep her on your fist, and beat for it again; then if she do fly and kill
it, you must be sure to make stay of the dogs until you have directly found
her: which being done, you shall get conveniently and gently in to her, and if
you dislike the place for the vneasinesse or thickness, Let the Hawke have no
discourageme^t at the entering.
you shall remove her gently, and draw her into a more open place, where she
may with more ease quietly enjoy her prey, and there suffer her to plume and
take her pleasure on it awhile; then call your dogs unto you, and walk and
stir gently about her, with some moderate rusling and busling in the bushes,
the better to acquaint her with the same noise: then when you see it
convenient, stoop to her on your knees, and rending the chappes, give her
blood in the throat, whereas it will issue plentifully, to her great content;
then paring the hard braine-pan from the rest, and covering the body with your
hat, Good observation for the young man
give her the head in her foot to eat on the ground; and having your Spaniels
close by you; when she has done, and begins to look about her, throw the
Fesant, even as it it were in their very mouths, that she may (together with
some words of rebuke from your self) make them give way with fear unto her,
yet drawing them into her sight again to remain, so long as she is on the
ground, and while you make her supper ready: and when you see she has taken
her sufficient pleasure, exchange (that) artificially with her, and let her
eat it on the ground where the quarrie lay, only reserving some little thing
to take her to your fist withal; and then put on her hood, not forgetting to
bestow some reward on her afterward, which she will be well pleased withal,
and take it for a kind conclusion at your hand, and will not be curious to
show it outwardly, in her behavior unto you, with feaking, ietting, rowsing,
and such like joyous shows and signs also of inward pleasure and contentment.

Many a man, as soon as he has taught his Hawke to draw and to come to his
fist again, A great error or oversight.
never thinks or considers of any other point belonging, but only which is
the next way to the wood, whereas he hopes to find his game, and unto that
place he runs or rides on headlong in hope of some good success; and when
he comes there, he may no doubt have such fortune, as to find his flight with
speed: yet all this while he remembers not that he has a strange and
unacquainted Hawke, or a company of unruly Spaniels, but he is certain and
knows right well that he has good store, and also so many, as if there be but
one Pesant in a reasonable Couart, one or another of them will spring him, or
put him up, which is all he takes care for. And when he has so done, and his
Hawke has flone, the next course he takes, is, he sends his dogs before, A
great fault.
himself posting them forward, with a loud voice, and crying, Go ret, go to
the Hawke go, as though they had as much wit as himself, and could manage
all things so well as he: and then, Have after, he cries to himself, and away
he follows as fast as he can, in hope to find some comfort; but when he
comes near to his Hawke, as he deemes, he listeneth, and looks, and
finds her sitting something low in a tree, looking downward, and prying to
the ground in mournful wise, as though she were much displeased: at which
sight, withal, he is something amazed, and then begins to look further
about him, and searches busily and narrowly underneath, and round about her,
mistrusting that all things is not well; at last he finds a mention of ill
fortune, as feathers, stumpes of wings, legs or feet; but the whole body,
that would have caused him to travel with a merry heart homeward; and also
have served for a chief and choice dish at the table (that) is devoured: Why
he sent his dogs before him.
then he begins to stamp, and in an angry mood to conceive of his own
error, and that there has been a hot skirmish between the Hawke, a poor
Fesant, and a confused company of unmannerly tikes, wishing in his heart that
the third part of them were all hanged: nevertheless there is some comfort,
for there sits the Hawke still, as well as ever she was, she has by good
fortune not lost one member, she was too wise, and more afraid then hurt, as
it chanced; she thought it not fit to bide the brunt at such a battle, nor
never will thereafter, she will hold it rather better for her the next time to
be gone, as soon as she hears either dog or what else soever, but to
rustle within a pole of her. And after this manner there has been many an
excellent Hawke and dog quite spoiled; for the Hawke will ever after, out of
her fear, leave her prey; and the hungry and ravenous dog having tasted of
the sweetness thereof, will follow as fast and cunningly to have it, so that
they are both spoiled, and not one of them ever again to be reclaimed, A
halter is fittest for a thief.
without a speedy course taken with a halter for the dog; for that is
meetest for a thief, and such dogs be always called robbers of Hawks, and
therefore are fittest to be hanged: and for the Hawke, although her warning
has been great, and her fear to trust such enemies to come near her any
more; yet nevertheless, with good usage she may be taught and made to forget
it.

And after that manner and fashion, as has bin here formerly prescribed, as, A
good observation.
with a judicial Keeper, and discreet follower, fair flying, and two or
three stanch and serviceable Spaniels; and yet to make it more plain unto you,
I say, he that does haste on his dogs, before himself, after any young or
strange Hawke, it is done rashly, unadvisedly, and without any discretion or
judgment, and he takes the clean contrary way; for it is his part, so
soon as his Hawke is flone, to follow her as secretly as he may, without any
noise, also as fast as he can, until he has found her; when as, if she has
killed it, he is there then close by her, to guard and defend her, and may
call for his Spaniels, and let them have understanding what is befallen, The
Spaniels must know what they hunt for.
that their desires may also be satisfied; and they may come so near unto her,
as he shall list himself, and no nearer, so that there shall be no offense at
all committed, but all parts well pleased: on the contrary, if she have missed
her flight, yet there he is ready to call his Spaniels, and say, in stead of
Go ret, Here ret: and although they have all lost him in his race of running,
yet having their hearing and smelling senses, they will quickly be with him;
so that when they do come and retetiue it, he is ready to rate them, and
govern all things to his own liking: likewise, if it be put to perch, also
there he is ready to rebuke the dogs at the fall: so that these courses being
well observed and followed, will make any Hawke, of reasonable mettle,
excellent. And when you have made her never so good and perfect, yet in
slacking of these things she will be as quickly marred; There must be a
continuance of careful usage.
for the best of that kind that ever did fly, will continue in goodness, and
alter from the same, according as she is ordered, flone, and followed.

But all this while we have forgot the poor Hawke, she is left unconsidered
of, let us return back and see what is become of her, she was not wont to
remove or stir from the mark or the man, but diligently to attend and wait
his leisure; and when he thought fit time to have her, she would come down
most willingly to his fist.

But now he comes to make trial of her, and after his accustomed manner,
calls for her, The Hawke is angry, and the Keeper not well pleased.
but he perceives the case to be altered with her; for she no whit
regards his call, she is so angry, and has been so much offended, and even
in the same temper away she goes, raling from one place to another, it may be
a mile or two before he can by any means come by her, nay it is ten to one but
she will kill a Hen or two before he can take her up again: which if she do
so, I leave it to the careful Ostringer himself, to testify and consider,
what a trouble, with vexation of mind he is fallen into, and almost knows
not, neither can imagine, how or which way to remedy it. And therefore seeing
that those kind of Hawks of all other, are so subject to take dislikes, and
learn il conditions, it behooues every one that loves to keep them, to be
charie of them, and careful, especially at their first making and entering;
for if they be then well made, well entered and imboldened with the man, the
dogs and their game, it will be a hard matter afterward to beat them out
of love so much, but that they may with skill and pains taking, be reclaimed
and recovered again, whereas otherwise there is little or no hope at all to be
had of them.

To imbolden the Hawke, and cause her take the Fesant from the perch with
courage.
I have yet omitted one course very requisite to be considered of, and that
ought to be taken, to teach the Goshawke, and make her venture with boldness to
take the Fesant from the perch, which ought to be practiced and brought to
perfection: before you do offer her to fly thereunto, you shall provide a young
Capon or brown Pullet, and take with you to the wood; when you are disposed to
call her for her supper, and as she is drawing and attending after you for the
same, having a pole convenient, provided before for the same purpose, and fit
opportunity and place, you shall call your Spaniels about you to make them bay,
and suddenly breaking the neck of the Poultrie, you shall at an instant lift
it upon a bough, so high as the Hawke may well have sight; there stirring it,
and withal, as before, crying Abay, abay unto her: at which noise, and as it
were to see it flutter, no doubt but she will come in and pull it down; which
if she shall so do, Keep the Dogs in awe.
be sure that the dogs may, with some rebuke from your self, give her good
leave, and make way for her descending; then suffer her to plume and take her
pleasure thereon, and nuzle her among the dogs, as you have been taught
before, and give her blood in the throat, and let her be well pleased and
rewarded on it: and in using this course but a while, it will make her so bold
and venturous, as that she shall no sooner see a Fesant go to perch, but she
wll as soon and suddenly have him by the ears, and pull him down.

Also in using your art toward your Spaniels, with some words of threatening,
and blows with reason; it will also make them so understanding, and in such
subjection, as that you may boldly trust them with her alone in your own
absence, Beware of strange Dogs.
always remembering there may be no strangers amongst them, for of that you
ought to be most careful at all times; for one strange and unruly dog will
put forward the best that be, and cause them to offend; and the Hawke also will
suddenly know him, and give way with fear unto him, so that he is sufficient
to mar the rest, and the Hawke also: yet there be many men that never once
thinks or considers of what dogs it is meet they should Hawke withal,
or suffer to hunt amongst their own that they have had proof on, and knows
to be stanch and good: but certainly he, whosoever he be, has not need to
take more care for any thing whatsoever belonging to his art, then for that
one thing; for three or four good dogs that be stanch, and knows what they
should do, is at all times better then three or four couple that be unruly
and riotous, as you may well understand, if you will but mark; when you shall
suffer but one more to hunt with them, you shall see when as they will range
and beat of very purpose quietly and cunningly for the Fesant, and challenge of
no other thing: the other dog will hunt every thing, or any thing that he
first finds; and not only do so, but also draw the other unto him, and
cause them to bawke the Fesant, A great inconvenience.
that otherwise they would most certainly have found. If this be so, as most
true it is, then do but consider what many such may do: as also I do not
deny, but that they may all chance to spring together; yet if it fall out that
they do meet at a bay, they will not only themselves be ready to pull the
Hawke in pieces, An excellent dish.
but also tempt the other, and set on them to do the like, or at least to
devour the Fesant; that otherwise would never of themselves have any whit
offended.

Thus having according to this one rule and prescription, taught your Hawke
this necessary and needful lesson, you may be bold to show her the wild
Fesant, when you find it convenient, and she will be in all points ready to
fly at him, and courageously to make seazure, and prey upon him without any
fear.

Enter her first to the Cock,
Also you must be careful to enter her first to the Cock, for as I have often
told you, all Hawks be not alike in their disposition, but are of contrary
natures, Seek out the nature of the Hawke.
and therefore will require great and diligent attendance, and skill to find
out their properties: and the same being perfectly known, you may order your
Hawke accordingly; whereas otherwise you shall commit many errors, and seldom
make a good Hawke. Therefore, if you find her at first to encounter boldly
with him, you need not doubt, being well pleased and blouded on him, afterward
to let her take her pleasure and chance in drawing, and to fly at what rises
first, be it Cock or Hen. Contrariwise, if you perceive her to be fearful and
cowardly, as not to buckle and kill him boldly, then with two or three days
rest, and hard washed feed, prepare her stomach soundly, and put her to him
again, and leave not off your pains and practice, until you have made her to
fly at him spiritfully, and kill him as boldly.

Some man before he has used any manner of means, Great indiscretion.
whereby he may guess or judge of her, or what spirit or mettle is in her,
will at very first put her up to draw the Couart, thinking thereby to give her
some vantage toward her first entering: but many times he is deceived in his
expectation, for the Hen Fesant is as easily found as the Cock; and the
veriest dastard of that kind will seldom refuse to fly at her, The veriest
dastard will kill the Hen Fesant.
and also to kill her, and then being well blouded withal, her Keeper thinks
he has done well, and his mind is pleased: but it is not so, for oftentimes
it falls out, that afterward with all the art and skill he has, he shall
never force her fly the Cock again.

Thus with these rash and hasty courses, many Hawks are quickly spoiled,
which although at first they have not so much mettle and spirit, with boldness
appearing in them, neither by nature, as many other Hawks have; yet with good
consideration of the same, and the careful pains and skill of their Keeper,
with due time adioined, Worthy of commendation.
they may be made very good Hawks: and he thereby shall justly deserve more
praise and commendations for the perfect making of one such Hawke, then of ten
other, that will at first out of their own spirit and mettle fly, and make
themselves without, in a manner, any assistance at all from their Keeper.

CHAP. XVI. A note worthy of observation for the imboldening of any Hawke, that
has been rebuked or discouraged by the Spaniels.


Whenever in your recreation and sporting abroad with your Hawke, it shall be
your hap to meet with such a Fesant, as will not, or otherwise is not able
to rise again after it has been hard flone, but shall be there taken on the
ground between the dogs and your self; do not then by my advice, seek for
any open or plain place to take your Hawke down upon, but otherwise and
immediately it shall be your best course, to rebuke the dogs out of the way,
This order will presently imbolden her.
and withal to throw the Fesant up aloft unto her, using your voice withal,
and there let her trusse it GOSHAWKE.
and fall with it to the ground, and if she shall chance, through any fear
or other occasion, to lose or let it go by the way, as oftentimes it comes
so to pass; yet let her have it again, or else never to enjoy it any other
way, until she will boldly do the same without any fear at all, and then
draw in your dogs about her, and acquaint them well together; and for want of
a Fesant, use her oftentimes after this matter to take her down with a pullet,
amongst, or near unto the Spaniels, with such care, as that they may not any
way offend her in the fall; and before it be long, this order will so well
imbolden her with the fall, and encourage her to hold amongst the dogs again,
as that she will quite forget all former unkindness offered unto her, and
trusse her prey again boldly, without any fear at all, being evermore
assured, that upon any such occasion, the stomach may be sharp in the
highest degree, for that will sharpen also her tallants, and cause her to hold
fast indeed. And without that one thing, there is no other course to be taken,
or means to be used with her, for she will never be subject to your will.

Also to use your young Hawke at her first entrance after the same manner, it
will perfectly encourage her to the like, whenever she shall have occasion,
without any manner of fear at all; for it is only at the first entering, being
not acquainted, the falling to the ground or bushes, near unto men or horses,
and the Spaniels baying with their several noyses, that does terrify her, and
oftentimes after causes the loss of prey from her foot: for of all Hawks,
she is the most nice and choice, and therefore will ask and require more skill
and attendance at her first making, then any other whatsoever; and for want of
such necessary and judicial considerations and courses, at that time, there
has bin many an excellent Hawke marred by her Keeper, before she have been
half made.

CHAP. XVII. The Haggart Goshawke in particular.
^ THE HAGGARD FAVLCON IN OPEM ME COPIA FECIT


THus far have I written and discoursed of the Goshawke in general, and
showed that of all other kinds, she is the wildest and most stout Hawke, and
that it is more difficult and hard at the first to draw her into true
subjection, and familiarity with the man, then any other whatsoever; and that
it is altogether in vain at that time to commit her into the custody or
keeping of any young or unexperienced Keeper, that is not able through his
judgment and skill, to order her as she ought to be.

And I am now come to the Haggart FAVLCON 1. book.
in particular, Of the Haggart.
as she is divided from the rest of her own generation, and will speak
something concerning her self, because there ought to be some difference
between them in the order and manner of dealing with them.

She is the absolute wildest Hawke of all, and will therefore deserve much
more labor and skill in her reclaiming and perfect making, then any of the
other: and therefore there ought to be had so much the greater care and
attendance on her, with such or the like preparation against the time you
intend to make her gentle, as I have before prescribed unto you.

For whereas it is an usual course with most men upon the receipt of such a
Hawke from the Cage, suddenly to make her gentle, by peppering, watching, and
other such like accustomed uses, without any former consideration or
imagination, how unfit her body may be, to be so suddenly striuen withal
and ouer-heat with holding and turmoiling in the hot water, that has been
rested, and therefore most like is charged and ouercharged with gross
imperfect fatness, and other such like humors, which being so suddenly stirred
and dispersed by immoderate and hasty dealing, may well hazard her life; and
for certain many Hawks have been lost that way.

Wherefore I would have you call to mind what order I have formerly prescribed
for such a Hawke; and that being well effected, then may you go forward boldly
after the same manner, and see there be no sparing of pains in carrying and
other necessary courses, until you well perceive by all signs of her good
behavior toward you, that she is gentle and well reclaimed.

Further, as touching her diet, feeding, calling or other manner of outward or
inward dealing, until she be ready to fly; I shall not need to meddle
withal, because I have before so plainly expressed the same, only I would have
you to observe this one note; which is, that these kind of Hawks being wild,
do all naturally love to feed on their prey in couart places, as where they
may not be discried or seen, by other such birds of the air as loves them
not.

Also, and otherwise being reclaimed by the man, whenever they do take it in
any champaine or plain place, they will do the like, and carry it to the next
place of harbor, to be shrouded or shadowed there; so much and so often they
have been not only taught, but also forced unto it, Crows Kites, and all
other such vermin.
being abroad and shifting continually amongst their enemies, that would, but
that they dare not, persecute them for their vigor and cruelty, such is their
malice toward them; and therefore nevertheless, will not cease with open cry
to rail and wonder at them while that they may be seen, and oftentimes
causes them to forsake their prey.

In this regard, when any one of these Hawks has after this manner safely
shrouded her self, she will sit very close, and presently fall to feeding:
which evil course she will continually hold, A great inconvenience.
to the great trouble and vexation of her Keeper, unless she be with great
care and skill well reclaimed from the same.

Wherefore, during the time of her calling, it behooves you to take this course
with her, although you do call and draw her by your chirping and whistle,
along after you, through the thick and couart places, the which is meet you
should do; yet do not there take her to your fist to be fully satisfied, but
let her still attend and wait on you, until you come to some plain
convenient place, and there entertain her in the best manner to the fist, and
let her feed a little thereon; then put to her lease, and let her eat the
residue on the ground close by you, and having reserved some stumpe or other
such thing, take her to your fist again, and so conclude with her for that
time. Also forget not, but that you do stoop gently to her on your knee, and
quietly and softly convey some bittes unseen far off unto her, that you give
her no cause of unquietness, as to strike at your hand with her tallants: for
those kind of Hawks will not endure to have any such thing openly showed, or
offered unto them; they will be so sharply disposed and eager at the sight of
it, and therefore there ought to be much heed taken by the man in his
behavior toward them, and neatness used, with handsome and cleanely
conueyances in all his outward dealings.

This course being well perfected with quiet and gentle usage every day, so
long as you do call her, will so imbolden her, and work all manner of fear
out of her, as that she will never after have any desire to carry any thing
from you: she will grow so far in love, and be familiar with you; but will
be well pleased, and account her self safely shrouded when she has your
company, and is close by you.

Now when you have after this manner thus kindly reclaimed and framed her to
your will, it will be good time to enter her to the field, and for that I have
before so plainly set down and prescribed the order and manner how and which
way to accomplish the same, I will omit to speak any more of that point, and
proceed onwards to the next.

When as she shall come to kill Partridge, then as I have formerly advised,
you must be sure to get gently in to her, having before provided her dinner or
supper ready dressed; and as she sits on the Partridge, bestow the same on
her in bits, She would be pleased always from your hand.
with neat and handsome conueyance, which will prolong her time in pluming,
and stay the sharpness of her appetite and desire to feed, which is not fit
she should do; for it would cause her to love that better they your self,
and to be loath and unwilling afterward at any time to be bereaved of it, In
some thick couart.
and thereby will take occasion to carry it from you, hoping to enjoy it to
her self more secret and quietly; whereas otherwise this course will so please
her, and draw her love so certain to you, as that she will never after offer
to carry one feather from you.

Also, all this while give no blood at all, but with some reuersion take her to
your fist again, and there content her, and before it be long, she will be
so constantly won and reclaimed to your will, as that she will never covet
or desire to carry her prey any whit from the place where she takes it; I
speak this by experience, and on my credit.
neither will she ever break it, so long as there is one feather left on it,
but still attend for your coming, and to have a reward only at your hand. And
therefore, if you may choose, let her never take any blood her self, but when
you have well nuzled and inured her herein, and that you do at any time after
find her with a Partridge in her foot: then after good time spent in pluming,
take off the head and neck, and give it unto her with the most part of her
supper together; which when she has eaten, and does look about her, take her
to your fist, and so conclude with her.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Hawke being well entered, and in love with Partridge,
ought not to be flone to the Couart at all.


IT is a rare thing to have a Hawke of this kind to be good to the field and
couart both; and therefore if you perceive your young Hawke at her first making
to be nimble and wight of her wings, and also to set her love on the Partridge,
and thereon to take delight, which will easily be perceived by her eager and
fierce flying, with the joy she will take in it, and iocond business she
will have with it, when she has the Partridge in her foot: then this being
well approved, it were great pity to let her see the Fesant at any time, or
at least to use her to that kind of game or manner of flight: He is a toling
and tempting bird.
for being a Hawke so eager and greedy of her prey, as they all in their own
natures be, will desire and more delight a short flight, and to have it
speedy, then otherwise to covet or be willing to pursue it, and hold out at
length; which she shall be constrained to do, if she will have the mounting
and styning Partridge to be at her command: and for the Fesant, by reason that
he is a foul in show and other appearance, far greater then the other: he
seems also in the manner of his flight, to be so much the more vnweildie and
heavy, and flies not so far as the Partridge does; all which are great
prouocations, and tempts the Hawke to fly courageously with more eagerness
and spiritfull assurance to enjoy him, then the other; The Fesant.
therefore his flght is of force, and sufficient to withdraw her love clean
away, although she has been otherwise well entered, inured, and blouded
before: for the best Hawke of that kind, being wild, and at her own
disposing, coueteth not, if they may choose, to fly far after the thing she
chiefly desires to prey upon, The true nature of the Hawke.
but most commonly uses her policy by sudden and cunning stealing upon the
same, and what she can win after that manner soonest, and with least pains,
the same she most delights in; by which appears, when we have them in our
own custody and keeping, the best of them all may be made bad enough through
want of skill and knowledge, with other careless usage in her Keeper.

Contrariwise, who has a true care and understanding in the art he
professes, may through his labor and painful practice, make one of far
more baser mettle to do him right good service.

CHAP. XIX. To teach the Goshawke to fly to the Wilde-ducke or Mallard, that
frequenteth the ponds or private pittes; which is a good sport, and a good prey
when it is taken.
GOSHAWKE.


AS you know right well, in most Countries there be many odd pondes that
stand in close and secret places, as amongst shrubbes, or bushes, or otherwise
environed with wood growing upward, that hides and obscureth the water from
the fight and knowledge of any travelers that passes to and fro, unless they
be such as perfectly knows them, or otherwise, those that by chance does
light upon them. The nature of the foul
In these kind of pooles the Mallard, with the Duckes his loving companions,
does take great delight and pleasure, there to repose and solace themselves
privately together, to their great contentment and safe assurance against any
enemy, that shall by stealth draw near to betray them.

Now whereas I have formerly delivered my opinion herein, that there is no
Hawke of this kind, in her wildness, but is able to shift for her self
sufficiently, and kill sundry kinds of prey; and afterward being reclaimed:
wherefore then should not the man by his art, cause any of them to do the like
for him? so that by this reason there is no excuse to be made for him that
shall have one of them in his hand a long time, to practice and work upon, and
shall in the end say she is a buzzard; she is of a bad carry, he can make her
do nothing at all. To the which I answer, that such a one is more fit for some
other calling, then to bear the title or name of either Falconer or Ostringer;
for if she may be made but to kill meat for other Hawks, she is well worthy
of her own, and there is some pleasure in it besides; and for such a one as
will neither be forced by the art and industry of her Keeper, to kill the
Partridge or Fesant, I will here show how she may be made not only to puruey
for her own or other Hawks diet, but also to give good satisfaction and
content to her Keeper: and to accomplish and bring the same to perfection, you
must observe well this order following.

When your Hawke is ready in all points to be flone, you must provide you of
three or four hand-fowle, if they be not wild, yet be sure they may be of
the same color, or as near as you can, the which you shall let your Hawke
only fly at, and foot out of ones hand one after another, day after day, and
let her plume and be well rewarded of them; and when you perceive that she
will do thus with an eager and hot desire, as no doubt, but she will very
quickly do in the highest degree of love toward them; then you must provide
you of a foul or two more, as you may easily do, and also that will fly so
far as you shall have need: and when you purpose to go abroad again with
your Hawke, send one before you with a foul, and also your directions, to some
close place of plumpe of bushes, where he may be very safely shrouded from your
self, and also the sight of the Hawke; then shall you follow after your self
with her rightly prepared, Spurs to prick her forward.
with her stomach sharply edged for her prey: and when you come there close
by the brimme or border of the thicket or fore-pointed harbor, and having your
Hawke ready for a sudden and delightful encounter, you shall strike hard on
the bushes with your pole, at which fore-knowne warning, the still couched
messenger, shall with all his might toss the foul aloft upright; which if
she do with courage take, an excellent catch-Ducke she will make.

Then after this you may boldly go to the ponds or pits, where the wild foul
lies, and as before said, creep as near as you may, holding your Hawke as
high as you can, and with your pole beat up the foul, when as they shall no
sooner begin to rise, but she will be as ready at the sudden sowce to pull
one of them back again; which if she do so, be sure to cross the wings of
it, and let her take her pleasure thereon in pluming, and be rewarded of the
same, and after that she will not miss one flight that she shall be flone to
after that manner: also it will not be amiss to have a dog always with you,
for sometimes after the Hawke is well acquainted with the sport, she will be
so nimble and quick at the catch, that they will fall both into the water
together, and by that means the foul may go to plunge, so that then the dog
may and will be ready to do you good service, whereby nevertheless the Hawke
may be served and well pleased again.

CHAP. XX. To fly to the Wilde-goose or Hearon, to the Rooke, the Mew, or any
other such short flight, which are to be killed at the sudden sowce, by the
policy of the Hawke that is not swift of her wing to take them otherwise
^ THE HAGGARD FAVLCON IN OPEM ME COPIA FECIT


THe most Hawks of this kind, does naturally love to prey upon any of these
things that I have here named, and therefore it is so much the easier to make
one of them by art to fly thereunto: nevertheless, on this consideration,
that they in their wildenesse do not altogether dispose themselves toward any
one particular thing of them; nor settle their loves or desire only on them,
nor no more then they do of the rest, or many other things that they also do
use to prey upon, as well as they: therefore if you will have one of them to
do you service therein, and to be constant in her flight thereunto, you must
not use her rashly, as trusting wholly in her own natural disposition, or
love to the thing you would have her to fly unto. Her own love.
But you must give a further addition and assistance to the same, by your own
art and cunning practice, extraordinarily to increase and make it perfect
withal; for there is no man of any understanding, that has a business of any
importance to accomplish, that will go rashly about the same, and without any
consideration, An addition or example.
think even so to effect it, but he will bethink himself better of it, and
cast which is the best way, and what course is fittest for him to take in it;
and then he will arm and prepare himself with discretion, to put the same in
practice and execution; and no doubt, but then he shall have all things go to
his liking, and also good success in the conclusion.

Even so likewise when you have taught your Hawke to go, and to come again
unto your fist, and that as you think she is ready in all points to be
flone, yet it is not fit that then you go with purpose to fly her, or to
force her fly at what you list, or would have her to kill: but you must
further consider what kind of things such a Hawke in her wildenesse does use
to prey and live upon, and is possible for the man by his art to make her unto.

Then all this being well considered and thought on, you may make your choice,
as of which one particular thing you would have her most addicted unto, and to
love better then the rest, for your own delight and pleasure; so as if you
think well even of the Rooke, a foul, which although there is not much worth
in the thing it self, yet it will serve well for her own or other Hawks
diet: and also through this order and observation, you may be instructed how
to make her to other things of more importance and value, as to any of those
other things I have formerly named.

Therefore when you have your Hawke ready in all points to fly, you must
provide you of some live traynes, the which you may easily do, either in
Summer or Winter; then when you would enter your Hawke, let one of them have
the wing pulled or cut; and when you come into the field in some green place
or slade, let the same be placed or set down there on the ground, and
retire back your self, with your Hawke, some forty paces from it, or as you
shall see cause, for you may draw near unto it again at your own pleasure;
then take off her Hood, that she may look round about her, and find where
the train is very like, busily disposed, as stirring, walking, or such like:
then if she do fly to it, and take it, let her plume and be well rewarded
on it: and after this manner you must order her, until she will find the
train readily as it is walking, so far off as she may well see it, and go
as readily and take it after that fashion.

Then the next time you intend to walk abroad, let your train be a flyer, and
placed at one end of a long creance, with a peg put slightly into the ground,
only to stay it, and no more, some yard or two from the end, whereunto the
train is fastened; and at the other end of the creance a mark set whereby you
may readily find it: then draw toward it, The train.
and vnhood your Hawke, that she may see it; and when she has found it, and
is gone from the fist well toward it, be sure to pull up the peg, that when
the train shall see her well near come at it, it may have some liberty to
fly, although it be but never so little before she do take it.

Thus if you can after this manner in your discretion, let her kill some two or
three more, and so order the matter with the creance, that when the Hawke shall
be almost at it, even then it may have some reasonable scope to rise before
she can take it; it will so nuzzell her, as that she will not after miss the
wild Rooke or any other thing you shall after this manner make her unto.

The Tassell is far more fit to be flone to this flight, or any other such
small flight, then the Hawke is, and she is meetest for the other FAVLCON 1.
book.
great flights, as the Goose or the Hearon, and none but she: I have seen my
self a Tassel that would very seldom miss one flight in ten, A good
condition.
but would puruey for many other Hawks; and which way soever he was carried,
he was found certain and sure in his service, and saved both man and horse
much labor, and also what other charge belonged to that place, as shot and
powder, with piece and such like; and yet he was never worth one groate for the
Partridge: nevertheless for his other service in my own estimation he right
well deserved, not only his own sustenance, but also due praise and
comme^dation. Also as I have told you, after this manner you may teach the
Hawke to kill the Goose or the Hearon, and she will quickly grow far in love
with them, if she be well trained; yet the Goose is a strong foul, and will
oftentimes wrong a Hawke very much with her wings: therefore beware you give no
trains vnbrayld of both wings, until the Hawke be well blouded; so shall you
be sure to encourage her thoroughly, and prevent all danger that may otherwise
happen in her making. For I did know right well my self one Hawke, that had
one of her eyes clean beaten out with the pinion of a Goose wing, and were
oftentimes before very much brushed and beaten with them; for which cause it is
not fit to fly thereunto without one Horse in the company, to haste in to
succor and help the Hawke.

There be many of these Hawks that be very large and strong, and withal as
heavy and sluggish of their wings, and therefore will never hold out to any of
the long flights, but altogether do shift and get their prey by subtlety and
craft; nevertheless the most of them are very hardy to seize on any thing.
And these be they that are most fit to be made and taught to fly to these
short and great flights, and to catch at the sudden sowce; which they will very
quickly learn to do with your own art and assistance, because their own
nature does very much direct and lead them even unto it.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Sparhawke.
SPAROWHAWKE


COnsidering that at first it was my special purpose to treat of short-winged
Hawks; and also in my proceeding, with them to join some others, the which I
have not forgotten to speak of: so also let me be no more unmindful of one
demie creature, that for her spirit and mettle, is well worthy to martch in the
best company, and therein is nothing inferior: The Sparhawke I mean, which I
have known to be of great worth and estimation, for the well performing her
service, with great delight and pleasure extended to her Keeper; as by her
spirit and policy to take any thing she shall be made to, and the manner
how, as at the first sight of the thing wherewithal she intends to encounter,
to behold how, and in what manner she first falls flat to the fist, showing
thereby her imbecillitie and unableness of body, for such unequal matches:
withal, as it were with discretion and deliberation, finds her best
advantage; and so expecting the speedy presence of her Keeper, and his kind
assistance in the skirmish, away she goes courageously, close by the ground
and nimbly, to the wild Crow, the Rooke, the Mewe, the Lapwing, the Ringdoue,
the Housedoue on the lands, the Pie-annit, the brauing and chattering lay; and
there is none of all these fowls, besides some others that I have omitted, but
after this manner she will make subject to her command, and yield to the
mercy of her sharp and piercing tallants. And for the Partridge, I have
likewise known her as great a commander, and to hold out, and continue all the
Summer time, as well as any other Hawks would do. And now on the contrary
(she) poor pretty Bird, is of no request or reckoning at all, but is almost
quite forgotten of all men: for the which they are much to blame undoubtedly;
for by experience, I know, during that season, there is no better Hawke then
she, if she be kept as she ought to be, high, lusty, and strong: but in
these days the young man has so deeply addicted himself to sloth and
idleness, with drowsy sluggishnesse, and other wandering mutabilities, as
that he had rather dye then to meddle with a Hawke that will require either
labor or attendance early or late, or any other time of the day, but will
reclaim and make their Hawks gentle with bating and hanging by the heels,
which is the cause, and for want of better guiding, that these poor silly
birds be not able to perform their service, which otherwise they would do;
for you must understand they be all but wretches, of little and small strength;
and to have any part of that diminished or taken away, it is not possible they
should be able to maintain their flight: but otherwise, to be strongly kept
in the Hood, and always flone from the same, she is a most excellent Hawke,
and will kill more Partridge in one day, then the best long-winged Hawke will
do in two; and she is for every place, you need make no difference of thick
or thin. And for her diet, that would be of the daintiest meat you can get,
unless in other times of rest, and also then, not forgetting to wash it well
and dry it again, especially if she be mued: likewise against she is to
fly, she must be prepared after the same manner, with a short cut to put a
perfect edge on her, and then she will fly after the best manner; and no
Hawke with more spirit and mettle then she. Also she would not be flone in
the morning, unless she be prepared ouer-night with a short and clean
supper for the purpose, and then she will fly for her own reward, and
content of her Keeper. Likewise, you ought to have always a pretty box about
you, full of fresh Butter, mixed with a little Saffron and Sugarcandie, to give
with her meat now and then, or to eat out of the box; which she will do
with great delight, and it will keep her head evermore loose, and in good
temper, and also prevent the Cray, and keep her proud and full of spirit.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Lanner and Lanneret.
LANNER.


I Am now come to speak of the Lanner and Lanneret, which although they be a
kind of Hawks, I never took much delight in, yet I will show you my opinion,
and what otherwise I have gathered by my little practice and observation from
them.

Then first give me leave to let you understand, that in my observation they
are all by nature and kind, of a hard and dull disposition, apt to do little
good of themselves, nor otherwise, but what they are forcibly compelled to do,
by their Keepers ordering of them. And for the Lanner her self, in my life
time I have heard here and there one of them that has been called or
accounted good; but as one Swallow makes no Summer, so one particularitie
concludes no generality: also and otherwise, the best good showed by them at
any time, in the little experience that I have had of them, does always
appear without true delight, after a tedious and base toyling kind of
fashion, and in my opinion far unfit to give a Gentleman content in his sport
and recreation: and so I will cease here to speak any more in general, but
especially in discommendations of them, lest I should seem offensive to any,
or to daunt the young Faulconer, or him that most of all for their sowndes and
long lasting, desires to practice and be dealing with them: but what was it
that I said before? did I say that I would even so leave them? surely that were
not well done of me, I must needs confess; and it shall go hard
nevertheless, but I shall find in my memory some cause, wherefore I should
not altogether so forsake sake them, but rather to make some amends, it is
otherwise meet I should do something in praise particularly of them.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Haggart Lanner.
LANNER.


AS the Eyas of this kind exceeds other Hawks, toward their Keeper, in
love and gentleness, even so does the Haggart of the same nature, as far
surpass the rest in exceeding wildenesse, and are very hard to be reclaimed;
and therefore whose hap it shall be to meet with any of them, he must take
extraordinary time and pains to make them gentle; and also all the luring
time the like course must be used, and see that she be taught and made to come
perfectly to the Lure, only garnished with hard washed meat, and that besides
she may receive the better part of her reward in bittes at your hands; even as
you were to order the Faulcon: and afterward during her trayning, there must
be much time taken, and otherwise the very self same ordering and outward
manner of dealing, that I have formerly appointed for the Haggart Faulcon, in
any other book of Hawking: so that it were but in vain for me to set down
any other particular prescription; and no doubt, but with such well governing,
and good time taken, they may make good Hawks: it was never my hap, to my
remembrance, to see any more then one Cast of them, and they never came to any
perfection, but even were destroyed through their own coyness, and their
Keepers over much haste and rashness, and also his hard dealing in their diet,
and with too much stoaning: and so I will cease to say any more of them, but
will proceed to the other of the same kind.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Ramage Lanner to the Field.
LANNER.


THere be many of these Hawks that has reasonable spirits and mettle
remaining in them, and does sometimes prove good Hawks, when it is their
happes to light into their hands that has judgment and knowledge to reclaim
them.

Also in my observation they are very Ramage and coy Hawks, and therein do
differ very little or nothing from the Haggart Faulcon, and it is as easy a
matter to reclaim the one as the other; nay otherwise I hold it in general,
rather easier to make the Faulcon in every respect more fit to be flone to the
field then she; they be so different in their natures; for example, the
Faulcons, although they are not all of one disposition, yet almost the FAVLCON
1. book.
very worst and stubbornest in nature of the kind, will be made to become
tractable and loving, both unto man, horse, and dog, with gentle and loving
usage, in due time bestowed on them. For they are composed of a far more
choice and delicate mettle, in respect of their bodily constitution, and also
are loving and kind, even in their own nature, as it were altogether
disclaiming their former course of wild living, and wholly subiecting and
submitting themselves to the man and his direction, in all francke and
freeness, with a maine and spiritfull performance of their love and service to
their Keeper,

On the contrary part, the Lanner, as she is nothing inferior to the other
in ramage and wildenesse, so is she more hard of ward and of a far more
strong and sound constitution, and yet will not be drawn by any gentle
dealing to do any thing, or to be pleasing to the man, but will evermore
deserve to have spurs put to her dull disposition, to prick her forcibly
forward to perform her duty; and yet when you have done the best you can, as
manned her, lured, trained and stayed her; all which to effect, I can prescribe
no better course then the very same that I have spoken of, or taught in my
other Book, for the Haggart Faulcon only, and excepting her diet, for that
must be considered of, with hard washed meat and stones, more or less, as you
shall find her natural inclination; for you must understand that they are not
all alike, but do differ as much as others do; and therefore ought to be
regarded thereafter.

Now when you have thus far forth effected your desire, yet have you not
well concluded with her, unless you be mindful of this one thing, and also
have well perfected the same; which is, that through your pains and skillful
practice you do well stay her, and by your art also restrain her from
dragging or carrying any thing from you; the which ill quality, there is no
one Hawke more subject unto then she.

Therefore, to prevent the same; first, you must beware, that if she but once
only knows the Lure, that you lure her no more, but once at one time, and
let that suffice, although you take the more time to make her, which shall be
the more for her good; for otherwise it will hazard the spoil of her, or any
other Hawke you intend to make to the field; for so soon as she once knows
the Lure, she will settle her love on it, and desire to hold it, and will be
loath to be taken up from it to be lured again, and will quickly grow
fearful to let you or any other man to come near her, lest she should be
deprived of that which she chiefly desires to enjoy, and will dragge and
cover to carry it from you.

Also during the time of her luring and trayning, you had need be careful to
order the business so, as that she may have her reward, for the most part, at
your hand in bits, only reserving some small quantity to take her to your
fist withal: and all this while you must have your Spaniels close by you, as
she is on the ground, and every day acquaint them well together; for they be
Hawks of all other that be most coy and fearful to suffer any dogs to
come near them.

Also at her first entering you ought to have but few dogs, and such as be
both cool and gentle, until she be well entered and also acquainted with
them; and then she will be out of all danger, although she should afterward
at some times be put besides her prey, yet she will not be beaten quite out
of love, or discouraged therewith, but even slightly will account of such an
accident, because she had been so kindly used and nuzled amongst them before;
whereas otherwise for want of this kind of careful ordering and governing at
the first, if she should chance to take any fright or sudden fear with a
dog, she would never abide them again, being a Hawke so coy and apt unto
it, and also strong and well able to carry her prey away: she were quite and
for ever made; for she will too soon know her own strength, and whenever
she shall have a Partridge in her foot, she will suffer neither man nor
dog to come near her, but she will carry it away and prey upon it; which if
she should do but only once, that is as much as one hundredth, for she will
never be reclaimed from it. And this is the only fault the Ramage Lanner is
subject unto, and also the best end of as many as falls not into a careful,
skillful, and painful Faulconers hand.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Ramage Lannner for the River.


IT cannot be denied but that there has been Hawks of this kind, both
upward and high flying, and also stowt and tough of their wings to maintain
the same. And I have as often marvelled with my self what the reason should
be, that in my time no man (of my knowledge) has ever made trial what
perfection such a Hawke might be brought unto for the River, considering they
be also hardy enough. Likewise I do very well remember, that when I was but
very young of years my self, I heard an ancient Gentleman report, that in
former times they were usually flone thereunto, and were held in great
estimation for the same; and in those times the Haggart Faulcon was not known:
He likewise affirmed that he had a Lanner himself that would fly very high
and very long, even like unto the wild Hobbie, the which was bred in Molton
Park: and in drawing through the young springs, himself and his Spaniels in a
Forest where he lived, as he often used to do, with his Hawke high flying
over him, he has sometimes put up foul unawares unto him that used to lie in
plashie or waterie places in the said Groves or bushie closes, the which she
would not miss, but kill one of them at her down come. Also at other times the
Fesant cock, the Woodcocke and the Partrige; and for these things that I have
named, there could not any of them come to her amiss, such was the excellency
and goodness he had brought her unto through his plain and simple skill: for
of my own knowledge he was no Falconer, although he had some love and little
understanding, as many others have that likes well the sport. Now if this were
true, as I do verily believe it was, for that he was a man, as I have told
you, truly ancient, and of good reputation: wherefore then should not we in
these days and times of more experience, and greater knowledge, in some sort,
shake off this habit of sloth and idleness that we have been trained up and
nuzled in this many years? and summon our wits and devices together, not only
to teach us tread the path of our ancient friends, and imitate their
inventions, but also well to applaud them for the same with due respect to
their instructions? But some man may replye and say, The nouice.
Wherefore should we so much trouble our selves with such dull metled humors
as they be, that will ask so much labor and pains about them, before they
can be brought to any perfection? There is the brave spirited Haggard Falcon
Gentle, she will be reclaimed and made with a trice; and she is of a loving
disposition, and also as frank and free of her mettle: and therefore if we
will bestow on her but one three weeks, or a months well luring and training
with Doves to cause her to love us, she will be wholly wedded to us, and will
not away. And moreover, she will as suddenly understand what she should do;
for she will not require much instruction. And this is the bird worthy of due
commendation. To the which saying I yield, and will say no less, for I can no
way wisely dispraise her; for if I should, I must do both my self great
wrong, and her also, that before I have so highly commended: but thus far
give me leave to answer, as it is in some sort truly said, and may also be as
well performed with some Hawke, so is it on the other side, as slightly and
simply answered; and it is as common in these days with every nouice of little
or no understanding, that has but newly gotten his art only in fit terms
and phrases, and for any other reason they have or can allege about such a
Hawke, or of what else belongs unto her, but only that common saying, by every
one of well loving the Haggart. I have known in my time many shepherds
resorting to Hawking places, that I durst have undertaken to have taught any of
them with a few plain instructions in one fortnight to have performed as much
so well as they, with some Hawke of the kind, although there be some other of
the same generation that will put twenty wiser men then they to their shifts:
but I would very feign hear of one of these self conceited young men that
would somewhat withdraw his affection from these kind of Hawks that are so
easily, and with little pains reclaimed, and will in a manner as they suppose,
even make themselves. I would see him to undertake the Ramage Lanner, and with
all his wisdom make her seem a Faulconers Hawke to the brook, that will not
make her self neither be framed by another without both labor and skill
indeed: truly he should deserve much commendations for his well performing
of this business; and more then for any such wherein as he deemes is not
required much Art, pains, or any great attendance. And for him that will bend
his mind, and will be willing to practice herein, I will show him my advice,
and the best directions from my author, or own understanding that I may afford
him.

It is not unknown but that the best metled Hawke, and highest slier of any
kind, may be abused and drawn down far from her wonted gate, as either
with too much flying, or too hard feeding, as to be wearied, or as it were
tired out with too often and overmuch toyling, or otherwise with having too
great an edge and appetite set on them with impouerishment, proceeding from too
straight a hand kept on them in their diet and feeding. And for certain, the
most of the Lanners kind are spoiled these ways, and drawn clean from their
wings, and forced to fly about the man's head, and go to stand, and therefore
although they be all of a hard kind, yet they are not all alike, but do differ
in their natures as much as others do, which ought to be well respected, and
especially noted, the difference between the good metled Hawke and the bad,
and to be ordered thereafter, and yet not in any sort it is meet they should be
starued; for there is no Hawke, and especially of this kind, that is too much
pinched, but will leave and give over that thing which she should fly after,
and take pains for, and more willingly return back to him again that she
knows well, has, and also will, on little cause in the end reward her: and
therefore when you have your Hawke full and in good temper, the best course is
and will be for you so to keep her. And let her diet be such, and the quantity
thereof with a hand certain and steadily kept on her; Neither too much at one
time, nor too little at another.
as that it may maintain health and strength to preserve her; for he that
has not so much discretion as to consider of this order, and to govern and to
use this Hawke thereafter, shall never have her to fly certainly, but even as
she is fed disorderly, so she will perform her service as carelessly. And this
one other thing you ought to take notice of, which is, that as you do first
use these kind of Hawks in their luring and training to their diet and
feeding, so shall you for the most part find by them in your further practice
and dealing with them. Therefore when you shall have one of them to deal
withal, and that in her making you do find her apt and forward to your
liking, let her not be much pincht howsoever you do in her diet and feeding:
and also be careful to take good time in her training, with Doves given in a
long creance for a while, that she may kill them close by you until her coy
behavior and wildness be over, and she be grown familiar, and will suffer
you without any coyness or staring to come in to her: Also let her be fed and
rewarded of the same Doves she kills, or with some other such good meat,
only it being hot, let it be a little washed as it were to give a Faulcon, and
no more; for you shall not need to carry so hard or straight a hand as if you
intended to fly her to the field. And with this course of so well making, and
other such necessary ordering, with casting and stoning, as I have formerly
taught, belonging, you shall keep her full, and lofty of life and spirit to
hold her wings withal. And also if by nature there were ever any vpwardnesse
or high flying in her in the time of her wildness, she will both show it and
hold it, you may be assured of it; and then you may put her to the River, and
having a good make- Hawke, you shall well quarrie her, and then she will be
worthy the accounting of; and the Faulconer that has so made her shall have
his due praise and commendations for his labor and paines-taking so
artificially with her: whereas otherwise if she prove not a high flyer, yet
there is no labor lost; for she may quickly change her diet, and with a
straiter order cause her to scratch amongst Spaniels for the Partridge, which
will also well counteruaile his labor.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Ramage Lanneret for the River or Field.
LANNER.


THere is not much more to be said for the Ramage Lanneret, then has been
here prescribed, and is spoken of the Lanner; for what method or order soever
is meet and fitting for the one, the very same serves directly for the other,
and he also being well mand, losed, trained and made inward to the man, may be
also flone to the River; for very many of them are very spiritfull and upward
Hawks, and being well quarried, proves very sure and certain Hawks, and
good fowle-slayers, and are very fit to be used as leaders.

These Hawks ought to be kept as high and full of flesh as may be,
nevertheless there ought special regard to be had to the stomach always,
that with clean feed, casting, and stones often (that) may be held perfect to
cause him maintain and perform his service after the best manner. But
whosoever can by his Art and labor best reclaim and make them to love and be
familiar with the Spaniels he shall use, and esteem of them as most meetest
for the field, and the equallest match for the Partridge, but they are for the
most part very coy and fearful of the Spaniels.

Yet nevertheless of my own knowledge, if you can be charie of them at the
first entering, and until they be well blouded and in love with their game,
although afterward they should sometimes by an unruly Spaniell be deprived of
their prey, yet they will slightly account of it, and remain nevertheless
still constant in their love to the thing they formerly took delight in, if
you will remember, The Partridge.
and always be mindful, as I have often told you, of the stomach, that it
may be hot and fiery, which will compel them only to mind their service, and
not to regard the sight of the dogs, or any other thing; for you must
especially consider, and further be mindful, that the Partridge time is in the
summer, which is always inclined to heat and hot weather, and therefore you
must feed so much the cleaner, and wash the harder to hold him in true
subjection withal; whereas otherwise the other sport is in the winter, when as
it is far more sharp and colder: which must likewise be thought on, and your
Hawke be ordered thereafter, and fed so much the better.

And whosoever will attain true understanding, ought evermore to be mindful of
the difference of times and seasons, and well to observe them, and then he
shall be well able to govern his Hawke by Art and discretion; whereas
otherwise in being forgetful thereof, or having little or no understanding of
those things, he shall not be able to rule them by reason; for being as they
are birds of the air, which holds seldom certain, they must be dieted and
governed according to the changeable or constant temper of the season, in
summer or winter: and therefore if you do well bethink your self, it is no
easy matter, for every one to order and govern certainly, such (a body) and
hold it always in temper, that is so mutable, and ever alters as the wether;
but he must be expert in his Art, and also his Crafts-master: and so I will
cease to say any more of the Ramage, and proceed to the Eyas, of the same kind.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Eyas Lanner, or Lanneret.
LANNER.


I Will now conclude with the (Eyas Hawke) by which appears a difference
between them in their several natures, as well as in their contrary names or
titles; all which I shall not need to speak of any further in this place,
neither would it be any whit available so to do, but will proceed as brief
as I may, and out of my own knowledge and understanding, gathered even by
little practice and observation, show how she ought to be made ready to be
flone to the field.

And whereas I have formerly advised that in all sorts and kinds of Hawks you
ought first to consider of their generation: Secondly in your further labor
and practice to find out their nature, and how therein they are inclined: and
thirdly, that being rightly and well perceived, then to frame and fashion by
Art and discretion your manner of course and dealing with them, according to
the same. Likewise for this Hawke lastly and particularly here mentioned, you
must consider that she was taken out of the nest very young, and after closely
kept, fed, and familiarly trained up only by the man, whereby of necessity she
must needs altogether forget her natural damme that bredde her, and become
loving and fond on him that brought her up: Also this manner of breeding must
needs cause her to differ much in the inclination of her body from the other,
which as you have heard were bred and trained up by their damme after another
fashion. Wherefore as your former drift and desire was only by your Art and
industry to reclaim them from their wildness, The Haggart or Ramage Hawks.
and draw their loves constantly unto you. So now on the contrary you must be
as chary that in your teaching and training, you do not altogether besot this
Hawke, that is in her own nature too foolish and fond of you already.

And for that I shall not need to prescribe any rule or order for the
reclaiming, luring, or any other thing concerning her first handling, I will
proceed to the next instruction, which is this: when she will come rudely to
the lure garnisht with meat, and also fly about you for the same: then let her
kill two or three live Doves at the Lure where they may have some little scope
to flicker and stir about, whereby to give her the more cause and
encouragement to come to them; which when she will do readily, and with an
earnest desire prey upon them, let her have no more after that fashion; but the
next time when she is prepared well for it, let her be lured from man to man,
and as she is coming give her a field Dove in such a creance as you know it
cannot carry quite away from you: then if she do rudely and eagerly fly after
that and kill it, let her be well rewarded on it; but after that let her have
no more upward trains given unto her, nor any other that she may see to come
from the man; for they be such things only that besots, and absolutely spoils
all those kind of Hawks. For in every man's understanding that has any
discerning or observing knowledge, their bodies be tempered with mettle of
such induration, as that their own natures will afford and permit them even to
live of any thing; which is the reason they want spirit and courage, and
therefore are for the most part of a drowsy and dull disposition; and what
they are first taught and brought unto, the same they will everlastingly cleave
unto, whether it be good or bad, as to the very Lure and Hawking bag, with
having or receiving too much kindness, although but in scraps from them; they
will be so tied and entangled in their love and desire toward them, as that
afterward with all the pains, Art, and skill that a man has, he shall never
be able to withdraw their fervent love so deeply planted there, to be set on
any other thing, or placed otherwhere.

My meaning or intent is not to tie or bind you to this strict limitation with
every Hawke, as justly to appoint how many Doves to give and no more; but still
do desire that you should be mindful, and always remember the difference
between the good metled Hawke and the bad, and so to use them in their
training and every other way; but how soever they shall appear to you,
nevertheless by my advice give as few trains as possible you may to any field
Hawke of this kind, for the foresaid occasions, but even so soon as they be
taught to catch first readily on the Lure, let them have the rest given vnseild
with some few feathers drawn from them, that they may kill them al-waies by
the ground, without any mounting at all: Also from the fist, and out of the
hood; and then so soon as she will fly and trusse readily that way, leave
off that course, and show her Partridge, and if it be possible, let her have
some few from the hand, after the same manner: and there is no question but
with this course rightly observed, and well followed, you may make even the
veriest slug of the dullest spirit, to become a good Hawke, as well for the
field and the Partridge, as otherwise to hold out and pursue a train to the
end from the man's hand.

I know there will be an expectation at my hand of some rules of Physic for
these kind of Hawks, and the best answer that I need to make unto it, is
this: First, there is no sound Hawke whatsoever, that shall have need of any
such thing, unless it be to confound her, that otherwise would do well; and
for these kind of Hawks, it goes hard with them when they shall have any such
occasion: and therefore by my counsel, let every man that has his Hawke sound
and well, strive and be careful to keep her so; for it is far more easier
to do so, then when he has through negligence or evil order abused or put
her out of temper, to amend her with Physic again neither can he ever do it,
unless in some appliment for an apparent outward accident; but otherwise, for
any inward medicine, let it be even clean feed, well washed, and stones with
discretion, and once in a week to the full and hard Hawke; and on a resting
day, join some salendine with them, to cleanse and purge her of such glit, and
other imperfection as those Hawks be most subject unto, and have gathered,
with rest or full feeding before.

Likewise for the Goshawke or Tassell, I have put you in mind already, that
they also be free from diverse dangerous diseases that are ordinary and common
with other Hawks, as to be apparently liuer-shot, or to have the Fellanders,
or the Crocke, with others more; and to speak LANNER.
truly, if it be their fortunes to light first into a wisemans hand, he will
keep any of them even all her life time, which are many years, and she shall
never have surfeit, sickness, or any one disease or other befall unto her,
unless it be by some strange accident, as in her flying through blows,
brushes, thorns or such like, which is no way to be prevented by her keeper,
for that she is then under her own government and disposing; for they be all
of so strong and sound a constitution after they be once mued, as that they
are evermore preserved and kept in health by the very force, strength, and
virtue of their own nature, by reason whereof there is little cause why they
should be medicined at all.

And whereas I have heretofore discoursed and showed sufficiently of them in
every respect, as how to take them from the mew being fat and full, or
otherwise from the cage, or elsewhere, and how to order them accordingly
without any medicine or scowring at all: And whereas many men holds an
opinion, that when they have drawn their Hawke from the mew, it is not
possible to make her clean and ready to fly without two or three scowrings in
the mean while: I think I have said enough for that before, and also showed
far a better way, and therefore I shall not need to say any more in this
place; and also let me advise every young man that wishes well to the sport,
and would be a Faulconer, that he do never give any manner of scowring or
medicine to a sound Hawke, how fat or full soever she be; for there is an old
rule or saying in Physic, which is, The whole needs no Physician: and for
the Hawke I can maintain it, for I never yet knew that ever it did good to any
one, but otherwise has much distempered them, and hazarded their lives; nay
otherwise taken it quite away, that else before were in no danger at all.
Nevertheless, for that every one is not of the same opinion, but does
otherwise dispose of himself, and determine to practice on very little or no
occasion: I will here for such greefes as these kind of Hawks be subject
unto, set down so many medicines, as through occasion I have found by
experience to be most convenient and necessary to be applied or given unto them.

Lathams approved medicines, incident to all Hawks mentioned in this Book.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of the cold in the head, or the Rye.
OF all the diseases that belongs to these Hawks, there be only three that
they be most subject unto, which is the Rye, the Cramp, and the Craye; and
being once taken and continued any season, they will be very hard ever after to
be recovered: Therefore the best way will be for the keeper evermore to be
mindful and careful to prevent their infection, before any of them has laid
hold, or seized on his Hawke; which he may very easily do if he will be
mindful and watchful over them, and through his foreseeing knowledge be
careful to avoid the occasion. All these infirmities be in a manner taken one
way, and proceed of one cause, which is cold, and after this manner they be
engendered: the Crampe and the Rye follows after the Hawke has been hard
flone and labored, especially in the winter time, in wet and dry, when as
afterward they be set up or down to rest the night time, in some moist or
dampe place, low, near unto some earthen floor; wherefore it is necessary
that you be evermore careful to set them up as high as you can in such places,
and upon some thing or other that they may rest warm upon, after their bodies
and blood has been extraordinarily heat and chafed, to prevent that danger;
for they will not brook to sit in the night time near to the moist earth as
other Hawks will do, and it has often times caused the Crampe to lay hold upon
every joint and limme of the whole body; and for that I have already written so
largely of the same disease, and what may be done for the recovery of it, I
will here say no more, but that the best course is through care and diligence
to seek to prevent the coming of it. Also for the Rye that is taken through
the same occasion, and is a fast-setled grief and stuffing in the head; and
will, if it be not quickly found, and as suddenly looked unto, grow either to a
dry frownce or a wet, or otherwise a continual moist humor, which will
hardly be ever cured; for example, I had a Hawke sent me the last Michaelmas
from Sir William Wooddowes, winking of one eye, the which proceeded of a
continual cold in the head as I plainly perceived; and after I had a little
loosened it by one cover that was grown in the chest of his Pallat, and
another close by his ear, on the same side that he winked on, which I took
away; and also was enforced to burn one of his nares to open that which was
quite stopped up, I used all the means I could to purge and cleanse it, and he
ceased not every other day to throw and cast out some filth, and in time so
much, as it is not to be imagined or spoken of, during the time until after
the Christmas following, and then it ceased and dried up on the sudden. This
plainly shows what a fault and ouer-fight it is in any man that will not when
he may, so easily prevent such things before they do come, or otherwise when
they are taken to be careless and unmindful to epsy them, but to let them run
and grow on until they be unrecoverable; therefore whenever you shall by any
means have such a Hawke that is any whit stuffed in the head, look that you
defer no time to break it, lest further or the like inconvenience do grow
thereon as I have showed you, and for recovery thereof, this will be your best
course.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Rye or stuffing in the Head.
FIrst, you must be very careful that she may always sit warm, and
especially in the night time and also that she may evermore be fed with hot
meat, and fire as often as may be, for it likewise give her now and then at
evening with her meat, 2. or 3. bruised cloves of mace; the which is one very
good thing against the same disease, and will also sweetly perfume her whole
body and breath, and sharpen her appetite: also use her to fresh butter that
has been quickly gathered, and shall be well clarified over a chafing dish of
coals, with a little Rue and Saffron in powder, and good store of Sugarcandie
well tempered altogether; let her have this with her meat evermore a little at
a time, and it will presently loosen her, and cause her to snite and throw with
her head; which when you perceive, then take the juice of Dazie roots, and
with a straw blow it hard into her nares a pretty while before you intend to
feed her; then afterward when she is at quiet again, let her have her dinner
in her foot that she may liar well on it, and this will certainly amend her;
for although this juice of Dazies is a common medicine, yet it will purge and
cleanse the head being loosened before as well as any thing whatsoever. Blow
into her nares with a straw, the juice of Sage three mornings in the week; it
is very good to draw down tough slime out of the head. I could set down
diverse other things more stronger, but in them there is some danger; and in
this there is none at all, but will work to good purpose, and cause a good
conclusion.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Craye.
THis disease or infirmity that we call or term the Craye, is of an
exiccatiue or astringent quality, drying and binding in the Hawke, which
causes her not to mute or slice from her according as naturally she ought to
do, but otherwise to drop far short some part of it dispersed asunder from
the other; and also passes not clearly with ease, but comes harshly and hardly
from her; all which signs and shows are apparent and easy to be perceived.
And therefore the keeper is so much the more to be blamed that shall defer
any time, and suffer the cure thereof to be neglected; for by that means the
grief is grown to be more dangerous and deadly: whereas otherwise it is of no
moment, but may be very easily amended; for you are to remember that this
particular infirmity proceeds also of cold, as the other does that I have
before named, but yet after another fashion: For I let you know before, that
both the Crampe and the Rye comes by taking cold: And this which now I speak
of, is taken by a continuance of gross and cold washed meat that is given the
Hawke to feed upon, which this kind will not endure or last withal; for it
will consume them inwardly where it cannot be seen, as in those places, and
after the manner as shall appear hereafter plain unto you. It is not unknown
but that the gorge of the Hawke is the first place and only receptacle or
harbor of such sustenance as she always takes to nourish her whole body
withal, and is unto her as a maine and clean conduit, the which being filled
with pure and clear liquor, it is not tainted or made unsavory there, but let
pass in due time further into smaller vessels, more fine then it was before,
to serve for other uses: Even so on the contrary it is with the Hawke; for if
her gorge be filled with stale and gross cold meat, contrary to her natural
inclination, it will soon grow unsavory there, and her stomach will abhor
to entertain it, and also the other more secret passages will be annoyed
thereby, which will quickly turn to her destruction. As for example, I have
known diverse Hawks that has died on this occasion, whose inward and
invisible infirmity has never been mistrusted, but only has practiced and
wrought on the tuel for remedy; nevertheless when she has been opened, the
very gorge has been like unto chawke with the panell, and the next venting
place into the small guts has been even burnt and eaten with heat like unto
the Frownce, which was the cause her excrements wanted free passage: all which
proceed from such unnatural stale diet as the stomach could not well brook,
and were repugnant to their natural disposition; for there is no such kind of
gross feed given, although the gorge will with greediness receive it, yet
afterward the stomach will be choice and unwilling to taste of it, as you may
well perceive when it has been kept so long as that it begins to wax windy,
sour, and distasteful, and by the course of nature would feign be eased and
emptied of some part thereof, which does so much annoy and offend her; as you
may see by her often writhing and striving to remove it, and put it down into
the pannell: Her stomach.
and when she has in some measure so done, through nature^ violent forcing,
yet it is also therein so long detained, and unkindly digested, as that by
virtue of it, she does not win to her self any natural or kindly comfort;
but otherwise evil imperfections and humors of moisture does arise thereon,
which ascends up into the head, whereby all that part is molested: otherwise
there is left downwards much unnatural heat and oppilations or stoppings
that infects the body and secret passages; whereupon this disease which we call
the Craye does proceed, with many others. Wherefore it behooves every man to
respect his Hawke better, then at any time to cloye or clog her with such
gross and unkindly feeding, but otherwise with care to give her her due as
near as he may, according to her deserving and natural disposition; withal
further observing other such necessary courses belonging in due time and
season, as I have in many places appointed by prescriptions, and in so doing
he shall never have need to take care for either scowring or medicine, but
shall evermore have his Hawke according to his own liking, full lofty and
strong, well able to perform her business after the best manner; whereas the
other that shall be careless and forgetful, and is well pleased if he may
pamper her with any thing, and is as vnrespectiue of other wants or needs
appertaining: he shall seldom or never have his Hawke perfect and healthful,
but ever out of tune and unfit to do any thing; whereas before through ill
diet and disorder your Hawke caught this disease, so now on the contrary, and
especially, by means of better usage and good diet, with some other appliment,
you must restore her to health again: wherefore so soon as it is perceived,
you must remember that you are not only to destroy and kill the Craye alone,
but also such other evils as waits and partakes with that in the unnatural
working the poor Hawks desolation, which is cold and moist, raw humors
ascending up into the head, and otherwise unnatural heat and drowth, with
oppilations or stoppings possessing the body and interior passages; all which
ought to be particularly considered of, and your remedy prepared and applied
accordingly. Then first you must bethink your self of her diet, that it may
be of light and cool meats, easy to be disgested, as of Hens flesh,
Chickens, young Pigeons, Rabbets, new Sheepes-hearts, Porke, Pig of the
shoulder and the heart: then must you provide the sweetest fresh butter of the
newest gathering that may be, and boil and scum it well with half a score
bruised cloves of mace in it; and when you have so done, in the cooling put in
a little of the powder of Rue, and so keep it close in a box, and as often as
you do feed, anoint her meat therewith, the oftener the better, so that the
gorges be easy, according to the Hawks ability, and the power of the
infirmity: and for certain, this will not fail only to open and loosen the
head, but also disperse those other humors in the body, and scower them away
that was cause of the sundry diseases. Now when you have seen this business
thus well effected in the head by her countenance and other appearance there;
and also that she mutes and slices well from her again, nevertheless it may
well be her head was but only loosened, will have some need also to be better
purged, and clearly cleansed. Likewise for the body and inward passages,
although they were or are newly scowred, yet nevertheless they may require
some more labor therein, and also to be thoroughly cooled. Therefore, as you
shall see cause, first in the head by snufling or sniting, or any other signs,
use the juice of Dasies or Sage, to cause her throw it forth the sooner; but if
you perceive the humor to continue nevertheless moist still, then put to the
juice a little of the powder of dust of Brimstone to dry it up withal, and
she shall do well. Likewise for the body and inward places, give with her
meat the distilled water of either Horehound or Woodbine, or the water of
Barley, that I have prescribed in my other book, and she shall be well, and
her body moderately cooled, and in good temper again.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Eye.
THE Goshawke as you know is a fierce spirited, and fast flying Hawke if she
have naturally a true love and liking to her prey: and for that she is most
commonly used to fly through the hight of highest and thickest woods, where
the game that she best loves, most often uses; and because the eye and only
ornament of her body is her chief guide in those places, and is so dear and
precious a Jewel unto her, it were great pity that it should miscarry or be
blemished by any misfortune. Therefore fearing or misdoubting that any such
evil accident should befall, I will show you a sure medicine to amend it
withal.

CHAP. XXXII. For the Eye that shall have any hurt by accident or otherwise to
grow upon it.
TAke a thunderbolt, the which is found most commonly in the fields, in some
channel or watercourse, by which means it is there laid open from the earth,
and is easily to be perceived, and put it into a hot fire and burn it well;
then when it is cold again, beat it to fine powder, and searce or sift it
through a fair linen cloth, then mingle it with sweet butter in differently,
and on any occasion put as much or the quantity of two little pins heads
morning and evening into the Hawks eye; and if any thing whatsoever will do
it good, this will not fail to do the like. Also you may at these times blow
it into the eye with a straw, and it is as good, and will as speedily work any
thing forth, or recover any thing that is growing, or amiss in that place.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Hobby and the Marlion.
HOBBY.


MERLIN.


THere is yet this Cast of little Hawks, the which I have not so much as once
named; the one is belonging to the young man, the other pertaining to the Lady:
and in my opinion are most equally matched one with the other, in regard
whereof, it were great pity they should be parted ever, but even fly for the
prey by turns together; not you know where, I do not mean, for then the young
man perforce must mount alost indeed, at which the Lady would be as lowly
displeased to see her Marlion so put down in the losty flight: But what do I
mean to skip so far beyond my Art? let me courteously crave pardon and
favor, to leave the Lady and her Hawke together, as birds with whom I never
had, nor have no skill to deal at all; and withdraw the young man and his
Hobbie Into the Champian fields, where he
may be partaker of such sundry sorts of glee,
As tongue can no way well express,
or eye shall seldom see;
For there he may behold her,
first as she is wild,
And see how she bestirs her,
the silly birds for to beguild:
And also attends the Falconer,
and his Spaniels as they range,
As if she were mand before,
which is a thing most strange,
That such a bird
that never was in hand,
Should wait so long, and stop so often,
Many a true laboring servant has been cast off with a bunting that has
deserved a Lark for his reward.
and never go to stand.
And furthermore,
neither to be served,
But so let go without reward
that has so well deserved.
Yet nevertheless this loving Hawke
will take no offense at all,
But on the morrow next will as ready be
to come when he shall call:
But to uncouple his Spaniels
after his wonted guise,
To spring the fearful Partridge
that in the stubble lies:
Or else the mounting Lark,
which soon the Hobbie spies,
And beats from ground with all her might
up to the lofty skies;
Which then for to behold,
no mirth you may compare,
Unto the Hobbie and the Lark,
thus striving in the air.
Until the harmless bird
being wearied with the flight,
Is forced with clipped wings together,
to throw her self down right.
Whereat the Hawke does joy,
and dallies by the way,
Yet long before they come to ground,
she makes of her a prey.


For the Partridge, the Haggart of this kind is best, and may most certainly
be made a special Hawke for the same; she must be taught and trained in each
degree like unto the Faulcon; and must be careful not to fly her after eight
a clock in the morning, especially if the Sun break out in any heat; for
if you do, she will fall to soring and be lost, and must be sought up again
where she was first taken. Also in the afternoon you may begin at two, if the
day be temperate, and Hawke with her until it be near the setting of the
Sun; but if she be flone any longer, she will likewise fall to dorring, and
be lost, but otherwise with this observation and good order in her diet, she
will show her self a Hawke to please a Prince; for you may fly her twenty
times in the afternoon, when no other Hawks will fly but must be waited on:
yet a little longer, then may you put her to it, as either to the Partridge,
the quail, the clot bird in the fallow fields which is a very fat and a dainty
bird much like unto the Martine, the Warwinckle, which is a pyed bird, and uses
most in pastur-ground, or other champane places, whereas grows great and tall
bushes, one some place or distance from the other; whereas I have seen an
hundred stoopings upon one of the same birds before it could be killed, which is
most excellent sport, and full of delight; for if the bushes stands not some
reasonable distance apart, the bird will be so terrified at the sight of the
Hobbie, as you may almost take it with your hand, and when you think it meet,
in the end you may kill it with a stone bow, and throw it to the Hawke. Also
for the Lark I am not able with my pen to express the delight and passing
pleasure that is in that flight, but indeed the Eyas is the very best for the
mount; for after she has but wrought three or four seeled Larkes and preyed
on them, she will never give over, but work into the high air after the
Lark, so it be in a champane and plain country; for there the policy and
drift of the bird that nature has taught her, is, by being so exceeding high,
and upon a circle or wide turn of the Hobbie, to stretch away to some kind of
covert to shroud and succor her self thereby, by which means sometimes they
are preserved from their merciless enemy, but more often are deceived and do
lose their lives in the midway.

When you are disposed to have one of these Hawks to make to this flight, you
must make your choice of the formal, and take her from the nest a little
before she is able to sit upon the side of the same; then must you provide and
make another nest, and place it on some tree in either Orchard or Garden, where
it may be safe; and there she must be fed by the man with bits given on the
sharp end of a stick, until she be grown able to stand stiffely on her
legs, and to pull hard for the meat she shall eat; at which time, as you
shall further find her strength and ableness, the nest being no higher but that
a man may well reach it, she must be taught by your Art and voice in luring, to
come to the lure from thence, if it be but a foot at a time at the first, and
so afterward by degrees, as you do find her more stronger, to teach her to
come further; and after this manner she must be tutered until she will come
from the neast to your voice so far as she can hear, and fly upon you,
attending still on her wings where you will have her, and until you perceive
her to be full sound, when as you must have your hood, Iessebuites and bells,
with other ornaments belonging to deck and furnish her withal; which being
done, she must be made more gentle and acquainted with the hood, and carriage
continually on the fist: then must you provide some Larkes to train her
withal, but not one to be seen come from the fist or hand, but having before
killed two or three on the lure, let her go at first from the hood to a train
that must be in a creance of brown thread, and as high as a tall tree before
you do vnhood her to it. When as you shall find her so apt and forward to
that sport, as by that time she has but inioyed two or three after that
manner, she will go to her business so willingly, and with such delight and
pleasure, as it would even ravish the mind and senses of her keeper, or other
spectator; then having thus well taught and trained her, afterward when you do
not use or fly her, you may suffer her to take her pleasure abroad both day
and night continually, or as you shall see cause, always remembering that you
feed her not at home for a while at the first, but otherwise by your lure or
voice to draw her abroad some quarter or half mile, and there feed and leave
her; And for certain, when she has fed, feaked, and rejoiced, she will
repair suddenly back to the place where she was bred up by the man, and
trained. Also, on resting days when she is gorged, if you will observe her,
you shall see her usually in the heat of the day to fly and soar so high, as
it will not be possible to view or behold her; by which means with her
natural education together, she will be as perfect in knowledge of the
country, as the wild Haggart her natural damme that bred her, and you shall
not need after to fear to lose or leave her behind you any where within four
or five miles, with her prey in her foot, but so soon as she has concluded,
she will return to the place of her first training again. And this course
she will hold most certain and constantly until the week before Michaelmas,
but no longer, and then she will as her own nature shall lead her, be gone,
if you give her any liberty, and trust her abroad.

But to return to the Haggart, as there be some of them excellent for this
slight of high mounting, so likewise there are other some that in their
natural understanding and cunning will desire and seek after advantage, as to
be high flowne on their wings, and from them, and after that manner to conquer
their prey, but otherwise will not go from the fist to the mowtie at all: also
for their diet, it would be of clean washed mutton or such other like meat,
when they fly not; for they be as hard Hawks as any be, and must be stoned
and set to a sound stomach when they should fly. And so I will leave them as
the most rare and excellent birds of the world for the young man's use, who
cannot well brook or endure to be tied to any certainety, as to be limited or
appointed by prescription, when or at what times he shall begin or end his sport
and pleasure in Hawking.

Whereas altogether through the persuasion of my friends, I consented at first,
though unwilling to undertake this business, even so afterward, as unadvisedly
and rashly, without any foresight, or consideration of the subjects I was to
treat of, or ground whereon I might safely build my foundation, I have labored
and traveled a long time, uneasily, and with much wearines in my journey;
nevertheless am now well refreshed and comforted that I wandered not from the
line that was laid me, or the rough or rugged path that was likewise appointed
to direct me: and therefore if I may with simple request persuade thee honest
Reader, not to grudge at my good will, but censure better of me, I shall
heartily thank thee for thy love, and so I sit down to rest me.

FINIS.
The Epilogue, Wherein is contained the opinion of a worthy Divine S. I. and
composed by himself, concerning this and the like subject.
I Have always thuoght Hunting and Hawking, and the like exercises
indifferent, with zealous In the beginning of his Lectures upon the Hebrews.
Deering, persuading my self that the smelling of the Dog, the flying of the
Hawke, the Antipathie amongst the Creatures, how ever it was produced by the
fall of man, yet nevertheless that God in his mercy allows, and in his wise
providence disposes even of these contrarieties and Antipathies, as well as of
the Sympathies of the creatures, for the good and use of man, his Lieutenant
and Vicegerent over the works of his hands. And for Hunting, more specially it
is my opinion (if not judgment) that Genesis 27. ^.
Isaac would not have tolerated, much less commanded Esaus hunting, if it
had bin sinful. Secondly, it is lawful to kill the Creature in Christian
liberty, Dear or Hare, or the like, for meat or medicine: yea so to kill them
as they may be most useful and behoofefull for man, which is done better by
chase or course, then either by Gins or shooting (as experience shows:) and
(as some scrupulously object) this is not to tyrannize over the creature, in
putting it by continuance of chase or course, to a more lasting pain, but
rather to lessen (even as he that dies by degrees in a consumption, or that
bleeds to death, dies more easily then he that is hewn with a sword, as Samuel
did 1 Samuel 15.33.^^
Agag, al at once:) well the ground being the legitimation of this exercise, as
many arguments may convince, if it should be contradicted (the circumstances of
time, place, persons, duly and truly observed): now because these exercises
are grossly and sinfully abused by many loose and licentious persons, that
observe no circumstances (which usually make or mar the actions) they using
it most that stand least need; in respect of any calling or imploiment they
have, or undertake, to weary their spirits, or spend their body or brain,
having their hearts so taken up, and affections entangled with it, as they
spend and mispend their golden and precious time, two or three whole days in a
week, making recreation half, if not all their vocation, trade, and
occupation, turning all their meat into sauce, yea the Sabbath it self, which
should be dedicated to God and good duties, being profaned and polluted by the
discourses of their chases and courses with their hounds and horses, or
coursers; I say, because such idle libertines do abuse this honest and
harmless exercise, as it has ever been accounted, Romany solemn viris
opus, vtile famae, vitaeque and membris, etc. Horace. Lege Natalem Comitem de
venat. in fine Mythiolog^
may it not therefore be lawfully and conscionably used with moderation by a
Magistrate, or Minister, or Lawyer, or Student, or any other seriously
employed, which in any function heat their brains, wast their bodies, weaken
their strength, weary their spirits; that as a means (and blessing from God)
by it their decayed strength may be restored, their vital and animal spirits
quickened, refreshed, and revived; their health preserved, and they better
enabled (as a bow vnbended for shooting) to the discharging of these weighty
charges imposed upon them. Who will deny this, but either those that are
blockishly ignorant, ignorantly or blindly zealous, viciously profane,
splenitiuely malicious, or critically, if not hypocritically censorious? that
will be taxing and condemning, and shooting their bruta fulmina, foolish Bolts
as mad men their darts, against those whom they hate or emulate, whether
there be cause or no.

FINIS.

