DIVINE AND POLITIC OBSERVATIONS Newly translated out of the Dutch language,
wherein they were lately divulged. UPON Some Lines in the speech of the Arch.
B. of Canterbury, pronounced in the Star Chamber upon 14. June, 1637. VERY
Expedient for preventing all prejudice, which as well through ignorance, as
through malice and flattery, may be incident to the judgment which men make
thereby, either of his Graces power over the Church, and with the King, or of
the Equity, Justice, and Wisdom of his end in his said speech, and of the
reasons used by him for attaining to his said end.

Prove. 26.28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, and a
flattering mouth works ruin. Ovid. l. 2. Eleg. impia sub dulci melle uenena
latent. Printed in the year of our Lord MDC.XXXVIII.

The (...) Dedicatory Epistle.
IF it may please Your Gr: Your Apology and defense of Innovations in diverse
Church matters, made or approved by your Gr: lately published in our language,
has occasioned many both different and strange discourses and scannings of it,
amongst such of my Countrymen, as do not consider that the discourses and
vvritings of men so much busied as your Gr: in matters of state, are hardly to
be understood, or obvious to the Judgment of vulgar capacities. And because
there may be much mistaking, incident to the Judgment of those, that through
either presumption or rashness measure the expressions of so great a man as
your Gr: by the rule that the speeches or vvritings of men of common and
ordinary sense and condition ought to be squared by. I have therefore
adventured to lay at your feet, open to your Cracious view, the Judgment
which is made of your Graces said speech by men of bes^ understanding and
moderation, asvvell in hope to give your ^r: contentment hereby, as in
confidence to give satisfaction to such as by your ^r: greatness are either
scared to look upon, or affrighted to judge of the Mysteries both of Religion
and Politic government which your Gr: said gracious speech implies

Your Gr: true Friend, though unknown Theophilus.

The Translator to the Reader.
THere are many, who (considering that the defenc^s of the innovations
contained in the Arch. B. speech before ment^oned, are not able to sa^isfie any
in partial judgment, and that he obtained such cen^ure as ^ee sought against
those three worthy men whom he caused to suffer for writing and pointing at
his said innovations,) do conceive tha^ a publica^i^n of his speech could not
seem to his wi^dome either needful or pertinent, and that his Majesti^s
command for pri^ting thereof has been craved and obtained by his Gr: either
out of such a vain glory (which I cannot b^leeve incident to his Gr:) as
ostentative persons aff^ct in showing the ways how they compass t^eir ends,
or to make appear, the absolute, implicit and fearful power, which he has
with his Majesty. And albeit all minds aff^cted with these impr^ssions,
apprehend that his Majesty's said command for printing of it, implies his
approbation of all the purposes in the said speech, and thereupon scare to
publish their judgment of th'expressions in it: lest thereby they seem ^o
fail^ in the duty which obliges subjects to forbear scanning the reasons of
their Sovereigns commands, and to acknowledge his will to be sufficient for
the same: Nevertheless seeing great Princes can hardly see any thing, but in
such shape as it is represented to them by such of their Courtiers or
Counselors as they are pleased to trust (who often have private ends or
interest for disguysing truths unto them. I am verily persuaded that his
Majesty did in his wisdom command a publication of the said speech, thereby to
try and discover, of what value and weight the reasons mentioned in it for the
innovations made by his Gr: and other Prelates would be found in the balance
of such judgments as are not to be swayed by either fear or hope from
Prelates power. And seeing his Majesty could not possibly get such notice and
satisfaction herein as is expedient, ^f all men forbear either to speak (which
no man may in good manners do, but such as have some place ^ear^ him) or write
their conceptions of it: I have therefore adventured to translate in English
the foresaid Observations published in Dutch, soon after the said speech was
publishe^ in that language, both hoping that his Majesty shall see, and approve
diverse things therein, and confident that if ought be either deficient in them,
that is expedient for his Majesty's satisfaction, or disguysed, misconstrued or
wrested to a wrong sense, by the artifice and power of such as have much
benefit, and their chief subsistence by disguysing truths to his Majesty: The
same shall be made good by some that have more understanding than I, and a
better faculty than The Author of the Dutch now here translated, to write what
this Theme may bear, and is expedient for Gods glory, the good of the Church,
and the public weal of his Majesty's good Subjects and Dominions.

If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defrauding of
judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter, for he that is higher
then the highest regards, Eccles. 5.7.

The proud lies in wait^ and turns good into evil, and in things worthy
praise he will find some fault, Ecclesiasticus ^1.31.

DIVINE AND Political Observations upon a speech pronounced by the Arch. B. of
Canter: in the Star Chamber, upon the 14. of June 1437. newly translated out
of the Dutch Languague. Wherein They were lately divulged.
HIS Grace after some plau^ible Complements to his Majesty, Arch. B^
^iteth a place in Proverb. chapter 18.^6. Their foolish mouth^^ have already
called for their own stripes, and their lips (and pens) bee^e a suare for
their souls.
Whenever it shall please his Grace to consider that the words immediately
going before those which he cites Pro. 18. viz. Observe.
That it is not good to ac^ept the person of the wicked, to cause the righteous
to fall in judgment; His conscience may happily tell him that he wresteth the
sense of the words cited, applying them to the words or writts of the poor men
that he ^e has caused to suffer under pretext of a Crime (which he ^ath caused
through his power and greatness) to be imputed to acts ^f theirs both honest and
lawful.

But I humbly beseech Your Majesty to consider, that it is not We only, ^at is,
the Bishops, that are struck at, but through our sides, Arch. B.
^ur Majesty, Your Honor, Your Safety, Your Religion, (...) ^eached.

^^serv.
The mention making, yea the reproaching and condemning those actions of
Bishops, which argue a probability of their intention to labor innovation in
religion, is no striking of the King through the Bish^ps sides, As Christian
religion has been brought into the dominion of many Princes, so alterations
have been made in it, sometimes against their wills, and sometimes without
their knowledge, by artifice and cunning of Churchmen, who often (as one
writes of those that did abuse the great trust they had with the Emp.
Theodosius) aut stabili^e impia dogmata, aut art m^j^res distractiones, facere
conantur, ne ips^rum au^horitas labefactetur; As wise Princes, as ever have
bee^e, can be, or now are; Have been and may be abused by Churchmen in trust;
Constantine was by Churchmen moved both to embrace the A^rian haeresie, and to
establish it by his auth^rity and consent of a general counsel; Constantius
was induced by Churchmen not only to authorize it by decrees and acts of six
several general counsels, but to command also all Churchmen to approve the
said acts by subscription thereunto; Churchmen persuaded Arcadius to banish
Chrysostom, And The^dosius, to convocate a counsel, and besett it wi^h armed
men, for establishing the haeresy of Eu^^ches. As the mention made by Orthodox
Christians, and impugning of those haeresies and artifices, whereby those
Churchmen induced those Emperors to establish them, were such acts of the duty
of loyal subjects and good C^ristians as could not be lawfully termed a
striking of those Princes through their Prelates sides; So neither the
historical narration, nor the preaching or writing against those acts of
Bishops, which argue probability of their purpose, to use their power to reduce
our country to Popery, is noe striking at his Majesty through the Bish^ps
sides.

And seeing no Bishop has hitherto condemned, impugned or accused Sancta
Clara, and such as appl^ud his book, of the crime of str^k^ng at the K.
t^rough the Bishops sides, by alleging the writings of Bishop Andrews,
Bish^p Mon^ague, Hooker and others, and an act of commencement a^ Cambridge in
1634. and pretended interpretations by some learned English divines, of some
words in the articles of the con^^ssion of the Church of England, to prove that
the religion of the Church of England is all one with the Popish in the
doctrine of ^^eewill, natural justice, and perfecti^n, de merito congruo,
justification by ^orkes, works of superarogation, invocation of Saints,
adoration of images and other strange articles, mentioned in the book
inti^uled, Deus, natura, gratia, Page 7.27.33.55
68.133.158.181.211.212.245.260.275.276.277.307.316. and 318.

Yea seeing it ca^ be pr^ved by irr^proch^ble witness, that the Printer of
that book, affirmed before ^ufficient witn^sses, that he made two impressions
of it at London by his Graces allowance, and that the Prelates thought the
bo^ke was to the advantage of our Church, because a Popish author of it
allows us the name of a Church, and approves the doctrine of our English
divines, (out of whose writings (notwithstanding) he cites nothing but Popish
doctrine;) It is to be wondered, that a man of such temper and moderation as
his Grace, should affirm, that by the defendants mentioning the innovations
which he allows the making of; the K. is struck at, through the Bishops
sides: and his Majesty's honor, safety and religion impeached; for if Prelates
teaching by their writings, the Popish doctrine mentioned by Sancta Clara; be
no impeaching of his Majesty's honor, safe^y and religion, the defendants
mentioning of other acts of Prelates, tending that way, is no striking at the
K. through the Bishops sides, nor any impeaching of his Maj^sties safety,
honor and religion; What Prelates dare do, or have done, other subjects may
say they do or have done, without being obnoxious thereby to the imputation of
striking through their sides at the K. or of impeaching his honor, Majesty,
safety, and religion.

GOD be thanked 't is in all points otherwise with you: For God ^ath blessed
you with a Religio^^ heart, and no^ subject to change. Arch-B.
And He has filled You with Honor, in the Eyes of Your People: And by their
Love and dutifulnesse^ He has made you safe.

The love and dutifulnes whereby his Majesty is safe, is not that which is
professed unto him, Observe.
and expressed in the smooth and fair words of such, as by sundry artifices
have got much benefitt, or some ^att benefices from him, or of such sycophants
and parasites of Court as ^till hunt after them, but only that which is br^d
in religious hearts by the zeal of that religion, which as well the late
Parliament, as many of his Majesty's best subjects show a fear of innova^ion
of.

I hope they are not many that are unthankful to You, Arch. B.
or to God for You.

(...)bserv.
Of Bishops and such as have had great benefitt or benefices from his Majesty
there are many more unthankful to him, then amongst all those that had never
one groate of benefitt or place of power from him in the rule of either Church
or State; and all such as are either enemies, or ignorant, or unjust judges, to
the happiness which they enjoy under his Majesty's reign, are either fiery and
fierce Papists, or lukewarm Conformists, that measure their duties by their
benefits and private ends, and measure their gettings not by their deservings,
but by their desires, whereby Quicquid i^s infra votum venit, beneficij nomen
amittit.

(...)rch. B.
Yet I shall desire, even these to call themselves to an account, and to
remember, that Blasphemy against God, and slandering the footsteps of his
anointed are joined together, Psalm. 89.

(...)bserv.
Albeit there are diverse good places of Scripture as well against slandering the
Lords anointed, as there is against blaspheming of God, yet in the place cited
by his Gr: blaspheming against God and slandering the Lords anointed are not
joined together, (as his Gr: pretends) for the words, both according to the
original, and as they are translated in the translation commanded by K.
James, can be (and are) but these; wherewith thine enemies have reproached O
Lord, wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed; It is
true that in the book of Common prayer, the word (THEE) is foisted in,
whereunto if his Gr: do rather cleave then to the Bible, certainly he so
blotteth, blemisheth and slandereth the Bible, whiles he seeks a Text in
Scripture for giving luster and grace to the imputation he casts upon those
men whom be accuses of slandering; But suppose the Bible (even) in the
translation made by the command of K. James, were to be ruled by the book of
Common prayer, which the Prelates think they have power to strain and change
at their pleasure, in that case either the Prelates must be esteemed our
Princes and Sovereigns anointed by God, or a descovery of their maluersation,
and such discourse of their actions and innovations as they are offended at,
cannot be esteemed a slandering of Gods anointed, and so his Graces words in
this place do seem impertinent, either for that quality which they imply of
Prelates persons in our Country, or in the desire which his Grace expresses,
for having men to remember here that blasphemy against God, and slandering the
foo^esteps of his anointed are joined together.

But then, as I desire them to remember, ^o I do most humbly be^eech your
Majesty to account with Your self too: Arch. ^
And not to measure your peoples love by the unworthiness of those few. For a
loyal and obedient people You have, and such as will spare nor Livelihood, nor
Life to do You service: And are joyed at the heart to see the Moderation of
your Government and your constancy to maintain Religion, and your Piety in
Exampling it.

As those that fear prejudice to Religion by the P^elates craft and unlawful
ambition, Observe.
are his Majesty's most faithful subjects, and most to be trusted unto in a
defense of his sovereignty against the Pope and Spanyard, and all forreyne
enemies of his greatness, so are they for loyalty and love the chief men to
be trusted unto in the defense of his Majesty and of the public, against the
prejudices which Prelates ambition, avarice and artifice may breed to the quiet
of the Church or State by the dangerous Practices of Papists, Atheists, and
discontented persons within the Island.

And as I thus beseech You for your People in general, Arch. ^
so do I particularly for the three Professions which have a little suffered
in these three most Notorious Libellers Persons.

It cannot be made appear that any of the three Professions have suffered by
any act of the defendants, Observe.
done against the Kings honor, benefitt or power; but by practice of his Gr:
Counsel of the command which he advises his Majesty to lay upon the reverend
Judges, not only law and reason, but the Kings honor likewise would mightily
suffer: For, howsoever it is very consistent with justice and his Majesty's
goodness, to putt whatsoever he thinks fitting to the deliberation of ^he
reverend Judges, yet to prescribe them what to resolve, is not compatible with
his Majesty's wisdom and honor. And seeing it seems as well compatible
with Episcop^ll dignity, as it is with appearance of reason and moderation for
Bishops to convent in a legal way before the reverend Judges (in those Courts
where Bishops are no members) such as affirm that their keeping Courts and
issuing Proces^es in their own names, are acts against the Statutes and Laws
of our Country, and seeing a Sen^ence of the Judges in such course, after
hearing the reasons, allegations and answers of both parties, could not but
show more considerate, more just, and more legal then any decree or resolution
of Judges for obedience of his Majesty's peremptory command, without any
hearing or citation of parties, it is very strange to see that any greatness of
power in Church or State, should have made so wise a man as the Archbishop to
adventure to advise the K. to ordain his Judges, to publish a resolution and
declaration repugnant to Statutes and acts of Parliament, which many
understanding men affirm to be standing unrepealed, especially seeing in
consultations (even) about cas^s wherein there is nothing determined by
Parliament, it is a derogation both to the liberty competent to a Counsel, and
to the Majesty of a lawful Sovereign, to prescribe or command their
resolutions; This desire of his Grace may happen to breed a suspicion in most
part of his loyal subjects in Scotland, that it was his G^: Counsel that made
his Majesty in Parliament a^ Ede: in 1633. express what he would have them
resolve in some cases, put to voicing in his own hearing, and to
discountenance, and with his own Royal hand write in a note as disaff^ctioned
to his service, the names of all those that voted not as his Highness required,
whereby his Majesty's honor as well as the liberty, due to a Parliament, did
suffer in the opinion of his best subjects in that nation. Mean while seeing
upon the 12. of June, it was ordered by his Majesty's High Court of
Starr-Chamber, that the opinion of the Judges should be taken in the
particulars, which he desires his Majesty to cause them resolve and publish,
it seems strange that i^ this Epistle Dedicatorie of his Gr: most reverend
speech, pronounced two days thereafter, his Gr: wills his Majesty to cause
them resolve what is here craved, for as it seems not to be pertinent to
crave that his Majesty command the Judges to deliberate or consider the matter
after he has done it, so the matter being r^ferred to their consideration, it
seems not pertinent to desire his Majesty to command what he will have them
to resolve, but leave it to their science and conscience to declare, what they
judge to be lawful in the case, unless there be some prerogative not obuious
to sense, nor bounded with any reason either for his Gr: desire, or his
Majesty command of such resolution.

^r^h-B.
And for Physic, the Profession is honorable and safe: And I know the
Professors of it will ^emember that Corpus humanum, man's body, is that, about
which their Art is conve^sant, not Corpus Ecclesiasticum, or Politicum, the
Body of the Church, State, or Commonwealth. Bastwick has been hold that way.
But the Proverb in the Gospel, in the fourth of S. Luke. is all I Will say to
him, Medice, cura teip^^m, Physician heal thy self.

As man's body is that about which the art of Physic is conversant, observe.
so the G^spell and man's spiritual good by the preaching of it, not Corpus
Physicum aut Politicum, is that about which the art and calling of Churchmen
ought to be conversant. For albeit I can hardly agree to Erasmus, where he
writes, that as Crocodilus anceps animal nunc in terris, nunc in aquis degit,
in terra ponit ova, in aqua pr^edatur and insidiatur, ita qui and aulici sunt
and Ecclesiastici, utrobique pestilentes. Yet I dare not but reverence the
judgment of so learned a man where he writes: Quemadmodum mulus ex equo and
Asino conflatus, nec equus est nec asinus, ita quidam dum a^lici esse volunt
and Ecclesiastici, neutrum sunt.

And yet le^ me tell your Majesty, Arch-B.
I believe he has gained more by making the Church a Pati^^t, than by all the
Patients he ever had beside.

There is no Bishop that has not gained more by conversing in matters
Political and plying the ways of Courts, Observe.
and by working upon the trust they get sometimes with good Princes, sometime
with weak subjects, then any of them has ever got by laboring in the word
and doctrine, for which the Apostle says double honor is due to C^urchmen,
wh^me he designeth by the name of Presbyteri.

Sir, Arch-B.
both my self, and my Brethren have been very coursely used by the Tongues and
Pens of these men, yet shall I never giv^ your Majesty any sower Counsel; I
shall rather magnify your Clemency, that proceeds with these Offenders in a
Court of Mercy as well as Justice: Sinc^ ( as the Reverend Judges then
declared) you might have justly ^alled the Offenders into another Court, and
put them to it in a way tha^ might have exacted their Lives, for their stirring
(as much as in them lay) of mutiny and sedition.

Seeing the defendants are able to make it appear, Observe.
that in their writs and speeches excepted at, they had a lawful end,
compatible with the duty of loyal subjects, and with the nature of the said
writs and speeches, ^hey are very wrongfully reproached for such as bend their
whole power to stir mutiny and sedition: If they had had any such end, they
could have employed their tongues and pens in such way as BB. and Prelates used
for stirring of Sedition and Mutiny against such of his M^jesties Predecessors
Kings of England, as they made the people believe, to be either neglecters of
Parliaments, or maintainers of the maleversation of their Officers: where his
grace says, that the defendants might have been called in another Court and
their Lives exacted, he says very true, for as our Savior told his Disciples,
MAT. 10.17. that men would deliver them up to the Councils, and scourge them in
their Sinagogues, without saying that they should convince them of any Crime,
so, doubtless his Gr: could have caused the defendants to be called into another
Court, and scourged and put to death, though it is not in the power of any man
to make appear either by Law, or reason, that the deeds for which he has got
them to be censured, are in their own nature either Crimes or faults. Arch. B.


Yet this I shall be ^old to say, and your Majesty may consid^r of it in your
Wisdom; That one way of Government, is not always ^^tt or safe, when the
Humors of the people are in a continual Change. Observe.


The maxim is good, and the defendants wish that his Majesty would change the
course of his cl^mency against such as labor for any change, either in
Religion or State that may prejudice him, either in the opinion and affection
of his subjects, or in respect amongst forainers. Arch. B.


Especially, when such men as these shall work upon your people, and labor to
infuse into them such malignant Principles, to introduce ^ Parity in the Church
or Commonwealth. Et si non satis s^a sponte in sa^iant, instiga^e, And to spur
on such among them as are to sharply set already.

Observe.
They that would introduce a Parity in the commonweal ought to be esteemed as
well enemies to the ordinance of God for humane Government, as Churchmen that
pretend authority over their Brethren ju^e divino, are transgressors of our
Saviors rule in that point of Church Government.

Arch. B.
And by this means make and prepare all advantages for the Roma^e party to
scorn Us, and pervert them.

Obs^rv.
Advantages are prepared for the Roman party, to scorn some and pervert others
by those that abuse the name of the Kings authority, for satisfying their own
spleen, vanity, or other ends, in silencing, ba^ishing, emprisoning, fining,
pillaring, or putting to death such as refuse to do any worship, either to
Image, Altar, or Sacrament, to admit of the Mass in English, or to
acknowledge ^ necessity of a white Surplice, or any other Pagan, Popish, or
Jewish Ceremony for divine worship^ and such as write against the Popes
pretended power, and demonstrate him (as King James did to be the Antichrist,
and such as write against that doctrine which San^ta Clara cites and proves
o^t of the Authors before mentioned, to be coincident with the Romish, and
withal countenance such as by public writing maintain Popish Religion, or
preach new doctri^e in matter of faith.

DIVINE AND POLITICAL OBSERVATIONS Upon the Archbishops speech in the
Star Chamber.
MY LORDS,
I Shall not need to speak of the infamous course of Libelling in any kind:
Arch. B^ page 1.


Nor of the punishment of it, which in some cases was Capital by the Imperial
Laws. As appears: Cod. l. 9. T. 36.

Nor how patiently some great Men, very great Men indeed, have borne Animo
civili (that is Sueton: his word) In Iul. ^. 75. laceratam existimationem. The
tearing and rending of their credit and reputation, with a gentle, nay, a
generous mind.

THough his Gr: Observe.
pretends it needles to show how libels have been heretofore punished,
nevertheless, being to charge men with the crime of Libelling, it seems
expedient (at least not unfit) to tell what a libell is, which if it be here in
England (as hitherto it has been every where else acknowledged to be truly
de^ined) Compositio in scriptis facta ad infamiam alicujus ob aliquid quod
Author probare no^ v^lt (aut non potest) in publico loco, occulto nomine
affixa, and if withal it be true that si injuria personae inc^rtae illata
fuerit, nemo propterea potest se contumelia affectum jure dicere; s^aque
interesse ut honor and existimatio, vindicetur per actionem de injuria, the
defe^dants, could not lawfully have been either accused or condemned as
Libellers for any thing contained in books, printed in their names, and
without designing any man in them reproachfully. But suppose Bishops may in
England (by some prerogative whereof the mystery is not to be inquired into)
change the nature of any thing they please, and as well make every writ
containing truths avowed by their Authors to become libels, and untruths which
no man owneth, as the Roman Clergy pretend their power to transubstantiate
bread into the body of our Savior. Yet seeing ^ur Savior ordained his
Disciples and Apostles to bless such as should revile them, it is no ^ore
incompatible with the duty of a Churchman, than it is with wisdom in men that
have no Church office to neglect, contemn (at least not to be moved with) such
libels, and to consider that Convi^ia si iras^are agnita videntur, spreta
vilescunt. And suppose likewise that it were heresy, libelling or some other
crime, either to presume that Lord B. should take notice of our Saviors
precept aforesaid, or not to acknowledge their exemption from such obligement
of civil reason and prudence as does bind men of all other condition, and
suppose also that the books published in the defendants names and avowed by
them, were libels occulto nomine in publico loco affixi, yet by the law which
his Gr: cites Cod. lib. 9. Tit. 36. they could ^ot have been condemned for
the same, in respect it be^reth, that si a^sertionibus suis (speaking of a
libell, that the Author of, is discovered or legally convented) very fides
opitulata fuerit laudem maximam and praemium meretur. Like as there is a law in
that same book Tit. 7. bearing si quis modestiae nescius aut pudoris ignarus,
improbo petulantique maledicto nomina nostra ^rediderit lacessa^da, and
temulentia turbulentus obtrectator temporum nostrorum fuerit, ^um paenae
nolimus subjugari neque durum vel asperum volumus sustinere, quoniam si ex
leuitate processerit contem^end^m est, si ex insania, mis^ratione dignis^mum,
si ab injuria, r^mittendum. And l. famos^. ff. 3. ad leg. ^ul. Majest. Ne^
lubricum linguae ad poenam facile trahendum est. And suppose also that they who
for reproaching the Prelates (for making the innovations for which his Gr: in
this speech pretends some reasons and warrants) an intention to introduce
popery, were to be esteemed libellers by the foresaid law and ordinance, and
that it were inconsistent with Episcopal dignity to forbear to take notice of
such libellers, and to forgive them; yet all they could in reason have craved
for punishment of them, was, that such punishment should be inflicted on them
as the law makes Papists (and such as usher in Popery) obnoxious unto; for si
deprehendetur Author famosi libelli eatantum poena plectendus est ad quam
convitium passus merito damnaretur si verum crimen e^ libello imponeretur; And
seeing in England there is no law that punishes Papists criminally or makes
their Religion (much less the ushering of it in) a crime, so as albeit it were
true, that the Prelates did not only usher in, but were themselves content to
profess Popery with as much passion as they have commanded the observation of
Popish Ceremonies, and manner of Church Government, they could not for that by
any English law be^ punished with either Pillory or prison, it follows
consequently that the defendants for charging the said Prelates with the
ushering in of Popery (though falsely) could not (lawfully) for that be
punished either with Pillory or prison.

But suppose finally that there were either reason, or some law in England,
(without making Popery a crime, or the ushering in of it any fault) to make the
speaking or writing of Prelates, apparent intention to introduce it, to be
libelling and subject to such punishment as the Statutes ordain for libelling
against K. or Qu. The defendants could have only been punished with an
hundred pound fine, and a months imprisonment, by the Statute of Qu. Mary: or
at the most, with 200. pound fine, and 3. months imprisonment by a Statute of
Qu. Eliz. without any corporal punishment, unles^e they refused to pay the
fine.

But of all Libels, they are most Odious which pretend Religion: Arch. B^
as if that of all things did desire to be defended by a Mouth that is like an
open Sepulch^r, or by a Pen that is made of a sick and a loathsome Quill.

^^s^rv.
The pretending Religion for an unjust accusation or wrongful imputation of a
libell to any man, is no less odious th^n the pretending of it for a true
libell; for Religion neither can be defended nor ought to be invaded by a mouth
that is an open sepulcher, or by a pen made of a sick and loathsome quill.

A^ch. B. ibid.
There were times when Persecutions were great in the Church, even to exceed
Ba^barity it self: did any Martyr or Confessor, in those times, Libell the
Governou^s? Surely no; not one of them to my best remembrance:

Observe.
Such as are persecuted for refusing idolatrous ceremonies, or not acknowledging
any manner of Divine worship necessary, which has no warrant in the precepts
of our Savior or his Apostles, do no more libell against their Governors,
then the Martyrs did of old, bu^ complain of persecution and suffering by the
cunning and power of evil Prelates, as many good Christians and Martyrs did in
former times.

Arch. B. page 3.
My Lords, it is not every man's spirit to hold up against the Venom which
Libellers spit.

O^ser^.
It is but for such as acknowledge there was wisdom and consideratenes in the
rule pr^scribed by the Emp. Tit. 7. lib. 9. cod. before ci^ed; or for such as
believe the doctrine of Christian patience founded upon our Saviors precept
before mentioned, and other pas^ages of his Evang^ and Apostles, or for such as
wanting due knowledge of Christian humility have minds fraughted with such
proportion of moral virtue as enableth them to master their passions, where
^dium or amor, ira or libido do ^^irre and trouble their calm.

In the mean time I shall remember what an Ancient under the name of S.
H^^rom^ tells me, Arch. B ibid.
Ad Ocean. de Ferend. Opprob. Indignum est and preposterum, it is unworthy in it
self, and preposterous in demeanor for a man to be ashamed for doing good,
because other men glory in speaking ill.

Observe.
It is as preposterous a demeanor not to be ashamed in doing evil, because
other men have occasion to glory both in doing and speaking well.

It is not my purpose to examine your Gr: intentions, nor to contradict any of
your words, but where they are used for wresting the defe^dants writings to
what they meant not, or for palliating with fair pretexts the innovations
charged upon Prelates.

Arch^ B. ^ag. 4.
For my care of this Church, the reducing it into Order, the upholdding of the
Eternal worship of God in it, and the settling of it to the Rules of its first
Reformation, are the causes (and the sole causes, what ever are pretended) of
all this malicious sto^me, which has lowred so black upon Me, and some of my
Brethren.

If by the storm (which his Gr: Obser^.
says has lowred so black upon him and some of his brethren) he means the
discourse and expressions made by many honest men of innovations made by them
(either apologized for, or not touched upon in this his speech) neither the
reasons which his Gr: here mentions of the said storm, are the true causes
thereof, as he pretends, nor could they which he says have stirred it, be
lawfully convented as libellers against the King, nor could his Gr: or any
Prelate that pretends himself prejudiced thereby, be judge thereto, for
those that speak o^ the said innovations do reverence all that have care of
this Church, but are able to make it appear that his Gr: is so far from
upholding the external worship of God ^n it, as he is like to pollute it with
commanding a nece^^ity of some ^opish ceremonies which were not purged out but
winked at, in the first reformation, and with much erroneous doctrine in points
of free will. Gods election, predestination, which were expugned at the first
re^ormation^ like as what is spoken or written against a subject cannot ^e a
ground for furnishing actionem de injuria aut contumelia in regem, and no
subject ought to be judge in a case where he is a plaintiff.

And in the m^ane tim^, they which are the only, Arch-B. page 5.
or the chief ^nnovators of the Christian wo^ld, having nothing to say, accuse
us of ^nnovations; They th^mselves and their Compli^es in the mean time being
the greatest Innovators that the Christian world has almost ever known. J deny
not but others have spread more dangerous Errors ^n the Church of Christ^ but
no men in any age of it, have been more guilty of Jnnovation than they while
themselves Cry^out against it: Quis tulerit Gracchos.

What the Parliament has either found, Observe.
or just reason to suspect or fear^, cannot be unlawful in a private subject
to speak, write, suspect or fear; the ho^ourable Court of Parliament that
representative body of the Kingdom, his M^jesties m^st faithful and least
c^^ruptible counsel of ^^a^e did find your Gr: and others of your Coat
innovaters of Religion^

Neither can you make it appear that they are innovaters. Your Gr: cannot make
good your charge, and the defendants are able to make it appear both that
there have been, and that there are now known, some greater innovators then
they, or any of their abettors.

The repetition of this reproach of innovation is so far from being a good
probation of the truth of it, as it argues unability in his Gr: to make it
good and an aparant presumtion of his Gr: immoderate hatred of such as are
nicknamed Puritants, and of his confidence that all he speaks (how false and
impertinent soever) shall get respect enough (by reason of his eminency) from
the reader or hearer. As those that by the Powder^ plot an. 1605. intended to
have blown up the whole body of the Parliament, had a purpose (as some of them
did ingeniously confess) if their design had succeeded, to charge the said
Puritans with the reproach of being Authors and actors of i^: So all those that
greeve at the honor and power of the King: and seek the overthrow of Religion
and liberty of Parliament, study to make them hateful by all sorts of
calumnies, whereas the truth is, that those that dissuade his Majesty from
convening of Parliaments, and those that under color of his Authority command
in the point of Gods worship a necessity of doing diverse things that ^he
refusers thereof esteem unlawful, and ^hem^elves affirm indifferent, are
underminers of his greatness, and such incendiaries both in the stat^ and
Church, as do what in them is to stir mutiny and sedition.

Arch. B.
For'tis most appar^nt to any man that will not wink, that the Intenti^n of
these m^n, and their Abettors, was and is to raise a Sedition, being as great
Incendiaries in the State (where they get power) as they have ever been in the
Church; Novatian himself hardly greater.

Observe.
Though his Gr: were able to suborne and produce witnesses to prove this case,
their testimony or probation were not to be respected because testis deponens
de intention cordis alterius, nullam fidem meretur quia humani cordis intentio
soli Deo nota est. Invoc. super de renunc. Bald. in margarita.

They that cannot force their consciences to the acknowledging a necessity of
using ceremonies in Gods worship, which they are able to demonstrate to be both
unlawful and inconvenient, cannot in reason ^ee esteemed so great incendiaries
either in Church or State, as they that both acknowledge an indifferency in the
^eremonies that they press a necessity of, and pretend a right jure Divino, to
such power, and jurisdiction as they obtain from the indulgence, benevolence,
and free grant of their Sovereign; like as those that are, or have been
always the chief causes of troubles, schisms, or dissentio^s in the Church,
are and have been always apt to breed troubles in State government, and may
be truly called incendiaries both in Church and State, and Cassand^r even a
popish writer says as truly as wisely, that Dissidiorum in Ecclesiis causae
illis assignandae s^nt, qui quodam fastu Ecclesiasticae potestatis inflati
recte and probe admonentes superbe contemplerunt and repulerunt.

Our maine Crime is (would they all speak, Arch. ^
as some of them do) that we are Bishops; were we not so, some of us might
be as passable as other men. And a great trouble'tis to them, that we
maintain that our calling of Bishops is Iure Divino, by D^vi^e Right: Of this
I have said enough, and in this place, in Leightons Case, nor will I repeat.
Only this I will say and abide by it, that the Calling of Bishops is Iure
D^vino, by Divine Right, though not all Adjuncts to their calling. And this J
say in as direct opposition to the Church of Rome, as to the Puritan humor.

When I fund his Gr: affi^me that some speak plainly out, Observe.
that the ^eing BB. is the Prelates maine crime and for instance mark in his
margin. Burt. Apo. p. 110. J looked the book and funde that ^ll that Burton
says in that place (after he has instanced a number of evils which BB. have
done both in the Church and the Kingdom) is that if there were such a fashion
and danger in propounding new laws in E^gland as was amongst the Locrians, h^e
should adventure this proposition, that it would please the great Senate of the
land to take into their consideration, whether upon such woeful experience, it
were not both more honorable to the King, and more safe for the Kingdom, and
more conducing to Gods glory, and more consisting with Christian liberty, and
more to the advancement of Christ's Ki^gly office, which by usurping Prelates is
trodden down, that the Lordly Prelacy were turned into such a godly government,
as might suit better with Gods word and Christ's sweet yoke. He neither says
plainly that the being BB. is a crime, nor can his words afford a ground for
any such conclusion. He^ cites Authors there who tell that Bruno Segninas
re^used a Bishoppricke, and that P^pe Marcellus says that he^ could not see
how they that possessed that high place could be saved, and that Claudius
Exp^nsius ( in Tom. digr^s^. lib. 3. cap. 4.) gives many examples of pious and
learned men who refused Bishoppricks, bu^ does neither say nor cites any man
saying that it is a crime to exerci^^ the ^ffice of a Bishop, and his writing,
that if there were such a custom in England, as the Locrians had in
propounding laws, he would adventure the proposition before menti^ned to the
consideration of ^ Parliament, is not a speaking out that it is a maine crime
to be a Bishop.

Arch. B. biid.
And a great trouble'tis to them, that we maintain that our callin^ of Bishops
is Iure Divino, by Divine right: of this J have said enoug^ and in this place
in Leightons Case, nor will I repeare. Only this I will say, and abide by it,
that the calling of Bishops is Iure, D^vino, by Divi^^ right.

All kinds of degrees of Officers in the Church that can pretend ei^ther
ordinary or extraordinary calling jure Divino from G^d an^ Christ immediately,
^bserv.
Ephesians. 4. 11. are designed by the names of Pro^phets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastors and teachers; to no man in an^ of these degrees was there given any
jurisdiction above another in t^^ same degree; yea all authority given unto
them, and whereof the^ can pretend a right jure Divino (as appears, Mat. 18,
19, 20.) is ^ne^ly a power to preach the Gospel to all nations teaching them
to ob^serve all things whatsoever our Savior has commanded, and ( John
20.23.) is only a power to ^inde and loose sins. His Gr: will not ((...)
hope) say (at least, cannot make good) that L. B. are Apo^tles, or Pro^phets,
or that they can pretend any calling jure Divino, but what i^ comprehended
under the names of either Pastors or Teachers, or t^a^ they have any calling
jure Divino, but what is like expre^sed by the name Episcopi, ( Ph^l^ 1. Act.
10. and Tit. 1.) and ^y the word Presbyteri. 1. Tim. 5.17. Tit. 1. v. 5.7.

And seeing our Savior Mat^h. 20.25, 26. Ma^k. 10.42, 43^ Luke 22.25, 26.
pr^hibiteth to such all dominion ove^ their B^^thren, ^e^ing likewise 1 Pet. 5.
the Apostle ordains Presbiters to ^eed their several flocks, non ut
d^minantes ^le^is, and 1 Timothy 5. Pa^l ^^ac^e^h that m^^t h^nour is due ijs
P^e^bit^ris qui laborant in ve^b^ and doctrina, the L: Bishops as well English
as Romish, in so far as they assume or claim all power of ordination and
excommunication, and whose chief labors is not in the word and doctrine,
cannot lawfully pretend that authority in their calling jure divino, for the
words which they allege, super hanc petram, etc. Mat. 16. and pasce oues meas,
v. 21. Et ne cui manus imponito cito. 1 Timothy 5. and, constituas oppidatim
presbyteris. Tit. 1.5. Are no better warrant to prove the L. Bishops
Monarchical ^uthority in government of the Church, or that Timothy or Titus
alone ^ad power the one at Eph^sus and the other in Crete, to ordain Pa^ors,
then the words 1 Timothy 4.7. which ordain Timothy not to take ^eede to fables
and to have faith and a good conscience, and the words which ordain Titus to
teach sound doctrine, can be warrants to ^rove, that in Ephesus and Creete
none but Timothy and Titus were ob^^ged to neglect fables, to keep a good
conscience, and to teach sound ^octrine, or that the words Quicquid ligaveritis
Mat. 18. and quorum miseritis peccata remittentur ijs, Io^: 20. and Attendite
ad vos ipsos and totum ^egem in quo vos spiritus ille sanctus constiu^t
Episcopos, Act. 20.28. were ^^t spoken both to all Christ's Apostles and to all
Pastors in the Church.

And I say farther, that from the Apostles times, in all ages, Arch-B. page 6.
in all ^^aces, the Church of Christ was governed by Bishops: And Lay Elders
^^ver heard of, till Calvin's newfangled device at Geneva.

That there were Lord Bishops dominering over the Church in ^^e Apostles time,
Observe.
his Gr: forbeareth to allege, and cannot but ac^^owledge that in the Church
assembly mentioned, Act. 15.22. all de^^ees were made of the Apostles, Elders,
and whole Church without (...) much as naming L: Bishop, which could not have
been omitted if ^hrists Church had been then governed by them, and Mat.
18.17. ^ur Savior teaching how such as offend should be dealt with, ordai^eth
that the Church should be told of those that do not mend upon ^rivate
admonition, it is evident that in those days the Church of Christ was governed
(as Ierom some few ages after writes) communi presbiterorum consilio; but
whatsoever place Bishops had in Church-goverme^t ^n the Apostles days, and
long after, it appears they were not such as English and Romish now are.
Basil. Mag. Moral. 70. cap. 28. says: Non ^^portet eum cui concreditum est
praedicare Euangelium, plus possidere quam ea ^uae ad necessarium ipsius usum
sufficiant. Negociatorum clericum, and ex inopi diuitem and ex ignobili
gloriosum quasi quandam pestem fuge, says Jerome ^n his Epist. to Nepot. And a
Canon of the Couns^ll of Carthage (where Augustine was present) bears,
Episcopus hespitiolum habeat aut domum Ecclesia pr^pinquam and tenui
supellectili instructam, mensam and victum pauperem^ and d^gnitatis suae
autoritatem fide and vi^ae meritis qu^^ra^; and Chrysostom upon Philip. 2.
s^rm. 9. (writing of the lawful maintenance of Pastors) says, Dic quaeso,
sericis vest^^ur Pasto^, mul itudinem seq^entium and comi^^^tium habens? Circ^
forum ^rrog^^ter incedu? Equ^ v^h^^u? d^mos^ AE^^ficat habens ubi manea^? S^
ista facit, eum quoque sacerdotio indig^um dico, quamodo enim admon^bit ne
superfluis istis ^acent, q^^ seipsum ^^monere nequ^? All good subjects
acknowledge that his Majesty may give ^o his ^ubjects of any condition, great
revenues, raise ignoble and base persons to a rank more eminent then the
nobility^ trust them with the managing of the Patrimony of the Crown, rul^ of
the people, and chief places in the Government, and acknowledg^ likewise that
persons benefited by his Majesty with these advantage^ may (without reproach of
presumption or of ostentation) wal^ through the streets on horseback, or in
their C^aches, accompanied with many followers and waiting men; but Churchmens
accepting or attaining these advantages, does not give them prerog^ or power
jure Divino, either ^o domineere over such as have a^ office in the Church
designed by the name of Pastor (as is said) or to call the discipline and
government used in the Apostles time communi Presbiterorum consilu (and
continued after them, until ambition, avarice, craft and corruption of
Churchmen wrought out of the weakness and ignorance of some Princes and
people, those grounds which have bred Bishops) Calvin's newfangled device at
Geneva, for in the Church of the Apostl^s time, either there were Elders which
did not preach, and were not obliged to labor in the word and doctrine, or the
distinction of E^ders m^ntioned 1 Timothy 5.17. ^s imper^inent. But if his Majesty
and his high C^urt of Parliament should be pleased to reduce Episcopacy, in the
point of revenues, mansions, followers, rank and power in the temporal
government to the rule of the foresaid counsel of Carthage, and condition
which Jerome and Chrysostom in the places quoted (and others also) show that
they ought to conform themselves unto, it is possible (and probable too) that
they would forbear either to pretend authority above their brethren jure
Divino, or to command in divine worship the ne^essary doing of that which
themselves esteem indifferent; and the refusers thereof think unlawful,
especially seeing it appears Romans 14. that it was not of old unlawful for
Christians to doubt of the lawfulnes of the practice of some things which are
in their own nature indifferent, nor to forbear the practice of that, which
they doubted the lawfulness of. With all it is to be wondered that his Gr: (who
both has, read and cannot but know that others have read Ecclesiastical
writers also) is not ashamed to say that Bishops from the Apostles times have
ever governed the Church of Christ in all places and in all ages, for either
Bishops power and rule has had a beginning in Churches which were planted in
diverse places and many years after the Apostles time, or else S. Jerome
writes both falsely and foolishly, where he says, that when factions began in
the Church, ^o prevent schism it was decreed through the whole world, that one
elected from the Presbyteries in several places and countries, should be set
above the rest, to whom the care of the Church should appertain: but as
Musculus ( loc. com. cap. de verb. minist. page 421.) writes, if Jerome and
those of his time had seen as much as they that came after, they would have
concluded that Episcopacy was never brought in by Gods spirit (as was pretended
to take away schisms) ^ut by Satan to wast and destroy the former ministry
that fed the flock, and Daneus, cont. 5. lib. 1. cap. 18. (after he has
refuted B^llarm: ground, whereupon all Episcopal prehemi^ency is founded)
says, but afterward by ambition of them that were set over the rest, the
Apo^tolicall form of Discipline was taken away, BB. began to separate from
preaching Elders, all honor was given to them that usurped that name against
the Word, and none almost left for the Elders; So began the Church to be trodden
under foot, the Apostolical Bish: to perish, and humane Bishops to fl^rish,
which afterward grew to be Satanicall and Antichristian, this kind of
Episcopacy is not jure divino, and takes much from the Kings right and power
over them, as it is exercised in the Romish and English way now a days.

For though our Office be from God and Christ immedia^ely, Arch. B^ page 7.
yet may we not exercise that power, either of Order or Jurisdiction, but as
God has appointed us, that is, not in his Majesty's, or any Christian King^
Kingdoms, but by and under the power of the King given us so to do.

If greatness of power and trust with great Princes, Obser^^
were not apt to misleade th reason and judgment of any man that is over
tickled or swollen therewith, none could believe that a Churchman of his Graces
sufficiency could have a face to affirm, or adventure to set under his hand,
both that Bishops have their office Iure Divino, and that they may not exercise
it in any Christian Kings Dominions, without power from the King, for doing of
it: for it cannot be shown either by Scripture, or by the writings of the
Fathers, or in the acts of Ec^lesiacall Counsels, that Officers appointed by
God, for teaching his Church the tr^e way of his worship, are forbidden to
exercise their office without a power from C^ristian Kings to do it, and it is
eviden^ that the Apostles and Pastors of the Church long after them, did
exercise their calling under Pagan Emperors, without seeking their warrant,
yea after their prohibition thereof; and it is not likely that they which have
office in the Church Iure Divino (which may be exercise^ in the Dominions of
Pagan Princes, notwithstanding their command to the conrrary) may not under
Christian Princes lawfully do wha^ was not unlawful to be done by virtue of
such office under Heathen Emperors, Heretics, and persecutors of the Church.

Arch. B. page 7.
And were this a good Argument against us, as Bishops, it must needs be good
against Priests and Ministers too; for themselves grant that their calling is
Iure Divino, by Divine Right; and yet I hope they will not say, that to be
Priests and Ministers is against the King, or any His Royal Prerogatives.

Observe.
The argument is good against such Ministers as intend any further power jure
divino then preaching of the Gospel, administration of the Sacraments,
reprehension, correction, excommunication, and relaxation from the sentence
thereof such as show true repentance; And Ministers that pretend a righr Iure
Divino to any rent, power, or jurisdiction that depends upon the Kings gift,
are as well against the King and the Royal Prerog: as those that appropriate
to a few under pretext of juris divini, Ecclesiastici, or regi; all that power
(or any part of it) which is competent to all Pastors, are against God, and the
respect due to the simplicity and sincerity of our Saviors rules and precepts
for government of his Kingdom which he professed, was not of this world.

Arch-B. page 8.
Now then, suppose we had no other string to hold by (I say suppose this, but I
grant it not) yet no man can Libell against our calling (as these men do) be
it in Pulpi^, print, or otherwise, but he Libels against the King and State,
by whose Laws we are established.

When Chur^hmen pretend, Observe.
that the power granted them authori^ate humana, belongs to them jure divino,
they may lawfully be opposed by all that are in duty bound to defend the right
of Sovereign ^ower, and authority of the temporal Prince or State wherein
they ^ive, and opposition of reason to those that dare pretend such divine
^ower, is no libelling against King or State; Fendatarius that disday^eth his
superior by the civil Law forfeiteth jus ^eudi, and Bishops ^^at presume to
ascribe to their title jure divino, that right which they ^ave by the Kings
grant, or Parliamentary confirmation, deserve to ^e deprived of whatsoever
they have gotten from King or Parlia^ent, it being as unlawful to pretend a
claim Iure divino to a title ^^r right depending upon the King and Parliament,
as it is for Bishops ^^ devise a new guise for Gods worshipp, and to impose
others a ne^essity of it.

W^y did they not modestly Petition His Majesty about it, Arch. B. page 9.
that his P^incely wisdom he might set all things right, in a Just and
^^derly m^nner? But this was neither their intention nor way.

Though State diseases which none but his Majesty with his Par^^ament can c^re,
may be lawfully laid open in word or w^itt, not ^^ely when the discovery
thereof imports the duty of any man in ^^s calling, but also when it is
necessary or expedient for vindicating (...) in^ocency of honest men from
imputation and reproaches cast upon them by men of so great power in Church or
State (through ^ trust from their Sovereign) as none but a Parliament may
without ^anger represent to the Sovereign their malversation, nevertheless ^o
p^ivate subject can in good manners petition his Majesty, for re^ormation of
such a^uses, or prevention of such dangers as do highly concern the State and
Religion, that they cannot in probability be ^olpen or av^ided without the
advice of his Majesty's Estates in his ^igh Court of Parliament. Again. His
G^: does press ^ere to ^ubb a most false and pernicious reproach upon honest
men, who are ^ble in a Parliament to make appear^ both their own loyalty to
his Majesty, the traitrous hearts of those that through impotencie to mo^erate
their Prosperous fortune, charge them with mutiny, and with what else they
please.

Arch. B. ^ag. 10.
And by most false and unjust Calumnies, to defame both our Cal^lings and
Persons.

Observe.
Eum qui nocentem infamavit non est aeqnum ob eam rem condemn^^ praesertim
quando reipub^ interest vitium illud quod (etiam convitiando) ob^jectum fu^rit
manifestum fieri. Dig. lib. 47. Tit. 10. l. 18.

Arch. B. page 11.
And these men, knowing the Disposi^ion of the people, have labo^red nothing
more, than to misinforme their knowledge, and misguid^ their Zeal, and so to
fire that into a sedition, in hope that they, who^ they causlesly hate, might
miscar^y in it.

Observe.
It is not within the reach of understanding of men, that move in ^ low sphere,
to conceive how it can be con^istent as well with his Gr^ wisdom as it is
with his greatness to affirm both here, that there was danger of sedition from
the defendants and their abettors, and i^ his Epist. Dedicat. of this speech,
that there are few or none of their humor, for from few there could be no
danger of sedition or mutiny^ Withal causeless hatreds easily evanish, and
are not likely to dispose^ any man to attempt the fyring of a sedition
purposely, that they whom they causelessly hate may perish in it; Men do not
adventure an assured danger to their credits, fortunes and lives, without some
probability of some either honor or profi^t by the success of their attempt;
But if the defendants and their abettors were so foolish t^aitors as without
any such hope, for a causeless hatred to attemp^ ^^^ring of the peoples zeal
into a s^dition, yet is there no appearance o^ possibility in their power to
kindle any such fire, his Gr: knows that they are not able to misguide the
zeal of Papists to such an end, and that there is no zeal in the lukewarm
Conformists, nor in the professed Atheists that can be fired, but by such
materials (good coy^e hope of benefit or preferment) from the Pope or Spain,
as neithe^ the defendans nor their abettors could afford, and among those th^^
have zeal in the substance and scare at a necessity of using Ceremonies,
i^vented by man, for divine worship, there are few (as his Grace says) of the
defendants humor, and from those few (as said is) there could be no danger of
sedition or mutiny.

Arch-B. ibid.
So says Mr Burton expressly to change the Orthodox Religion established in
England and to bring in I know not what Romish S^perstition in the room of it.

Observe.
If Mr. Burtons book was writ^en since 1628. it is likely that his ^xpressions
in it, of danger of change of the Orthodoxe Religion, (...) founded upon such
reasons as in that and the year following bred (...) the High Court of
Parliament, a fe^re of such a change, and possi^^y his fear was, and is so
much the greater, because the last Parlia^ent was brok^n up when they were
advising the remedy which they ^^ended to have acquainted his Majesty with,
for preventing the ^^nger of the inconveniences of such change, and attempting
of it, if ^^s book ha^h been written before these Parliaments, he is
blame^orthy, if he has not expressed in it such reason, for showing the
ap^earance of the said danger, as the High Court of Parliament when ^^s
Majesty conveneth it, shall acknowledge to be sufficient for the ^^me.

For there is not a more cunning trick in the world, Arch. B. page 12,
to withdraw (...) peoples hearts from their Sovereign, than to persuade them
that (...) is changing true Religion, and about to bring in gross superstition
^^o^ them.

It is neither to be denied what is here affirmed in the general, Observe.
nor ^^n it be made good, that the defe^dants were guilty of the crime ^^re
expr^ssed, yet may it be affirmed also, that there is not a more ^^nning trick
in the world to withdraw a Soveraings heart from his ^^ople, then to persuade
him that al notice offered ^o be given him (ei^^er by any private subject or by
the Parliament it self) of the maluersa^^on of Prelates or other Officers in
Church or State, are acts which ^^^ike (and wound) his Majesty through their
sides (as his Graces ^^^oresaid Epist: to the King affirms) and that his
Majesty's giving ^^^re or listening thereto, or reference thereof to the trial
of a Parlia^ent, is a prostitution of his authority, whereas in truth the
pun^sh^ent of those disloyal acts of some Prelates and Officers that can be
^^scovered, and the Kings show of trusting the wisdom and loyalty (...) his
Parliament as it deserves, are most assured ways for holding ^^st the hearts
of his subjects, and preserving his autho^ity from all such dangers as
Sovereign power has often been obnoxious unto (...) the cunning flatteries
and malversaton of Prelates and other per^^ns trusted by their Princes, when it
imports their private ends to ^ith draw the Sovereigns heart from his
subjects; and when it falls ^^t that the pretense of S^veraigne authority is
v^ed (as it was i^ Qu: ^^^aries days) for changing true Religion, they that
persuade the Prince such a course, and not they that affirm the truth, in such
^ case are to be charged with the crime and reproach of using a cunning trick
to withdraw the peoples hearts from their Sovereign; None of the defendants nor
of their abettors do doubt of his Majesty's sincerity and constancy in
religion; Yet without prejudice of their dutiful persuasion thereof, they may
fear that Prelates work upon him i^ that point, as Churchmen have heretofore
done upon Constant: and diverse his successors, and such fear is very
consistent with subjects love to his Majesty.

Arch. B. Page 1 3.
And for the Prelates; I assure my self they cannot be so bale, as to live
Prelates in the Church of England, and labou^ to bring in the Superstitions of
the Church of Rome, upon themselves and it.

Observe.
The Prelat^s in our Church have no grounds, whereupon either they may build
their Lo^dly authority, or to obtrude the Ceremonies which they enforce upon
many honest men's consciences, but such as the Roman Church u^eth for Prelates
greatness and doctrine of their Ceremoni^s; And howsoever p^ssibly ^is Grace is
well enough minded in having his hand sooner then any man against such as
labou^ to bring in more Popery then himself has yet done, yet the know^ledge
which men have of some passages in the last Parliament, an^ of some actions of
his Gr: both before and since the breaking of it up^ will scare most men from
discovering to him what they knew (Perhaps) touching Prelates laboring in that
kind.

Arch. B. Page 1 4.
I have ever been far from attempting any thing that may truly be said to
tend that way in the least degree.

Observe.
Your Gr: doctrine expressed in the High Commission Court, th^^ the P^pish
religion does not differ from ours in fundamentalibus, your direction for
bowing at the Altar, and praying toward the East, your allegation and making
use of some Popish Canons, for vindicating your self from imputation of
innovation, in commanding these and other Ceremonies Popish, rev^ved by you in
our Church, your opinion of Chr^sts corporal^ presence ^n the Sacram^nt
(manifested Page 47. of this your speech) your Gr causing and pressing a
necessity of Cerem^nies, which your self acknowledge to be indifferent, the
punishment which you cause to be i^flicted upon the refusers of them (whereof
^^me in their conscience think them ^nlawfull, and all ^en (of moderation)
inexpedient) and upon diverse Orthodoxe men, for ^riting against them, your
causing Censure of D^ct^r Bastwicke, and ^^ndemning his books written against
the Popes authority, your ^^nnivence (some say ^avour and countenance) showed
to the writings (...) Sancta Clara (reprinted in London by your Graces
direct^on or ^^^mission at least) Chonaeus, Shelford, Cosens, Re^ve,
Pocklington and ^^^ers containing doctrine of Popery and Atheism, seem to
argue a ^^^position in your Gr te^ding to Popery; assuredly these acts
^^^ourage Papists, make Atheists merry, and greeve all religious ^^ts, and men
of good judgment think that they so tend to the ^^^ering in of Popery, as
when you have well considered the matter, (...) Gr: will be loath to give your
oath that you have been far from ^^^^mpting any thing which may be said to
tend to the altering of ^^^^gion in the least degree, your Gr: is known to be
an understan^^^g Courtier, and to have the dexterity to offer as well your oath
^our service to such as you know either dare not, or by their condi^^^^ may
not, or esteem it against good manners and civility to put (...) Lordship to
it in a case, that no man which knows your Lord^^^^s actions can possibly
imagine you can swear safely.

^ee live under a Gracious and a Religious King. Arch. B. page 15.


(...) be not p^rverted by some p^rnicious Churchmen, as Constan^^^^^, and
others. Observe.


^ shall humbly desire your Lordships to give me leave to recite ^^fly all the
Innovations charged upon us be they of less or greater ^^^ent, Arch-B. page
16.
and as briefly to answer them.

among other innovations pretended, made by Prelates, Observe.
Mr. Bur^^^ mentions that they procured from K. James both a command ^^e
Universities that young Students should not read Calvin or (...), or any of
the modern learned Writers of the reformed Church ^^thout any prohibition of
reading Popish Writers) and an order ^^^^biting young Ministers, to preach the
Doctrine of election and repro^ati^, whils old Doctors, Deans, and Bish did
both preach and print (books (...) ^^lse and erroneous Popish and Arminian
Doctrine in those points.

^econdly, that his Gr: affirmed at the Censure of Doctor Bastwick, (...) we
and the Church of Rome differ not in fundamentalibus, and (...) ^llowance of
the books written by Chonaeus and Sancta Clara to (...) purpose, with the
books of false Doctrine, published by Monta^^ Shelford, Ailword, Iacks^n,
C^s^ns.

Thirdly, his not censuring those that maintain, that the Pope is neither
Antichrist (as K. James in his printed works has plainly declared) nor that
Babilonicall Beast of Rome, m^ntioned in 6. Hom. of rebellion.

4. New doctrine in the point of obedience to superiors, and concerning the
Lords Sabbath

5. That the Censures in use against Drunkards, Heretics, and other vicious
persons, are now inflicted upon Ministers that esteem it unlawful or
inexpedient to impose a necessity of Ceremonies, which the Prelates acknowledge
to be indifferent in their own nature.

6. Their adding to the Ceremonies of our Church, other rites and Ceremonies
then are mentioned in the Communion-booke, whereunto they are restrained, by the
act of Parliament, praefixed to the said book.

7. Their practicing without special warrant a power to judge of cases, which
are the object of civil (not Ecclesiastical) Courts. Now seeing his Gr: in
this place where he promises both to recite and answer all the innovations,
(be they of less or greater moment) charged upon the Prelates, as tending to
th'advancing of Popery) is so far from answering, as he does not recite any
of these particulars, but mentions only those that he can give such color
of answer unto, as hi^ greatness is able to bear out against all reason that
any man dare allege against the same, and seeing ^e acknowledges that
exe^ptio ^ir^mat regulum in non exceptis, his Gr: propounding of a part and
for^bearance to mention the foresaid perticulars, charged by Mr. Burton upon
the Prelates argues, that Mr. Burton does truly chardg^ the Prelates with the
said innovations, and that they can neither deny nor give a reason for the
making thereof.

Arch-B. page 17.
And there was visible Inconvenience observed in men's former flo^^king to
Sermons in Infected places.

Observe.
When preaching was forbidden under pretext of danger of infection, by concourse
of people at Sermons; Comedies and scurrulou^ interludes contrived in derision
of religion, and true piety were no^ only suffered to be acted in all ordinary
Stages, but in the Court i^^selfe also with great confluence of people, as
though the means o^ humiliation, and not ways to prophannes, were
pestilentious in great assemblies, and that Gods vengeance were not so much to
be feared for the practice of sin, as the preaching of that doctrine, which
pincheth or disquieteth profane men's consciences; there cannot any reason be
given justifiable either in wisdom or goodness upon occasion of death or
sickness, that has been incident to some at a Sermon, to prohibit the ^se of
that spiritual food at usual times, ^o such as have minds hungering with an
appetite thereof, no more then to prohibit men to take their ordinary food or
physic (when they find t^eir stomachs at their usual times disposed thereto)
because men ^icken or die sometime after a good meals meat, or after physic;
inconveniences that sometimes fall out at Sermons either in wholsom^ or
infected places, are not sufficient pretenses for prohibition or discharging of
so lawful, good and necessary a business.

But the business was debated at the Council Table, Ar^h. B^ page 17.
being a matter of State, as well as of Religion. And it was con^luded for no
S^rmons in these infected places.

And in all likely hood by the Counsel referred to the Prelates consideration,
Observe.
who, having inj^yned the fast (mentioned in those news from ^p^w^^^^) without
Sermons in London, contrary to the orders for other fasts i^ former times; The
^entioning an innovation in that point is very injuriously named a Libell, for
it cannot be called a crime nor judged unlawful to any man to speak or write
what is not unlawful for Prelates to do.

Nor Thirdly is that true that Se^mons are the Only means to humble men.
Arch. page 18^


I have heard that K. James discou^sing at Table of the un^avourines of ling to
his ta^t and smell, Observ^
a gentlememan answering to his Majesty, told him, that ling was his only
meat, my meat (said the King) I swear man J have never in all my life eat
of that fish, whereupon the gentleman replied, that by only meat he meant,
it was special good meat; The author of the newe^ from Ipswitch, being
charitably construed, or admitted to interpret his own words will be p^ssibly
found to have meant, that Sermons are the most and (best) special good means
to h^mble men; It is an act that smells more of pride then of justice to
wrest to an ill sense, words that can bear a good interpretation, and are well
meant.

Arch-B. page 20.
Besides, these men live to see the Fast ended, and no one Wed^esday Lecture
suppress^d.

Observe.
Chat escha^de eraign^ l'eau ^roide; Men that had heard of the pr^hibition of
Sermons upon the wednesday in time of solemn fast, an^ had seen many other
simptomes of dislike of them, and inclination (...) place all exercise of
Religion in the Ceremonies and Letany, might very probably fear and think
there was some intention to suppress^ wednesday Lectures; Many wise men have
showed fear of things which have never come to pass, and many have been
mistaken i^ their ju^gements of men's intentions, when they measured them b^ the
success of their actions; Great men's intentions are not allwaye obvious to the
understanding of men that live in a condition beneat^ them, nor allw^yes
Priv^ledged with succes^e, or with prerog: (...) chardge a crime upon such as
mistake them, or understand them no^ and the argument is not good; Wednesday
Lectures are not sup^pres^ed, E^go his Grace had no intention to suppress them.

Arch. B. ibid.
And ^he Arch. B. and B^sh^ps to whom the ordering of the book^ i^ committed,
have power under the King, ^o put in, or leave out, whatsoever they think fi^t
for the present occasion; as their P^edic^ss^^^ have ever done before them.

Observe.
This general implicit power is not suf^icient, for affirming truel^ tha^ they
have the Kings command or warrant for every thing th^^ put in, ^r leave out, no
more then the general power, which t^^ Chancellor, Secretary and other
O^ficers have from the King, is suffi^cient fur alleging the Kings command
and warrant for every act they do in their several stations; they cannot
change any thing once axcepted out of their O^fices, without a new special
vvarrant.

Arch. B. Page 21.
Provided that nothing be in contrary to the Doctrine or Discipline of the
Church of England.

Observe.
Quaeritur, whether the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church be that which
Bishops invent, prescribe, or purchase color of his Majesty's au^hority for
commanding off; Or that which by other Reformed Churches is held to be of
divine institution.

Arch. B. ibid.
And it is not the custom of the Church, nor fit in it self to pray for
seasonable weather when we have it, But when we wan^ it.

Why not as well as it is the custom of the Church, Obser^^
and fit in it self ^o pray for grace, wisdom and understanding of the
Lords of coun^ell that want none of these, and for illuminating Bishops, with
true ^nowledge and understanding of the word which they have and want ^ot.

Thirdly, it is most inconsequent to say; Arch. B^ page 22.
that the Leaving that Prayer ^ut of the book of devotions, caused the
Shipwrackes and the Tempest, which followed.

In the news from Ipswitch, it is not said, Observ^
that the leaving out that ^^ayer caused the shipwracks and tempests, but was
one cause (that is (...) far as men may judge) one of the occasions thereof,
and to this ^^ce a man may speak without exceeding the limits of Christian
re^^rence, duty and humility. in speaking of actions and accidents, ^^ereof no
other cause can be affirmed literally, but the will of al^^ghty God, and the
saying that the leaving out of that prayer, is ^^e of the causes of the
shipwracks, is as justifiable a way of speech, (...) the saying of a man sick
of the ague, that his sins are the causes ^^reof.

I humble desire your Lordships to weigh well the Consequence of ^ great and
dangerous Innovation. Arch. B. page 23.
The Prayer for fair weather (...) left out of the Book for the Fast;
Therefore the Prelates intend to ^^ng in Popery.

^here is not so much as one line (in those news excepted against ^^is Gr.
Obser^^
) inferring either upon this or any other of the innovations ^^^tioned in it, a
conclusion of the Prelates intention to bring in ^^ery, yet upon the whole
conjunctio an appearance of such inten^^ may be in reason as well affirmed as
feared. August. Tom. 10. ^^mil. 42. says, de minutis guttis implentu^ flumina,
per minutas rimula^ ^^^at aqua,, impletur sentina, mergitur nav^: Small drops
make floods through small rifts the water loaketh in, fills the deck, and
sinketh (...) ship.

To this I answer First, As before; Arch. B^ ibid,
It was lawful for us to alter what we thought fit.

And Secondly, since that Collect made mention of Preaching, (...) Act of State
forbad Sermons on the Fast days in infected pla^^^; we thought it fit, in
pursuance of that Order, to leave out (...) Collect.

For reply may be repeated the answer to the 3, Se^^: withal^ act of State
forbidding Sermons, is not a sufficient warrant for leav^^^ out of a prayer in
use to be read, a collect because it mention pre^^^^ing.

Arch. B. page 24.
For the branch in the other, which is the first Coll^ct, Though (...) did
deliver our forefathers out of Romish superstition, (yet God be (...) sed for
it) we were never in.

Observe.
Though it were absolutely true (as it is not) that none of the ^^^rers of these
prayers, which are usually read, were ^ver in Romis^ perstition, as his Graces
Speech here implies, yet could not t^^^ a sufficient reason for leaving out
the collect here mentioned, be^^ in the deliverance of our forefathers out of
the said superstition^ (...) did deliver us; Withal by the same reason his Gr.
might cause (...) bear the thanksgiving and prayers appointed to be used for
del^^^^rance from the Powderplott. A reverend remembering and than^^^^^ving in
our prayers to God, for delivering our foref^thers out of ^^^mish Superstition,
is a point, more material in Gods worship the^^ther an aeriall Cross, a
Surplice, or bowing at the n^me of Jesus: (...) as there is not so much reason,
for leaving out t^a^ branch of (...) Collect, as there is for refusing a
nec^ssity of the aeriall Cross, Sur^^^ and ducking to an Altar, or at the
sound of the word Jesus, by su^^ esteem the doing thereof scandalous,
superstitious, or otherwise (...) lawful; and seei^g there are many of the
^ormalists, or good Co^^^mists, who by the doctrine, practice the Ceremonies,
approved (...) urg^d by most Prelates, are led the b^^ad way to the avowed
pr^^^^sion and belief of Popery, that clause which implies a prayer for
^^^liver^nce from Romish Superstition, is not unfittingly expressed (as (...)
Gr: alleges) in the said Coll^ct, the words left out being these: (...) have
delivered u^ from Superstition and Idolatry, wherein we were ^^^ly drowned,
and have brought us into the most clear and comfortable (...) of thy blessed
word, by the which we are taught how to serve and (...) ^hee, and how to live
orderly with our neighbors in truth and verity.

Arch-B. ibid.
Because in this Age and Kingdom there is little opinion (...) meriting by
fasting.

Observe.
Papists in this age and Kingdom have still an opinion of meri^^ by fasting,
and the enjoining of a fast in Lent and other sent ti^^ ^sed by the Roman
Church, makes the lukewarm Conformists ap^^^^ertaine the same opinion, and
breeds in many religious hearts a ^^^ition and fear, that the forbearance of
the words which taught (...) people that they should not presume their fasting
to be merito^^^s, has been purposely ordered to content Papists and Atheists,
(...) to have the better occasion to teach, command or breed a belief ^he
weak sorts of persons religiously disposed, that they do (and (...) meritt by
fasting.

and this was done according to the Course of the Church, Arch. B. page 25.
which or^^^ed ordinarily names none in the Prayer, but the right line
descending. ^here is no Canon of the Church, Observe.
or warrant of Scripture for re^^^ing the prayer for such as are o^ a Royal
family, to those only (...) are of a right line desc^n^i^g; His G^: well
knows, that tur^^^ eijcitur quam non admitt^^^ ho^p^s, and that the Queen of
Bohemia (...) ever made a part of tb^ C^mmon prayer, could not be left out
(...) by any warrant, either of Religion, or State wisdom, and that (...)
leaving her out of it, could not but become a scandal and offense ^^ome,
breed in ma^y an opinion that they which are unwilling (...) have prohibited)
that usual prayers be made to God for her, will ^^dge to afford her the wordly
supply, which her Estate needs, and (...) may in reason expect and hope for,
from his Majesty and all such ^ubjects as are loyal and ^ot corruptible by
either Spanish or Popish ^^sents, pensions, or promises; if the King has given
command for under his hand (as his Gr: here says) his Majesty has been
abused some show of reason suggested to him, which his Grace neither
^^ntioneth, nor dare (J think) avow, nor are obvious to the ^^ce of any honest
man, nor likely ever to be approved by Parliam: I beseech your Lordships to
consider, Arch. B. page 26.
what must be the Consequence (...): The Queen of Bohemi^e and her Children
are left out of the ^^llect, therefore the P^elates intend to bring in Pope^y.

There is no such conseq^ence inferred upon the only leaving out (...) this
Collect, Observe.
and albeit upon this and the remanent innovations made (...) his Gr: (here
apologized for) and the rigorous urging of needless ^erem^nies, concurring
with the knowledge which many have of discoveries made (by the last two
Parliament) of his Graces and some ^^her Prelates ways, bred in most men an
opinion, that some of the ^^elates inte^d to bring in Popery, nevertheless it
does not follow ^^at the persons which his Gr: inveigh^th against, do go
about to poison the people, with a conceit, that the Queen of Boh^mia a^^ her
Children would keep^ out Popery out of England, and that the King and his
Children will not; Such Prelates as intend innovation in religion, are likely
to think it for their end, to work such an opinion where they have power,
for they may expect good benefit bo^^ from great persons abroad, and great
Traitors (as Papists, Atheists, and lukewa^me Conformists) at home, by working
into the hearts (...) the people any opinion, which may be made use of to breed
in t^^ kings own heart a jealousy of his Royal sister, and of the hopeful
Pri^^ces her Children. The persons Inveighed against by his Gr: cannon hope for
any good or adva^tage by laboring to poison the people with such a villainous
conceit, nor are they in any possibility to b^ disposed as Papists, Atheists
and Formalists aforesaid to any cour^^ tending to the prejudice of his
Majesty's greatness, or public good^ For as their har^s are enflamed with a
zeal in their religion, to t^^ service of God, so are they with affection and
loyalty in their allei^gance to the K: their Sovereign; neither do they
impute to his M^^jesty the blame of those actions, which they have hope (yea
confidence^ that his Majesty shall one day (either by his Parliam: or some
other way) discover that Prelates have caused to be done under pretext an^
cover of his authority, to the prejudice of true religion, and overthrow of
many learned and modest Ministers, and to the great grief of his M^j^sties
best and most loyal subjects.

Arch. B. ^ag. 26.
For my part I honor the Qu^ene of Bohomia and her Line, as much as any man
whatsoever, and shall be as ready to serve them.

^bserv.
Men that consider that his Gr: has not only now caused to raze o^t the name of
that good Queen and her Children out of those Collects, but blot al^o out of
the patent granted by his Majesty an^ 1635. for a collection for the
distressed Churches of the Palatinate, the words bearing them to be of the same
Religion, which our Church ^^^f^sseth, cannot believe that his Gr: did speak
these words but i^ his Court style, not minding their literal ^ence (whereunto
it is i^^ manners and against Cour^ wisdom, to ty the Court language) for his
c^mmand to bl^tt out these words in the sa^d patent, formed b^ his Majesty's
attorney (upon the model of a former patent in the same kind granted by K.
James, which av^wed the people of the Palatinate to be of our Re^igion) ^rgueth
that ^e hates the Religious ^^ofessors, both in that Country where the Queen
of Bohemia was ^^rne, and in that wherein she was married, and wherein her
self and ^er Princely Children have been bred and educated, and a Prelate
which either hates the Q^eene of Bohemias Religion, or professes ^^other
Religion then she and her Children do, and uses all pos^^^le craft and
violence, to make all he can embrac^ it; ought not to (...) believed in the
literal sense of the words when he says that he ho^^ureth the Qu: o^ Bohemia
and her line as much as any man whatsoever (...) But J know not how to depart
from my Allegean^e, Arch. B. page 27.
as I doubt these ^^n have done.

Prayers might have been continued by his Gr: Observe.
for the Queen of ^^hemia and her Children, without departing from his
allegiance, ^^d men's desire of continuance of that prayer, or being ^ffe^ded at
^^e leaving o^t of it, is not a sufficient reason for his Gr: to infer
^onclusion to charge them with the crime of departing from their ^^egeance, or
for his Gr. suspicion of it, In the Reformed French and ^^^^ch Churches
throughout all the United Provinces, prayers are ^^de, not ^n^ly for the Queen
of Bohemia and her Princely Chil^^en, but for our K. also, yet is not that
esteemed a departure of the ^^eachers and people that practice it, from the
alleadgeance due by ^^em to the Soverainty of the ^tate they live under.

That this Alteration was made in my Predecessors time before I ^^d any
Authority to meddle with these things, Arch-B. ibid.
And his Majesty ac^^owledges, it was done by his special direction, as having
then no ^^ildr^n to pray for.

If the words [ who art the Father of thine elect and their seede] have O^serv.
^^ene left out, or changed by his Majesty's direction, certainly ^ee ^us^
have had some other reasons suggested unto him (by some Pre^^^e, whose advice
he trusts in matter of prayer and divine worship) ^en (that which is here
set down) because the King had no Children to pray for, when he gave command
to leave out these words, for if that were the reason, then that clause were
now to be resumed (which is not done) since the K. has ^eede (which God
bles^e) like as ^he ^sing of those words is compatible enough with a^y Gods
elect, ^^ther having or wanting seed, so as to obtain his Majesty's warrant
^^r leaving out these words, it is likely that his Gr: or some other P^e^^te
has suggested to him such arguments as Papists and Arminians use for impugning
that article of Christian religion, which con^er^e^^ Gods election, without
acquainting his Majesty: with the answer^ made thereto by orthodoxe writers.

Arch. B. page 28.
The truth is, it was made at the coming in of K. IAMES^ and m^st of necessity
be changed over and over again pro ratione Te^^porum as Times and Persons
vary.

Observe.
The Parliament appointed that prayer to be used and it can nei^ther be lawfully
omitted and forborne (which his Gr: grants (...) auoweth the doing of) nor
changed without warrant of the same a^^ritie.

Arch. B. page 29.
Here give me l^ave to tell you 't is At the name of Jesus, in (...) learned
Translation made in K. James his time. About which m^^ny learned Men of bent
note in the Kingdom were employed, bes^de some P^elates.

Observe.
If the translation made in K. James time has At the name, ce^^tainly it is not
so consona^t to the Greek Original which ha^^ ((...)) or to the Latin
version ( in nomine) as in the the nam^ and ( In) being so long used in many
impressions of the common pr^^^er book confirmed by Parliament: it is not
likely that the chang^ has been error Typographi, but a direction of some
P^elate in (...) late edition, and therefore with very good reason this
alteration m^^ be numbered among other innovations made by Bishops.

Arch. B. page 30.
And M^ P^ynn^ (whose Darling business it has long been to (...) down the
honor due to the Son of God, at the mentioning of (...) saying Name Jesus)
knows the Gramm^r Rule well, In a place, or a^ place, etc.

Observe.
The honor dew to the Son of God, is not cried down by s^^ as m^intaine that
all reverence that can be or is required by his D^^vine Majesty, is dew unto
him (as Mr. Pryn and all good Christi^^^ ackn^wledge) and that alike honor is
due unto him, when he mentioned by the name of Christ, God, Jmmanuell, etc: As
when (...) is mentioned by the name of Jesus, and the word Phil: 2.10. Doe^
oblig^ Christians to worship the letters and sound of the word (...) but his
Person, which is expressed to our memories and understa^^^ings, as well by his
other n^mes, as by the name Jesus, and by (bow^^^ of the knee) in that passage
nothing is understood or meant, (...) the same that is meant by b^wing of the
knee Rom^ 14.1^. Esa^: 45^^ ^t were idolatry to reverence the pers^n for the
names sake, and if we ^everence the name for the persons sake every name
competent to him ^ught to be a like reverenced; withal if the words (bowing
of the ^nee) import a necessity of kneeling; ^he words (and every tongue shall
^onfesse that Jesus is the Lord) in that same place must oblige all men ^o a
necessity of a uocall and loud confession that Jesus is the Lord which must
make a confusion and disturbance in all assemblies, for prea^hing praying or
reading of scripture, yea, if the sense of the words ^ere to be taken
literally, that would ^blige men to kneel, but not ^p, no^ cross, nor to bow
the head at the name o^ Jesus, his Gr: does ^ot pres^e kneeling either in the
literal or metaphorical sense of the ^ords, and is not able to produce a text
for capping or bowing the ^ead at the sight or sound of the name Jesus.

This I find in the Queens Injunctions Arch-B. page 31.
, without either word In (...) At. Whenever the name of Jesus shall be in
any Lesson, Sermon, or ^herwise pronounced in the Church ('t is enjoined) that
due rev^rence be ^ade of all persons, young and old.

Queen Elizabeth's injunctions ought to be reverenced, Obser^.
yet mortuo ^anda^ore expirat mandatum; And no act, order, or command of a
^^veraigne Prince, not ratified and authorized by his estates in Par^^^ment,
does rule either his successors, authority, or his subjects obe^^ence after his
death. Queen Eliz: possibly ordained courtesy ^^d uncovering the head at the
pronouncing of the name of Jesus, for ^^e same respect, for which she suffered
an Altar, to remain in her ^^appell, after that by act of Parliament they were
ordained to be^ (...) down in all Churches of England, and after the pulling
down (...) them in many Parishes (even before warrant of the said act was
proved) The reasons of Princes commands, or connivences are not be too
curiously pried into, where subjects without being obnoxi^^^ to any
inconveniency, may both forbear doing of the thing en^^^ned or commanded, and
imitating of the thing winked at or prac^^^^d by them against a Law; Mean
while, the enjoining of such cour^^s^ only as thereunto does necessarily
belong, and before then ac^^^^omed, shows that she did not impose a
necessity of ducking, ^^^^ging, capping, or kneeling, because it was easy to
find that there (...) no custom in the old orthodoxe or Reformed Churches
ancient^^^ of late days for so doing, but only among Papists, whose abuses,
super^titions, and mountebankeries, though she could n^^ purge of a sudden
(especially trusting much to Prelates in the business) yet had she no intention
(doubtless) by her injunctions to follow or approve them.

Arch. B. page 32.
So here is necessity laid upon it, and Custom for it, and both expres^sed by
Authority in the very beginning of the Reformation; and is the^^fore no
Innovation now.

Observe.
Since such was the nature of the Law and Custom here ment^^^ned, as is before
designed, they cannot be a ground for the in^^^rence which his Gr: thereupon
makes, that bowing at the name of I^^sus, commanded by his Gr: is no
innovation, because neither in the (...) orthodoxe, nor in the late Reformed
Churches, there was either (...) or custom for the said bowing, and the
cannons or customs of Papi^^ were not ordained to be followed by Qu: Eliz:
injunctions, yea Ho^ calls that bowing an absolute ceremony, and the
introductio^ of an ^^^solute ceremony, is as well an innovatio^ as the hatching
of a new (...)

Arch. B. Page 33.
That Is left to the Church, therefore here is no Innovation aga^^^^ that Act of
Parliament.

Observe.
As it is a notorious truth, that the act of Parliament containing command for
prayers and thanksgiving every: 5. November: was pri^^ before the book
containing the prayers ordered to be read in obe^^^en^e of the said act, so is
it a notorious truth, that for respect to (...) said act, a prayer was
conceived, An: 1605. in the words which (...) been in use to be read every 5.
November: since that year, and albeit the making of the foresaid act, the
contriving of the foresaid pray was left to the Church, yet does it not thence
follow that a change the words of the prayer then contrived, and so long in
use, is no al^^^ration. Arch. B. ibid.


The Aleration first mentioned, that is, The Sect or that Sect them: O^serv.
is of so small cons^quence as it is not worth the spe^king of.

There seems to be so little difference between the sense of ^^ words
changed, and of those that are putt in the place, as (...) would think that it
were against discretion either to charge the cha^^ger with the reproach of
innovation, or to imagine that any man^^^ven of ordinary sufficiency) can be
moved with such reproach upon grounds apparently so weak, yet when men
consider that it is ^^^likely that so wise a man as his Gr: would have directed
a changes ^ prayer used in the Church above 32 years, but upon solid reasons
^^ther of state or Religion (because such a change seems an impli^ite
accusation of either error or ignorance in the contrivers and u^^rs thereof, or
of neglect of duty or want of understanding in those ^ishops that have suffered
the same so long) it is probable that Mr. Burton not being able to conceive any
reason of State or Religion, which his Gr: could pretend for it, or any honor
or benefitt to the ^ing or public (which are the end of all state actions) by
the said ^ange, has judged that because the tropicall expression of the words
^^^ng used, did clearly point at the Roman Church and Doctrine, and (...)
literal sense of the words as his Gr has caused them to be disposed the
change, do not pinch any people that is known, he has or^^ined all the words
to be insert, which are expedient for expressing (...) literal sense, as more
tender and less pinching the Roman ^^urch.

I did not move the King, directly, or indirectly; Arch. ^ page 34
to make (...) change.

In all the actions of Ministers, which are Formalists and good Con^^^mists,
Observe.
done for edification and feeding of any people or person, ^^th food approved
by his Gr: within that which he calls his Dio^^^se and Province, are and must
be esteemed his Graces actions (if ^^eir power for doing thereof be derived
from his Gr: and that the ^^ole Church power in every Diocese is inhaerent in
the Bishopp ^^^reof, as the Formalists reach) so whasoever any Prelate or
person ^^ggesteth to his Majesty (and breeds in his royal mind a belief
(...) a persuasion off, by virtue of the respect they have with his High^^^s,
through his Graces recommendation and character made by him (...) his Majesty
of them) tending to purposes which his Gr: does not ^allow ex post facto; And
whereof he may challenge the thanks and g^ory as his du^^, are such as his Gr:
well knows, ought to be esteemed his Graces actions, and that he can no more
safely give his oath, that he is not the mover off, then he will acknowledge
upon oath no man has authority or power to make one man a lawful Pastor of
many several Churches.

And that both these are true, Arch. ^ page 35.
I here again freely offer my self to ^y Oath.

Observe.
Howsoever his ^r: here offers his oath, that the King comm^^ded the change
without being therein moved by him, and that he had his Majesty's hand to the
book, for warrant of the said alteration^ before he made them, and sets
down three reasons, for which the King (as he says) commanded at least might
command the sam^, y^^ to all men of sense it seems more likely, that his Gr:
(who is an u^^derstanding Courti^r) offers here his oath by way of complemen^
knowing that no man would putt him to it, then that his Majesty (...) the said
reasons was induced to command (and to give warrant (...) the said
alterrtions, without being by his Gr: or some of his coat r^^quired and
persuaded thereto, and that not only because it is n^^ likely that his Majesty
(who is not by his Royal Office and calli^^ necessarily conversant in the
study of divinity) would upon his p^^^vate thought make any alteration in a
prayer so long used, esteem^ sufficiently considerate and expedient both in
matter and form, (...) because likewise neither the forbearance made in Queen
Elizab^^^ time to pray for deliverance from the tyranny of the Bish: of Rom^
after the state was clearly delyvered, and in posture to owe and gi^^ thanks
for delivery from the same, nor his instance of four sorts (...) Religion in
the world, nor K. James assertion that no Papist in his D^^minions was put to
death for Popery either during his reign ^ Queen Eliz: can be (as his Gr:
alleges (reasons able to induce ^^^ther a Prince of his Majesty's wisdom
and goodness, or any rati^^nall man to condemn the wo^ds, which call the
Popish Clergy Bab^^lonish, and their religion rebellion in the sense that the
prayer, is before it was changed, cal^ed them; withal if the words before and
af^^^ the change have one meaning, the change was neeedlesse, and if the words
changed have another sense then the former, either they, or (...) former must
be thought impertinent, if not pernicious, and either (...) Gr: or his
predecessors in Office impertinent in the exercise of it.

Ar^h. B. page 40.
Therefore by that, and such like Innovation^ the Prelates intend^ (...) bring
in Popery.

It is very true, that from the leaving out a prayer for the naui, (...) from
any one such like innovation (as has been said) there cannon be any
conclusion inferred, demonstrating that Prelates intend (...) bring in Popery.
Neither is it compatible with Episcop: wisedo^^ and with the respect they
pretend due unto them to do actions where^^ any man may be able perfectly to
know and discover their inten^^^ns, when they either dare not, or think not
fit to avow them. ^^e Bishop of S. Andrews (in a book entitled Confutatio
libelli de ^^imine Eccle^iae Scoticanae) writes that Episc: jurisdiction
(which by ^^s of Church a^semblies ratified in many Parliam: has been
con^^mned as humanum commentum and Antichristian) was brought in^^ that Church
^on confestim sed pedetentim, and per inter^alla ne res agi ^^eretur; And
albeit it may be now safely affirmed that those Ministers ^^t advised the King,
to make constant moderato^s in their Church ^^emblies, and to offer to the
Church jus suffragij in comi^ijs, by some (...) the Ministry which the Church
should have a power to choose ^^ore every Parliam: have (since they obtained
these prerogatives) ^^ought back into that Church both that office and diverse
Ceremo^^^s rejected at the reformation, and abjured by the accep^ers of them,
^^well as by all other Officers and members of the Church in that ^^^gdome,
nevertheless it had been a ridiculous ratiocination be^^^ their evident
apostasy and perjury to say; The Ministers have ob^^^ed warrant for voice in
Parliam: and an act for constant modera^^^^ in their assemblies, and many of
them good pensions out of the (...) exchequer; Ergo they intend to bring in
into the Church con^^^^y to their oaths and subscriptions, a Government and
Ceremoni^s ^^^cted by them at the reformation, and often abjured since; So
albeit ^^^re is no good l^gick for inferring upon any of the foresaid
inn^^^^ions, the Prelates intention for Popery, nevertheless men many say ^^^t
it is more probable that the innovaters of the whole particul: by (...) Gr:
here apologized for, intend Popery in the point of Doctrine ^^^n it was that
those Scottish Ministers intended Popish Discipline; ^^iscopacy and Ceremonies
rej^cted and abiured by their oaths and ^^scriptions (as said is) there are
many things quae peracta laudantur, ^^^t the carriage of, is dangerous, and the
actors of it will never (or dare not) avow the intention of; The pitiful
suffering of many honest men in Scotland, since the reduction of the P^p^sh
manner of rule and Cer^monies, helps much to breed that ^eare, which many
honest men and all loyal subjects here in Engl: have that those innovators
inten^^ons are as much set for Popish Doctri^e, as the seekers of t^ose
m^^^ratorships, pensions, and voice in Parliam: were set for Popish rule (...)
discipline in Scotland.

Arch. B. page 41.
No one thing has advanced or Vsherd in Popery so fast, as (...) gross
Absurdities even in the Worship of God, which these Men, an^ their like
maintain both in Opinion and practice.

Observe.
No man but Papists, or Atheists object against their doctrine or o^pinions in
matter of faith, and if by their practice be here unders^o^^ their lives and
conversation, neither Blasphemy, sabbath-breaking, dri^^king, playing and other
alehouse gaming, luxure, pomp, pride, pro^^gality, indyet, and apparel,
whoring, obscene discourses and actio^ non residence, nor plurality of
benefices can be so much object^ to any of them as to most of the conformists.

Arch. B. page 41.
To this J can truly say, that since my own memory this was in (...) in very
many places as being most proper (for those prayers are the read which both
precede and follow the Communion,) and by li^^ and little this Ancient custom
was altered, and in those places (...) where the Emissaries of this faction
came to preach.

Observe.
Neither can your Gr: be ignorant that it was out of use in mo^^ places (200.
to o^e) then since your memory it was used in, and (...) practice of it in some
few places without a lawful warrant cannot, (...) a reason for inferring that
either the command or practice of it of (...) is not an innovation in those
places where it was neither command^^ nor practiced before his Gr: began this
and the like innovations.

Arch. B. ibid.
With this the Rubrickes of the Common Prayer book agree: for (...) first
Rubric after the Communion tells us that upon Holy days, thou^^ there be no
Communion, yet all else that^s appointed at the commu^^^on shall be r^ad.

Observe.
The Rubric as well as the book of common prayer was ma^^ by the prela^es, by
whom though at the beginning of the reform^^^on there were diverse Rubricks,
orders and prayers left (which (...) found no possibility to reform a^ the
first) in it, as the Appostles (...) in the Churches infancy a^^er Christ
assension for respect to the (...) brethren of the Jews in the matter of
Circumcision (which (...) ^ractised in the person of Timothy Act: 16.3. and
forbear in the (...) of Titus Gal: 2.2.) and in the point of Abstinence from
blood (...) things stra^gled, nevertheless all religious and modest Bishops
(...) have been since the reformation in ^ffice at any time, have forb^^^ (^s
the Apostle did circumcision) either to practice other unlawful (...) d^r^
l^f^ in it, or to command to read at the communion table (...) (...) communion
is not given) the prayers which are appointed to be ^ead at the communion, for
albeit the Rubric ordered that when ^^e communion is given, the Priest shall
stand and read the prayers ^^pointed to be read at the Communion table, it
follows not that ^hen the communion is not given he must nece^^arily read
the same (...) the communion table, and not in the desk, as the custom has
been (...) this case before these late innnovations.

Moses did reverence at the very Door of the Tabernacle, Number. 20. ^ezekiah,
Arch. page 4
and all that were present with him, when they had made an ^^d of offering,
bowing and worshipping, (2. Chron.) David calls the peo^^e to it with a Venite,
O come let us Worship, and fall down, and kneel ^^fore the Lord our Maker. (
Psa. 95.) And in all these places (I pray ^arkei) it is bodily worship.

The example of Moses falling down at the door of the tabernacle ^^d of
Ezekias bowing and worshipping cannot oblige to the like ^orship any, but those
that offer the like sacrifice, and Moses Example ^^ligeth to bow before, and
Ezekias examlpe only after a man has made (...) end of his Sacrifice. From
neither of them nor from David's words ^sal. 95. cited by his Gr: can be
inferred either that at the entry into a ^hristian Church, a man must fall
down, bow and worship, or that ^^ere is a particular place in the Church
toward which a man must of ^^cessity turn his face for worshipping God, or
that he that does not ^^th these when he comes into the Church, does no more
reverence (...) God then a Tincker and his Bitch when they come into an
alehouse, (...) as it cannot be truly affirmed, that whosoever at his going
out of Church upon a sunday after the evening service, goes not to may^^mes,
pyping, dancing or other such exercise warranted by the ^oke for Sabbath
recreations (contrived as is conceived, by some a^^eistically Popish Churchman)
goes out of the Church with no more ^^verence then a Tincker and his Bitch
going out of an alehouse; so can it ^^t be truly affirmed that whosoever at
his entry into a Church does ^ot bow and cringe to the Altar (conform to
injunctions hatched (as is supposed) by some Popishly Hypocritical Churchman,
and allowed by authority) has no more reverence to God then a Tinker and his
Bitch, when they go into an Alehouse.

It is against charity to condemn men, as having no reverence to God, that
either after Sermon retire to their chamber, for private pray^er, reading, or
religious conference upon the points heard by them, o^ enter into the Church
with ears and hearts bent to assist the Ministers prayer, and to hearken to
his preaching, because the one goe^^ not to Maygames at his g^ing out of the
Church, and the other du^^ not at, or to the Al^ar at ^is coming in, for it is
possible that the o^^ thinking in their conscience, that the sports authorized
by the sai^ book, are not so consistent as private prayer, reading, or
religion conference after Sermon, with such observation of the Sabbath (...)
God has commanded; And that the other in their conscience thin^ that adoring,
ducking, cringing, kneeling to, or at the Altar^ is (...) seems to be an
idolatrous act, and derogatory to that revere^^^ wherewith a man's heart ought to
be fi^led when he enters into Church for religious exercise) withal as a
Tinker with his Bi^^ dri^king and dominering in an Alehouse, upon a Sunday,
after (...) has duckt to the altar, may not by any good Conformist be
reproac^^ed f^r breach of the moral Law for the Sabbath, in respect of his
pr^^viledge for so doing by warrant of the book for recreations; So (...) not
ducking to the Altar at a man's entry into a Church, cannot be ground for
inferring, that the omitter of it has no more revere^^^ toward God then a
Tinker and his Bitch coming into an Alehou^^ in respect of the warrant that is
in Scripture, for worsh^ppi^g G^^ alone; For albeit the command forbid^eth only
to fall down (...) bow before an image, it follows not that it is lawful
and necess^^^ for Gods worship to bow and fall down before an Altar, or at the
^^^try of a Church where there is no image, or that he that does it (...)
fails ^hereby in his reverence due to God.

Arch. B. page 45.
No man is constrained, no man questioned, only Religiously called (...) on,
Venite Adoremus: Come, let us worship.

Obser^.
If there be any Church Canon (or command of those that (...) power in the
times) to bow to the Altar at a man's entry into (...) Church, the^ are men
con^trai^ed t^ do it, for there is a neces^^^^ either of obedience, or danger
of being obnoxious to punish^^^^ for ^ot obedience in such a case; and if there
be neither Canon (...) Law, the practice of it is an innovation without any
pretext of ^^^^tant.

For there '^is Hoc est corpus meum, This is my bo^y. Arch-B. page 47.
But in the ^ulpit it is at most, but; Hoc est Verbum meum, This in my Word. And
greater R^verence (no doubt) is due to the Body, then to the Word of ^^r Lord.
And so, in Relation answerable to the Throne, where his B^^^ is us^ally
present, then to the Seat, Whence his Word use^h to be ^^oclaimed.

The argument (founded by his Gr: Obser^^
upon the words hoc est corpus ^eum) cannot bind any man to a necessity of
adoration and bowing to ^^e Altar, but only at the time of the celebration of
the communion; ^hen it is not given, his Gr: (who as yet neither does with the
Ro^ish Church profess a belief of transubstantiation, nor has or^^ined
pretended transubstantiated bread in the body of our Savi^^r, to be kept in a
boxr upon the Altar) cannot by any warrant of or^^odoxe religion pretend, that
because the body of our Savior is upon the Altar in such manner as the word is
in the Pulpitt, that there^^re at the entry into the Church a man must adore or
bow toward and where his Gr: for showing a necessity of this bowing and
crin^^ng to the Altar, says, that a greater reverence is due to the body ^^en
to ^he word of our Lord; as the words Verbum and Corpus expre^se ^^e essence of
Christ; That alike reverence is due to both, I think noe ^^n will deny, and
where Corp^^ ^hristi is taken for the Sacrament, ^^d Verbum Christi for the
Gosp^^^, or preaching of it S. August. lib. (...). hom. 26. Affirms that
alike reverence is due to both; Says he, ^^terrogo vos fratr^^ vel sorores
dici^e mihi quid vobis plus esse videtu^, ver^^m Dei an corpus Christi? Si
verum vultis respondere, hoc vtique dicere ^^etis, quod non sit minus verbum
Dei, quam corpus Christi, and ideo quan^^ sollicitudine observamus quando nobis
corpus Chris^i administratur, ut ni^^ ex ipso de nostris manibus i^ terram
cadat, tanta sollicitudine observ^mus (...) verbum Dei quando nobis e^ogatur,
dum aliquid cogitamus a^^ loqui^^^r, de cord ^^stro pereat, quia non minus
reus crit qui verbum Dei ne^^genter audierit qu^m ille qui ^orpus Christi in
terram cadere negligenti^ sua permisaeret; If Aug: says true, that as great
reverence is due to the word as to the body, then is there as much reverence
due to t^^ pulpit for the word, as to the Altar for the Sacrament, and either
there is no necessity for Gods worship to cringe and duck to the Altar, or it
must be also necessary to cringe and duck to the pul^^^t.

^rch-B. ^ag. 48.
And this Reverence ye do when ye enter the Chapel, and when you approach
nearer to offer. And this is no Innovation, for you are bound to it by your
Order, and that is not New.

Observe.
Suppose the Knights of the Garter are bound (as his Gr: affirms) by their
order to bow toward the Altar when they enter into the Chapel, and approach
nearer to the Offer, at the great anniversary solemnity of the said order, it
will not thereupon follow, that the Prelates injunction of that po^ture, to all
other persons, is no innova^tion in the manner of Gods worship either according
to the Aposto^licall institution thereof, or our Churches practice for the most
part ^ince the reformation. Though some Ceremonies at the solemnity (...) the
Order of the Garter, are done in the Church, they do not there by become such
a piece of divine worship, as his Majesty's other Subjects must necessarily
follow the pattern and practice off; For as the solemnity does not give to all
his subjects the ability to make so ri^^ Offers to the Altar, as are made
thereto by those of the Order, so do^^ it no^ oblige them to a duty of ducking
at the door toward the Al^tar, as the Knights do; when a marriage is
solemnized in the Church in our English way, the man mu^t putt a ring upon the
woman's fo^^^^ finger, and say, with this ring I thee wed, with my body I thee
w^^^ship, with all may wordly goods I thee endue; this practice thoug^ done in
the Church, in solemnizing an action that has better warra^^ in Gods
institution then the most honorable Order of the Gar^e^ does neither oblige
men that are not married to a bodily worship (...) women, nor makes a marriage
unlawful, in the solemnizing whereo^ such ring and words are not used; So his
Majesty's and the Knigh^^ ducking and offering, and other gestures in the
Church at the solemn^^zing some Ceremonies of the aforesaid order, do neither
oblige oth^^ subjects to the same way of worship, nor makes all other worshi^^
profane and unlawful. In a word, if the Kings practice in his Chappe^^ and in
the celebration of the Ceremonies of the Order of the Gar^^^ were sufficient to
oblige the people to do the like, in all the Church^ in Engl: his Gr: might by
the like reason pretend that the K. suffer^^^^ or allowance of Mas^e in his
house ought to be a sufficient warrant (...) Law for doing the like in every
family of Engl: which his Gr: J think^ will not say, unless he be confident
both to overthrow all respect (...) acts heretofore made in Parliam: and to
diswade the K: from (...) ^^^ing any Parliam: and to move his Majesty, to
command the reve^^^d Judges of England, to resolve that solemnizing of Mass in
eve^^ House, as well as Bishops issuing process, and keeping Courts in ^^ir
own names, is not against the Laws of the Realm.

And Jdolatry it is not to Worship GOD toward his Holy (...). Arch. B. Page 48.


The bowing toward a Table, a stool, a stone, a Wall, a House, Observe.
a ^^urch, a door, an Altar, or any thing else that is before a man when he
^^^eth for divine worship, does not thereby become Idolatry, but (...) bowing
toward any thing with relation to it, as of greater Holi^^^ then another thing
by it, is idolatry, and proved so to be by Prote^t divine, of the Church of
England, outward worship in Gods ^^^ice, and bowing before a stone, Cross,
Image, or Altar, are not to confounded, and his Graces greatness is not able
to make them ^ome all one with jumbling them.

according to a Constitution of Hen. the fifth (as appears) to give (...)
honor and Reverence, Arch. B. page 49.
Domino Deo and Altari ejus, in mod^m viro^^^ Ecclesiasticorum; That is, to the
Lord your God, and to his Altar (for ^^re is a Reverrnce due to that too,
though such as comes far short Divine worship) and this in the Manner, as
Ecclesiastical persons both ^^^ship and do Reverence.

This Constitution mentioned (as his Gr: Observe.
says) in the black book Windsor, is more lik^ a fable and forgery of a Monk
or Hypo^^call vain Churchman in those days, then an order or command ^uch a
King as Henry 5: It is not mentioned by any approved Hi^^^ian in his time, nor
in times after him, neither is it likely that so ^^^ious, victorious and wise a
Prince as Hen. 5. either did or would (...) add to the solemnity, appointed by
the foundation of the order ^^nstitution so ridiculous, as the directing those
of his order to make ^^^rtesy to the Altar, ad modum virorum Ecclesiasticorum,
withal, if (...) Gr: do not (which no man is able to do) prove that before
H^^ry 5. there was either divine Apostolical, or Imperial record, for
commanding Ecclesiastical persons, to bow to the Altar as a part of divine
worship, the Constitution mentioned in that black book ^^ough it were as true
as it is apparently forged) will not be sufficient ^^^rove that that Lesson
which it appoints the Knights to learn of (...) Priests for making a leg or
a duck^ either was necessary for divine worship in the Knights or their Example
obligatory of the people^ condemnatory of all worship done without bowing,
cringing or (...) king to the Altar in the fashion that viri Eccle^iastici
(without warr^^^ or command from lawful authority) were wont to do in K.
He^^^ 5. his days

Arch-B. page 51.
Bishop Jewel will come in to Help^ Me there. For where H^^ding names di^erse
Ceremonies and particularly bowing themselv^^ adoring at the Sacrament, I say,
adoring at the Sacrament not ador^^^ the Sacrament; there Bishop Jewel (that
learned, painful, and re^^^^ Prelate) approves all both the Kneeling and the
Bowing.

Observe.
Bishop Jewels approving of bowing and kneeling ( not to bu^) the Sacrament in
his answer to Harding as commendable gestures tokens of devotion so long as the
people understand what they mea^^ is not a sufficient ground either for
imposing a necessity of duck^^^ kneeling, or bowing to the Altar, upon all such
as understand these ^^^remonies fully, and apply them to God, and to none but
God, (...) they are not at the Sacrament, nor for affirming (as the Bishop do^^
that with us the people did ever understand them fully, and (...) them to God,
and ^o none but God, many Pagans could well aff^^^^ that they directed no
worship to the stocks and stones and ot^^^ workmanship of men's hands which
they had in their Temples, but the deity represented by them, and the learned
Papists profess (...) teach that they neither adore Cross nor Image, nor
Altar, but Chr^^^ crucified, or upon the Altar; neverthele^se the practice of
the learned ^^^sort in that point has been one of the chief causes of the
idola^^^ universal among the Pagans and Papists; So though many are w^ taught
and consent with Bishop Jewel, that bowing and kneeling (...) commendable
gest^res at the receiving of the Sacrament, yet if the^ be commanded to be done
to the Altar, when men are not at t^^ communion, they will be thought idolatrous
by such as esteem ge^stures of adoration due to God only, and that they have
no warran^^ For as, al^eit it is commendable in a man to close his
chamber-door^ and to kneel when ^e prays alone, it does not follow
thereupo^^ that if he do not shutt the door and kneel every time that he
entre^^ into his Chamber, that he enters it with no more reverence then ^
^^^^ker and his bitch going into an alehouse; So albeit it is a commendable
gesture in B. Jewels opinion, to kneel or bow at the receaving of the
^^^rament it does not thence follow, that he that does not bow or ^^^ge to the
Altar at his entry into a Church when the Sacrament is (...) given, is as much
wanting in reverence to God, as a Tinker going (...) his Bitch into an Alehouse.

^n the Kings Royal Chapels and diverse Cathedrals, Arch. B. page 53.
the Holy Table (...) ever since the Reformation stood at the upper end of the
Quire, (...) the large or full side toward the people.

Neither the Kings Chapel, Observe.
nor Paul's, nor Westminster, nor the prac^^^^ of any particular Church in Engl:
but divine institution and his ^^^esties Laws, founded upon warrant thereof,
ought to rule his ^^^ects in the substance, ceremony, matter, and form of Gods
wor^^^^; A subject is bo^nd to yield and measure his obedience not by
^magination of the inward motion of the mind, or knowledge ^^s Princes
practice, but by his express Laws and directions.

^^ere is nothing done either by violence or command to take off the ^^fferency
of the standing of the Holy Table either way, Arch. B. ibid.
but only lay^^^ fairly before men, how fit it is, there should be order and
uni^^^^ity; J say still reserving the Indifferency of the standing.

^^y please your Gr: to remember that a rail is set about the Table, Observe.
^^^h cannot be removed, there is no indifferency in the standing of (...)
which b^ a rail is limited to it is place, and there appears as (...)
violence in fixing unlawfully any thing to a constant place, as in ^nlawfull
removal of it, like as men are denied the S^cram: that (...) not come up to
the rail, and the Churchwardens and others that ^^^se to set up the rail,
are hurried and sued in the High Commis^^^, which argues both violence, and
that the indifferency (which his ^here mentions) of the standing of the
Table, is not reserved, as (...) is affirmed.

^ would feign know, how any discreet moderate man dares say, Arch. B. page 54.
that the placing of the Holy Table Alter-wise (since they will needs call it
so^^ done either to advance or Usher in Popery.

Since your Gr: has acknowledged Bishop Jewel, Observe.
a learned, painful and reverend Prelate, where you pretend his help (but by
wresting the sense of his words, as appears by what has been said Page
5^.) I hope you will not deny him the attribute of a discrete moderate man,
because in his Preface of his reply to Hardings answer, he wri^^^^; An Altar we
have such as Christ and his Apostles, and other holy Fathers had, which of the
Gre^ke was called (...), the holy Ta^^^ and was made not of stone, but of
Timber, and stood not at the end^ of (...) queere, but in the midst of the
people; another or better Altar then (...) and these holy Fath^rs had, we
desire to have none, and espe^ially any such ^^^tar as h^th been purposely
set up against the Altar of Christ. And (...) 3. Divis. 26. of the said
reply, he cites Origin and Arnobius te^ies, that in their times the Chr^st^ans
had no Altars at all, and S. ^^^gust. to prove that such Altars as were in his
time were made of ^^^^b^r, and called Mensa D^m^ni and Eus^bius to prove that
the Al^^^ placed in the midst of the Church, whereby it appears that B^^^^^
I^well esteemed a position of the holy table altarwise (that is (...) east end
of the Quire) to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Fath^^ in all liklyhood
would have judged the commanding of such ^^^^tion an innovation tending to
Popery.

Arch. B. page 54.
Did Queen Elizabeth banish Popery, and yet did she all alo^^ Reign, from
first to last leave the Communion Table so standing (...) own Chapel Royal,
in Saint Paul's and Westminster and other (...) and all this of pu^pose to
advance or Usher in that Popery which she driven out?

Observe.
In the beginning of Qu: Eliz: (as Cambden writes) the whole ce^^^^^nies of the
Mass were officiated in her chapel Romano ritu, ((...) that the Lords Prayer
and Letany were in English,) till by act o^ ^^^^liam: it was otherwise
provided, and after the act of Parliam: ho^^^ver most of corruptions of the
Mass were purged out of the f^^^ book of her Chapel, there were
candlesticks and torches (no^^^^^ning) some embossed plate, empty ewers of
silver, a great book (...) (as Thuanus writes, lib. 13. page 67.) Effigies
Christi affixi Cruci ^^^^tained upon the Altar in it, yet by act of Parliam:
the Mass be(...)bolished, and Altars appointed to be taken down (and the
z^^^^^^ pulling down many before warrant of the said act, approved) th^^ the
whole Kingdom, neither the Queens Chapel, nor Paul (...) any particular
Church, as is said, were to be patterns, for obli^^^^ all other Parish
Churches to such Altars and Ornaments for (...) worship, as have been (without
warrant of Law, divine or h^^^^ retained in the said Chapel and some other
Churches.

Arch. B. Page 56.
For the words of the Queens Injunctions are these:

The Holy Table in every Church (mark it I pray, not in the (...) ^^^ppell or
Cathedrals only, but in every Church) shall be decently made (...) sent in the
pla^e where the Altar stood. Now, the Altar stood at the ^^^er end of the Quire
North and South, as appears before by the ^^^^tise of the Church.

Albeit those words import, Observ^
that the Holy Table in every Church (...) be decently made and set in the
place where the Altar stood, yet (...) they not oblige men to set the Table
Altar-wise; There are two ^^^es which may competently be attributed to every
body, locus ubi, ^^^cus in quo; an ordinary place where a body is designed to
be set (...) placed, may be of greater extent then the thing placed, but when
^^n speaks Mathematically of a placen wheri a body is set, there ^nderstood
only that which in dimension holds no more th^n thing placed; The Queens
injunction (as the Author of the ^^^ke called the Holy Table, names or thing
does well mark) does (...) design the Mathematical place, but the ubi only
of the Altar, and ^^^eth not the subject to a necessity of setting the Table
with one of ^^^^des (and not one of the ends) to the wall, yea, there being
iniunc^^^^ ordaining the commandments to be written on the E^st wall (...)
church and the communion table to stand in the Chancell, when ^ommunion is not
given, and at the giving of it, in such part of the ^^^rch whence the Minister
may be best heard, it is evident that Queens injunctions mentioned by his Gr:
did not bind her sub^^^^^ to a necessity of framing the holy table to the
strict dimensions of ^^^ar in a mathematical proportion, and to set it so in
the place of the (...); for if such strict proportion had been required, then
the com^^^^ of taking down altars had been nedlesse since they could have
^^^d for such communion tables as those that the Prelates have cau(...) be
railed in; like as if the iniu^c^o^ had been mathematical for ^^^^g by all
proportions, the table in the altars place, it might fall out (...)n many
churches there would not be room enough to hold (...) ^ommandements, and the
Minist^r could not be so well heard of the people as the Queens iniunction
intended, and is ^^^^ssary in such a case. But suppose the Queens Injunctions
did ordain the Holy Table to be framed to the strict dime^sions of (...) ^ltar
in a Mathematical proportion, yet now these injunctions (...) ^oide, because
mortu^ mandatore expi^at mandatum, as has been (...), and no commands of
Princes bind their successors and subjects, but such as are approved and
ratified by their estates in Parliam^^^ as since those injunctions, there is a
rubric and express Canon, i^^porting that the Communion Table shall stand in
the middle of (...) Church or Chauncell, yea if there had been a necessity
intended (...) those injunctions for the Tables standing Altar-wise; Bishop
(...) who lived in our good Queens time, would not have contended (...)
zealously against Harding in that point, contrary to the mean^^^ (which his Gr:
pretends) of the Qu: injunctions.

Arch. B. page 58.
Some difference was lately rising about placing of the Comm^^^^^ Table in a
Parish Church of his Diocese. The Bishop careful to p^^^vent all disorder,
sends his Injunction under his hand and seal to (...) Curate and
Church-Wardeus, to settle that business: In which (...) has these two passages
Remarkable. I have seen and read (...) Order.

The first Passage is this; By the injunction of Queen Eliz^^^^^ (says he)
And by C^n. 82. under King James, the communion (...) should ordinarily be set
and stand with the side to the East wall of the (...) cell. Therefore this is
no Innovation, since there is Injunction (...) Cannon for it.

The other passage is this; It Is Ignorance (says that learned Bi^^^^ to think
that the standing of the Holy Table there, Relishes of Pope (...)

Observe.
The Bishop of Salisburies injunction in May 1637. which hi^ (...) mentions,
and his imputation of ignorance to those that think^ (...) heat used in urging
the standing of the Communion Table (...) wise, cannot but be esteemed
expressions rather of that reverend (...) Courtscience then of his conscience,
being done by him after he (...) the stream and storm of power run so
strongly for Cerem^^^ and the opposers of them so many ways persecuted in
their fo^^^^^ credits, and persons, and that speaking against them was the
(...) compendious way for Court-favour to such as have been esteem^ (...)
Doctor Davenant) opposers of Popery and Arminianisms, and (...) the Apostle
Peter to pleasure the Jews, preached Circumcision to (...) Gentiles, it is not
to be wondered that that learned man, the (...) B^^hops to pleasure those that
have power of all that concern (...) Church or State, has conformed his
injunctions to the liking of (...) that have the chief sway and power to
induce our Gracious S^^^^raigne to distribute praemia and poe^^s, as they
think fit, especi^^ (...) times that all piety (yea all show of it) is
nicknamed Puritanisme, ^ll Religion reduced to the establishing, preaching, and
pressing of (...), Cro^ses, cringing, ducking, Surplice, feasting, fish-eating
at cer^^^^e times stinted by Prelates, and singing of prayers to the Romish
(...). But here J hope his Gr: will either both believe and acknow^^^^e the
truth and soundnes of this Prelates writing against Armi^^^isme and Popery in
material points of Doctrine, or show some (...) and appearance of as probable
advantage for his writing what ^ath done that way, as is here set down for
his expressions cited (...) Gr: touching these Ceremonies.

^he Author prevaricates from the first word to the last in the book; Arch. B.
page 60.
(...) takes on him both for the Name and for the placing of the Holy (...),
and the like, to prove, that Generally and Universally, and Ordi^^^y in the
whole Catholic Church, both East and West, the Holy (...) did not stand at
the upper end of the Quire or Chancell. And this (...) ^ust prove, or he does
nothing.

^^ther it is preuarication to affirm that the K: Observe.
has in his Crown (...) Divino, the right and power of all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and (...) Parliam: are not called to confirm but to affirm and
declare (...) ^awes of God with much such like stuff, cap. 2. that no good
^^formist will (or ought to) deny^ or else his Gr. does not here (...)
affirm, that the Author of that book that the Bishop of Lin^^^ licensed the
printing ^ff, prevaricateth from the first word to ^^^st in it; Like as it
contains much in favor of Episcopal juris^^^^^on which his Gr: will be loath
to call prevarication, unless that (...) that breaks one of Gods
Commandments, is guilty to the ^^^gression of his whole Law, so he that
shows an opinion diffe^^^ from his Gr: will and pleasure in the position of
Altars, become ^^^by so perverse and pernicious, as all he speaks or writes
be^^^, mu^t be damned by the reproachful name of prevarication.

^^d you know both in Law and Reason, Arch. B. page 61.
Exceptio firmat Regulam in ^^n exceptis. So that upon the sudden I am not able
to resolve, whether this Minister has done more wrong to himself or his
Readers, for (...) h^th abused both.

It is true that Exceptio ^^^mat Regulam in no^ exceptis, Observe.
as his Gr: (...) says, but withal his Gr: does not show any rule or Law
binding ^^^^ersally and ordinarily the whole Church to set the Holy Table
alterwise at the upper end of the Quire or chancell, ^t affirmanti incu^^bit
probatio, unless therefore his Gr: make appear that there was su^^ a general
rule, he cannot pretend in reason that the q^otations made (...) the author of
the aforesaid book of the practice of diverse particu^^^ churches are but
exceptions from a general rule, but contrariwise (...) particulars instanced
by him do make appear that it cannot be true^^ affirmed, that there ever was
a general rule and law either comm^^^ding to set the holy table to on end of
the church for celebration of (...) Sacrament or declaring it to be necessary
for Gods worship to se^^ alterwise.

Arch. B. page 68.
Why my Lords J have a Copy, of the Articles in English, of the (...) 1612. and
of the Year 1605. and of the Year 1593. and in Latin of (...) Year 1563,
which was one of the first printed copies if not the first (...) all.

Observe.
In Anno 1631. One John Ailword, a Popish Priest, publishe^ (...) book,
entitled an Historical narration of the Judgment of (...) learned divines,
concerning Gods ele^tion, wherein he affirms (...) doctrine and judgment of
the Martyrs and first reformers of (...) Church to be the same, in the points
of Election and Predestinati^^ which was taught of old by Pelagius, and in our
days by Armi^^^ This book (licensed by Mr. Ma^tin chaplain to the Bishop of
L^^^don) coming to the hands of that learned Knight Sr. Hump^^^ Line, was by
him found to contain nothing but tho Copy ( verba^^^ of a Letter printed in
the third year of Queen Elizabeth, (with (...) name of Author, Printer, date
of time or place) whereunto in the times there were two answers, printed by
public authority, the (...) by John Veron (a Lecturer of Paul's) entitled, an
Apology or of the Doctri^e of Predestination, dedicated to Queen Eliz. the
four^h year of her reign, and printed at London by John ^^^dale, the other by
Robert Crowley, in his Apology for those Engl^^^ Preachers and Writers, which
Cerberus (the three-headed Do^ of Hell) charge with false Doctrine, under the
name of Pre^^^stination, printed at London by Henry Denham, Anno 1566. b^th
which books the Author of the af^resaide Letter is design the words of it,
Verb^tim, recited i^ several Sections, (...) confuted.

And albeiit the then Archbishop of Canterbury, after he was made ^cquainted
herewith, caused the books to be called in, yet most ^art of them being sold
and dispersed through the whole Kingdom, ^id bread a persuasion of truth of
the assertions therein contained, (...) the minds of all such as did imagine
that the Bishop would have ^aused the books to be burned and made some
public act against ^^em for discovering the impos^ure, if he had dislyked
the false Doc^^ine (and injurious to the memory of the worthy Martyrs and first
^eachers of reformation to our Church) wherewith they were stuffed ^^ce Ailword
durst make use of an old unwarranted and long ago ^^futed Pamphlet, for
proving that our church allowed Arminian and ^^pish doctrine in the point of
election, and could get such a book li^^^ced and contenanced by his Gr: own
Chaplain, and escape all ^^^ishments or censure afte^ discovery of such an
imposture, tending advance Popery, It is probable that for the same or the like
respect (...) persons could obtain^ his Gr: countenance for maintaining prin^^^
Articles of our Church containing some Articles as falsely imposed (...) in the
point of discipline and rule, as the book published by the (...) Ailword was
false in the Doctrine affirmed by it, of the said re^^^end divines in the
points of election and predestination.

^he copies which his Gr: pretends to have of the Articles of our ^^rch,
printed Anno 1612.1605.1593.1563. and the written Co^^^ out of the records of
his Office under his Officers ^and, are not ^^cient either to purge the
Prelates from appearance of forging the ^^^s of the 20. Artic: of the Church,
or to chardge those that his (...) inveigheth against, with the imputation of
rasing out tha^ Articl^ of the Copy given to be printed Anno 15^1. because
neither the ^^^^ers shop, nor a te^timony under the hand of a Bishops Officer,
(...) ^he warrant of the one and the other, can be a proba^ion of the (...)
which they pretend by the said 20. Articl: neither is the pow^^ which his Gr:
i^s^nuateth that some had ^n the Government Anno 15^^^ so probable a ground for
inferring an imputation upon the persons ^ foresaid inveighed against, for
rasing that article out of the co^^y then given to be prin^ed by authority of
Queen Elizabeth as ^he power which his Gr and those of his Coat have now so
(...) ^ad in the government, is a probable ground, whereupon to imagine it
likely that ^e may cause to be printed or set under his hand Copies of what
tenor and date he pleases to com^and, and certainly Bishops either must show
that Iure D^vino, or by acknowledgement of a Lawful Church assembly they have
power to decree rites and Ceremonies in divine worship, and authority in
matters of faith, or else they can hardly be free of being suspect of forging
the 20. art: in the said Copies, and inserting of it, with the K. decl^ration,
Anno 1628.

^rch. B. ^ag. 71.
If you be pleased to look back^ and consider who they were the Governed
business in 1571, and rid the Church almost at their pleas^^^^ And how potent
the Ancestors of these Libellers then did grow you (...) think it ^o hard
matter to have the Articles printed, and this Cla^^^ left out.

Observe.
This argues that his Gr: either acknowledges that some m^^ rule, and do
things in the name of the Sovereign, without lawful w^^^rant of his
authority, or that at least Qu: Eliz: was led and abused (...) factious
persons in those days, and therefore his Gr: ought neither (...) wonder nor be
offended that the like thoughts are incident to so^^ good and judicious both
Parliament men and others now a days.

Arch. B. ^ag. 73.
Some few more there are, but they belong to a matter of Doctr^^^ which shall
presently be answered Iusto Volumine, at large to satisfi^ (...) well-minded
people.

Observe.
I^ seems tha^ his Gr: either has forgot that he said page 16. (...) he would
recite briefly all the innovations charged upon the Prela^^^ and also briefly
answer them, or that, albe^t he has neither answer^ nor mentioned the most
material innovations (which are in (...) of doctrine) that Mr. Burton charge
them with the making off, (...) imagined that all his then ^earers and the
readers afterward of (...) his Speech ought to esteem the promise here made
of a Iustum v^^^^m^n, in answer to Mr. Burtons book, a sufficient performance
of (...) foresaid other promise. Of both a brief rehearsal and answer to (...)
the innovations changed by him upon Prelates. I know not what p^^^viledge or
prerog: his Gr: may have concerning his promises, or (...) acts of his Office,
but sure I am the shift he uses, could not have sa^^ another man from
imputation of impudency and charlatanery, if (...) should have dared before
such Hearers promise to recite and conf^^^ bri^fly all imputations charged upon
him, whether of great or (...) ^oment, and after such answers to some of the
least promise that these ^f greatest moment should be answered justo volumine.

Not long after the publicati^n of his Gr. gracious Speech, one ^^ter Heylin
p^blished a book of 26. sheets of paper, with an in^^^iption of a brief and
moderate answer to, etc. and a preface con^^^ning 4. ^heetes^ where he writes,
that he was commanded by au^^ority t^ r^turne an answer to all the chalenges
and chardges in the ^o Sermons an^ Apology of Mr. Bu^ton, which that book
bears (...) st^le no less M^gistra^e, if not so Magistraticall as this
Speech that (...) a M^jestie from his G^: own mouth.

Now, albeit a designation of all the impertinences, proud papisti^^^ and
passi^nate expressi^ns, which are comprehended within the ^^^passe of that
moderate answer, would seem in this place a dimi^^^ion of the respect due to
the M^jestie of his Gr: Speech; never^^^^es^e, I h^pe that ^is Grace: will be
graciously ipleased; That, ^^ere the said Peter Heylin page 1^4. says, that
his Gr: has reason (...), that the Church of E^gland and Rome diff^red not in
funda^^^tali^us, because the Church of England has not any where deter^^^ed
that we and those of Rome differ in fundamentalibus; and (...) Iu^ius,
Wittaker, and the Bish^p of Exeter affirm, that there are (...) things in the
Church of Rome, quae ad veram Ecclesiam pertinent; ^^venture to say here, that
if the consequence were good, it would (...) likewise, that we and the
Mahometans, Jews, and Ethnickes (...) not in fundamentals; For the Church of
England has not any (...) determined that they and we differ in fundamentals,
and (...) have divers^ things, quae ad veram Exclesiam pertinent. And where
(...) 125. he affirms that the Church of Rome has done more then (...)
Puritan (a nickname imposed to all that cannot allow Church(...) any
temp^rall authority or jurisdiction, more then Christ or ^is ^^^stles did
assu^e to themselves, or practice during their being in the ^orld) against the
Here^iq^es of this age, in maintenance of the di^inity of our Lord and S^viour;
I dare likewise say, that the Ro^^nists in daring affirm that a Priest can
transub^^antiate bread in (...) body of our S^viour, and that bread so
transubstantiated, is subject (...) corruption (may be eaten with Myse, Rattes,
Dogs, Swine, and by (...) how rep^^bate soever) fail as well in respect due ^o
the divinity (...) the humanity of Christ.

And where p. 128. he says that the words Babilonicall Bea^t o^ Rome, in the
7. Homili^ of rebellion, do not signify the Bb. (...) Pope of Rome, but
rath^r the abused power of that prevalent Se^ i^ time of K. John, and it not
being spoken dogmatically that the Po^^ is, and is to be believed the
Babilonicall Beast of Rome, it is not (...) be accounted for a Doctrine of the
Church of England, I wo^^^ feign know what difference there is between the
abused power (...) the then Sea, and now Sea of Rome, or whether the Pope now
do^ assume, or pretend less power, then the Popes did in K. John's day^ or if
the then prevailent and predominant Sea was the Babilonic^^^ Beast, as Heylin
acknowledges, at what time began that Sea to (...) from being the Babilonicall
Beast. And where (page e^d) he say^^ that unless it can be proved and made
good, that the Pope of Ro^^ conf^s^eth not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, there is ^o re^^ to conclu^e that he is Antichrist, and cites St. John
for a warran^ saying: Every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come^ the flesh, is not of God; but is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof (...)
have hear^, I hope his Gr: will give me leave to say, that St. Io^^ says not
that no man is Antichrist, but he that refuses to confe^^ that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, for he that says with his mo^^^ and knows in his
conscience that Jesus Christ is come in the fl^^^ but withal against his
conscienc^ affirms, and teaches that he (...) power to make Christ of a
piece of bread, and to give power to ot^^^ to make him, and that h^ whom he so
makes, should be worship^^^ in the same manner, that he, whom he confesses
to be come in (...) flesh, is as well Antichrist as he that in express words
deny^th ((...) most Jews do) his being come in the flesh. This brave argum^^^
Heylin has stolen out of the Jesuit Gre^serus book, written against James
Monitory to all Christian Princes, but his Gr: must not be ^^^^ended, that I
can neither take his nor Heylins ipse dixit for a suffici^^^ reason for this
point of D^ct^ine, different as well from the Chu^^^ of England (before it was
stinted by the Bb. pleasure of la^e) as o^^^^ Reformed and Orthodoxe Churches,
till either his Gr: or Heyl^^ confute the reasons, wher^by K. James, in his
said Monitory, and in (...) Comment. upon 7.8.9. and 10. verses of the 20.
chap. of the (...) proves the P^pe to be An^ichrist. And where p. 138. for
pr^ving (...) bowing at the name of Jesus is no innovation, he alleges that
P^^^ ^^astasius, who lived in the 5. Centurie, did bring it in, it seems that
(...) the same reason, he may pretend that invocation of Saints, adora^^^n of
Images and Crosses, transubstantiation, purgatory, pilrimages, ^^^^icular
Confession, and the like shall be no innovations, if his Gr: be ^^ased to
command the belief and Doctrine of them, for they were ^^ught in by Popes many
ages ago, and the introduction of any ^^^ng not contained in the artic: of ^he
Church of England at the re^^^mation, nor in the practice of it since warranted
by authority of ^^^er Scripture or Parliam: must be esteemed an innovation.

^f this book of Heylin be the large volume promised by his Gr: ^nswer to Mr.
Burtons chardges of innovations upon the Prelates, ^^th in these and many other
passages, so minse and smooth the Po^^ Doctrine, and so wrest the good meaning
and sense of the words ^rthodox writers, and zealous Preachers, that it cannot
but breed ^^at suspicion of the Prelates intention, to introduce Popery, if
(...) power can reach it. But admitting that Heylins book were ^justum
volumen, promised for answer to Mr. Burton, and suf^^^t to liberate his Gr: of
his answer promised to all th'innovations ^^^h Mr. Burton chardges upon
Prelates, yet since in this whole ^^^ch there is not one line containing any
particular mentioned, ^^^ch could be made a pretext for conventing, (much less
convicting) ^^^i^her Dr. Bastwick or Mr. Pryn in any Court, it is evident that
^^^er his Gr. has not performed his promise, page 16. of reciting and ^^^uring
briefly all th'innovations wherewith Prelates are chardged ^^^ey of less or
greater moment, or if what he has here written, be ^^^ee can say, against
them two, they have suffered very unjustly: His ^^^aying to the King in his
Epist: both that Mr. Pryn has thrust ^^^ken Law into Pamphlets, to wrong the
Governments of the ^^^rch, and that Bastwick only has been bold to meddle
with the (...) of the Church, cannot in a way obvious to common sense be
^^^^ne to be either a sufficient performance of his promise made in the 16.
page foresaid, or a sufficient ground, whereupon to convince eith^^ the one or
the other, of any crime punichable in the way, that his Gr: has caused them
suffer: especially since Dr. Bastwick being brought to the place of his
suffering, did solemnly avow that he was (...) conscious to himself wherein
he had committed the least tres^^^^^ (to take the outward shame he was then
putt unto) either against God or the King; and that the occasion of his
suffering was the writi^^ of a book against the Pope, which if it be
flagellum pontif. whi^^ goes in his name, it is a wonder where the crime
lies. And M^ Prynne said in the same place that he having tendered to the
Co^^^ his answer to the Information, which contained an accusation agai^^^ him
in the point of Libelling against the Prelates, the Court refu^^^ to accept it,
and that nevertheless he was condemned for not putt^^^ in answer to the said
Information, withal he offered to maintain ^^gainst all the Prelates in
Christendom, that their calling was not (...) divino, and against all the
Lawyers in the Kingdom (that should ^^^^pose him) that the Prelates sending
forth of writs and Process in (...) own names, is against the Law and Justice
of the Land, and entrenc^^^ on the K. prerog. and subjects liberties. If these
two poor men (...) spoken falsely, they did both deserve to be hangd^ after
their pi^^^ring, and it is likely too, that men that have been condemned ^o
^^^fer what they have done, (and that without any pretext of (...) and for no
crime, but a pretended not putting in their answers to (...) Informations
against them, which they tendered and the Court ^^^fused) could not have
misled, being hanged or worse considering (...) Prelates Spleen and power
against them, if their Speeches had (...) been true, always leaving that
book to the Judgment of mode^^ men, I return ^o his most powerful Gr: who
is pleased so farr^^ descend in his Speech from the height of his place, as to
say:

Arch. B. page 73.
Yet one thing more I beseech you, give Me leave to add. It Is (...) Burtons
charge upon the Prelates. That the Censures formerly laid^ on Malefactors, are
now put upon Gods Ministers for their Virtue (...) Piety.

A heavy charge this too. But if he or any man else can show that (...) has
been punished in the High commission, or else where, by the Prel^^^^ for
Virtue and Piety, there is all the reason in the world we should be severaly
^^^nished our selves. But the truth is, the Virtue and Piety for which these
^^^nisters are punished, is for Preaching Schism and Sedition.

Observe.
Tertullus called Paul a pestilent fellow, the Jews said our Savi^^^ had a
Devil, by whose power he cast out Devils, that he had ^^^^^phemed against God,
and refused to acknowledge the Soverainity (...) Caesar, though such
calumniatours had than more power in the w^^^^ then either Christ did assume,
or Paul practice or pretend right (...) ^^ither the Speech^s, nor quality of
those revilers, did make them ^^ilty to those foul imputations. So albeit his
Gr: say, that the Mi^^^ters and others who have suffered by banishment, prison,
fynes, re^aches in their good names, or by corporal punishment, for refuse^,
writing, or preaching against Popish Ceremonies, have suffered (...) for
preaching of schism and Sedition, it follows not that they ^re guilty of
these crimes, and his Gr: being as well in fear of pre^ice to his worldly
estate, by the preaching of those whom by his ^atnesse he makes to be chardged
with the foul aspersio^s of mu^^ and sedition (for every act or speech they
utter, where the one or (...) other shows any good reason against Episc.
unlawful ambition ^urisdiction,) as the Scribes and Pharisees were in ^eare of
prej^^^ to their worldly pomp by our Saviors Doctrine, his Gr: reaches
against them, ought to have no more weight toward their ^udice, then the
Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees ra^lings had (in any (...)) against our Savior.
But that they have not suffered for either tiny or Sedition may as clearly
appear to all such as are ignorant ^he true cause of their suffering, as it is
known to the consciences (...) Prelates their persecuters, not only by
inquiry and examen of ^everall pretexts, used for the persecution of such as
cannot strain (...) consciences to a nec^ssary practice of the Ceremonies,
that there ^^e color of Law and Custom for the practice off, but by the
^^^ring also of diverse Conformists.

1629. Mr. Smart a prebend of Durhame, a ^ingular Conformist ^^dyting before
the judges of Assise Cozens and Burgone (two (...) prebends there) for bringing
in new Popish ^euices in (...) Church (besides those that were tolerated in it
before ^^^^nst law, was for that, by the high commission put from his place
de^^^ed of his whole means, fined and kept in prison many years, al^^^^ the
said judges of Assise find his billavera, and gave sentence against th'indyted
parties: Mr Geo: Huntley for refusing a visitation sermon upon the Archdeacons
warning (though the Canon prescribes the Bishop and Ar^h-deacons to preach
themselves, when they visit) Mr. Crowde without any article exhibited to him
or witness against him or any proof conviction or confession of any crime,
underpretext that m^^^ers were so foul against him as they were not fit to be
Articled (...) in Court, Mr. John Heyden for preaching against setting up of
Images and against imposing some ceremonies that are not co^^manded by the
book of common prayer, whereby th^^r extent is limi^^ted, Mr. John Vicars
Minister at Stamford for some things that two Pap^^^ accused him of without
sufficient proof, and a number of others only (...) refusing to read in the
Church the book for sports on the Sabbath (...) reading whereof there was
neither Law nor command of his Majes^^ have been deprived of their benefices
and put from their Ministry wi^^^out being either convented or convicte^ of
mutiny or sedition before co^^pe^e^t judges to such crimes. Mr. Hugh Peter in
1628. Committed 6 we^^ close prisoner, only because being a Zealous preacher,
he was followed much people, Mr Butter a book seller committed to the fleet by
his (...) specially direction for printing a letter of Dr. Dauenant to Bishop
(...) passage against Arminians, which his Gr: Chaplain had given directi^^
leave out, to please the'Arminians: Mr^ Spark and Jonas Hardly Censured
printing books Orthodox, against Popery and Armini. Dr. Souch Dr. (...) Dr.
Tailar Mr Dauvenport condemned as notorious delinquents only for ting their
hands to a Certificat, for furthering a private co^tribution a (...) Charitable
Christians for relie^e of some poor Ministers of the Palitin^^ Her^by it is
evident since his Gr: cau^es to inflict such punishments ((...) upon good
conformists for preaching or doing things which Papists offen^^^ albeit by his
greatness he charges such others as he has caused to suffer the crime of
schism and sedition, nevertheless the true reason for (...) he ha^h caused
persecu^e them, is not so much their nonconforming (...) nenessity of
Ceremonies that there is some pretext of authority for c^^manding of, as
because they are strongly bent to th'opposition of al (...) Popery then that
which has been retained in our churches by the Pre^^^^ that had some hand in
the first re^ormation: for if he could have convi^^^ them of mutiny and
Sedition he would doubtless, have convinced them fore competent judges to these
crimes^ bu^ it is ordinary to Prelates to a reproach of mutiny and Sedi^ion
upon any man that opposes their un^^full ways: the Scots Prelates havnig long
labo^ed to quench in the peo^^^ hearts both all zeal to religion and all
affection to their Sovereign using pretext of the K. authority for
establi^hing Churchmen of (...) life and unsound Doctrine, and for obtruding
diverse points of Pope^y, rep^^^^ his Majesty's most loyal subjects, that
stand in their way, with th'aspers^^^ of M^tiny and Sedition. ^f Prelates, when
they falsely reproach men^ are under them, were as well in danger of
punishment, as men of^ ^state when they speak truly of Bishops actions, when
they are in^^^sistent with the duty both of a loyal subject, and of an
Orthodox (...) man, his Gr. would not have so liberally objected mu^iny and
Sedi^^^^ to those he has through all his Speech inveighed against.

I shall end all with a passage out of S. Cyprian, Arch. B. page 75.
when he, then Bishop of ^^rthage was bitterly rayled upon by a pack of
Schismatics, his answer (...), it is now mine; They have railed both bitterly
and falsely upon me, and Non oportet me paria cum illis facere; it beho^s^s not
me to an^^^ them with the like, either Levi^ies or Revilings, bu^ to speak
and write (...) only which becomes Sacerdotem Dei, a Priest of God.

^t is strange if his Gr: think either in his own mind, Observe.
or that such ^ave heard or read this his Speech, esteem it no reviling or
show of (...), where he says page 2. they libell and rail without all mea^^,
and complain of persecution, without any show of cause. Page 5. of innovatours
of the Christian world; The greatest innovatours (...) the Christian world has
almost ever known; incendiaries as (...) in the State, where they get power,
as they have ever been in (...) Church. Page 9. Have no other purpose then to
stir Sedition a^^^gst the peop. one clamours out of the pulpit, and all of
them (...) the press, and in a most virulent and unchristian manner. Page ^0.
by most false and unjust calumny defame our callings and persons, ^^tty their
rage, God forgive their malice. Page 11. Fire the (...). zeal into a Sedition.
P^g. 18. Humorous men, their Sermons ^re fitter a great deal to stir up
Sedition, then to humble men. Page ^^. Emissaries of this faction, where they
came to preach, by little and little altered the ancient custom of reading
the second service at the Communion Table: These me^ maintain gross^
absurdities in the Word of God, both in opinion and practice. Page 48. As these
men use the matter, it is verbum Diaboli, this is the word of the Devil in too
many places, witness Sedition, and the like to it.

Page 57. Stulti dum vitant vitia, weakmen as these libellers are run into
one superstition whilst ^h^y would avoid an other. Page 72. I chardge upon that
pure Sect this foul corruption of that falsefieing the Articles of the Church
of England. Page 73. Attendants upon Rabsaketh. Page 74. The virtue and piety
for which these Ministers are punished, is for preaching mutiny and Sedition.

And since in former times, Arch. B. page 76.
some spared not to call ^he Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more will
they be bold with t^e^ of the housh^ld.

His Gr: can show in the New Testament one Arch-B. of the Household of Christ^
Observe.
and that ^ome man has datred call his Gr: with such names as those that were
of Christ's Hou^ehold, were called by the^e that called Christ Beelzebub, the
comparison here made by his Gr: with leave of his ^^eatnesse, will never be
esteemed pertinent.

Arch. B. Page 77.
But because the business has some reflection upon my self, J shall ^^^^beare
to censure them, and leave them to GODS mercy and the KING Justice.

Observe.
As in that Consistory wherein Christ was condemned to death, (...) the Scribes
and Pharisees said ( John 18, 31,) it is not lawful for us to (...) any man to
death, yet when they cried, Crucify him, they pronou^^^ a sentence of death
against him with bloody malignitie; Even so, (...) Prelates forbear to
pronounce judgments of blood, and think the^^selves free from blame, of
directing judgment of death, or trunca^^ of members, by absenting themselves
from pronunciation and execu^^^^ of such penal sentence^ yet their very
debating and disputing in del^^^^rations concerning the same, makes them
guilty to the shedding the^^of. And his Gr: forbearance to pronounce the
sentence that he (...) the Judges, to decree against these poor men, does not
make him ga^^ less of their innocent blood, neither can it be lawful to
Prelates, to re^^ or desire the doing of that which is not lawful to them to
assist the (...) off. Ruffinus Hist. lib. 10, c. 2. writes, that albeit Saul
for pallia^^ his malice against David, under the shadow of innocence, said (1
Ch^^^^ 18 17.) let not my hand be upon him, but the hand of the Philistines;
ne^^^^thelesse whatsoever excuse of his malice this dissimulation wrought (...)
men, God did see it the more in his heart^ And albeit David did only ^^^rect
Ioab, to put Vriah in the forefront of the strength of the Battle,
ne^^^^thelesse Nathan said well, that David had slain him with the swor^^ the
Children of A^mon; If those men have deserved to suffer his (...) to be
commended for being the chief cause and maine instrument of (...) they have
suffered unjustly, their blood must be on his Gr: head, and (...) upon either
the King, who did the duty of his place, in referring the m^^^ter to his Court
of Justice, or upon the Judges who without seeing their ^^^swers looked upon
their case in the shape and colors wherein his Gr: (...) represent it to them.
God forbid J say that (which God only does kno^ his malice was no less
against them, then Saul's against David, or Dan^^^ against Uriah, only I may
adventure to say that in many places of (...) Speech, and in his Epist.
Dedicatory to his Majesty: his Gr. express^ some show of Passion, of anger and
of dislike of the men. What the (...) truth is, is only known to his Gr:
conscience, and to God Almig^^^ who in his own time, I hope, will show more
either justice or mercy his Gs. then he has shown to these poor men, whose
sufferings (...) much both talked of, and commiserated by strangers as well as
by (...) own Countriemen and Friends.

Proverbes the 25. Verse. 5 Take away the wicked from before the King, and his
Throne sha^^ (...) ^stablished in Righteousn^sse.
FINIS.
^he Courteous Reader is prayed to dispense with the Printers neglect of right
pointing of the,^: and - in many places^ and to correct the Errata here set
down, in the words following.
^. 14. l. 32. Invoc. r. Innoc. p. 16. l. 28. like, r. alike. p. 17. l. 6.
pres^ris, r. presbiteros. l. 15. leganeritis, r. liganeritis. quoram, r.
quorum. ^emiseritis, r. remiseritis. l. 36. negociatorum, r. negociatorem. P.
^1. supelleculi, r. supellecule. P. 20. l. 30. regi, r. regij. P. 21. l. 8.
dis^eth, r. disclaimeth, l. penult. Majesty, the, r. Majesty, and the. p. 22.
^o, r. do. l. 31. d^^ine, r. divine. p. 24. l. 25. then, r. them. p. 25. l. 3.
^ur^ r. favor. P. 28, l. 27. excepted, r. exped. p. 26, l. 25, particular,
^^rticular, l. 31, scurrilut, r. scurrilous, p. 29, l. 12. humility in, r.
hu^^^^ty m. l. 18, humble, r. humbly, l. 19, conjunctiom, r. conjunctim, p.
^3. mention, r. mentions, l. 24, the Ceremonies, r. and Ceremo^^^ p. 31.
which ordained ordinarily, r. which ordinarily, p. 33, l. 34, a^^ods elect, r.
any of Gods elect, p. 34, l. 9, auritie, r. authority, l. 17, ^he name, r. the
name, p. 36, l. 15, and 16, absolute, r. absolete, p. 37, ^f all the actions,
r. as all the actions, p. 38, l. 25, prayer in before, ^^^yer before, l. 33,
naui, r. navy, p. 42, l. 7, thinking, r. think, p. 43, (...), r. is, l. 31,
permisaerit, r. permiserit, p. 45, l. 12, divine, r. divines, (...), l. ^1,
where, r. wherein, l. 13, names, r. name, l. 17, Erst, r. east, l. ^lt.
^^^^essors, and, r. successors, or, p. 52, l. 8, on, r. one, p. 53, l. 31, it
sinua^^^^ r. insinuates, p. 54^ l. 31, promise. Of, r. promise, of, l^ 32,
changed, ^^^^ardged, p: 55, l. 15, J pleased, r. pleased.


