THE PROFANE SCHISM OF THE BROWNISTS OR SEPARATISTS. WITH THE JMPIETIE,
DISSENSIONS, LEWD, AND ABOMINABLE Vices of that impure Sect.

Discovered by CHRISTOPHER LAVVNE, JOHN FOVVLER, CLEMENT SANDERS, ROBERT
BVLVVARD.


Lately returned from the Company of M. JOHNSON, that wicked Brother, into the
bosom of the Church of ENGLAND, their true Mother.

PSALM. 83.16. Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name, O Lord.

ROMANS 16.17. Now I beseech ye, brethren, mark them diligently, which cause
division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned and
avoid them.

M.D.C.XII.

THE PREFACE UNTO THE CHRISTIAN READER, TOUCHING THE causes and the manner of
our publishing this Treatise.
HE that hides his sins shall not prosper; but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy, Prou. 28.13. Our sin of separation whereby
we have rejected the communion of all true Churches, being now made manifest
unto us upon such occasion as is hereafter declared in this Treatise, and we
desiring to receive mercy from the Father of mercies, have therefore resolved
and thought in our selves, according to the counsel of the holy Ghost, that we
will not hide our iniquity, but confess against our selves our wickedness unto
the Lord, that the punishment of our sin may be forgiven us. Our own
ignorance, and the deceit fulness of others had drawn us into the depth of this
error; and in the midst of this deep Schism, when the Lord might justly
have judged and rebuked us in wrath, even then were we bold to judge and
condemn others that were better than our selves, and far excelling us in all
the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit; we condemned them and slandered our whole
nation as a false Church, false Christians, a Synagogue of Satan, and a people
according to their public profession in a damnable estate; we exempted none,
neither the learnedest and godliest Ministers, nor zealousest people, but
condemned all, and avoided all in the service of God: And therefore to publish
our repentance for this scandalous Separation, we hold it in the first place a
just and necessary cause for the publishing of this Treatise.

He that is first in his own cause is just; then comes his neighbor and
makes inquiry of him; Prou. 18.17. Master Johnson and his confederates being
parties accused by us, and being judges also in their own cause, have first
condemned us with their censure; when we complained of their sin, they could
find no way to clear themselves but by accusing us, so that when we renounced
their Schism, they denounced their curse against us, and thus declared us to
be their enemies, when we told them the truth. In this case the holy Ghost
allows us to make apology for our selves, in enquiring into, and refuting
those slanders which they lay upon us, and make the ground of their sentence
against us. They have condemned us first in their own Church. We do now in
the second place by a public appeal bring the matter before the Churches of
Christ, to judge thereof. This is also another cause of our writing at this
time.

When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren; Luke 22.32. Being our selves
delivered from this snare of the Separation, our desire is to stretch out a
hand of help and comfort unto those, that yet lie in that ditch: and we are
not without hope of some fruit of our endeavors this way; but especially our
hope is to stay and strengthen some weak Christians that are inclining and
looking that way, whom we admonish and desire them in the Lord that they would
be warned by our harms, and by our going astray, to walk the more
circumspectly in the midst of all offenses and scandals wherewith they shall
meet. As for those that are already separate and caught in the briars of that
Schism, although we do assure our selves upon good ground, that sundry of
them do wish they had never met with the Separation, and would also much
rejoice if they were well quit and freed from the same, yea and have wished
some of them that there might be a dissolution of their schismatic body,
that so they might escape without excommunication; yet are they in the mean
time kept under in such bondage by the terror, tyranny, and subtlety of their
guides, which they show both in their doctrine and in their government, that
they dare not easily whisper or muffe against the separation. As for those
whose feet are almost gone, and their steps well near slipped, we desire the^ to
pause a while; it is not so easy a matter to come out of that snare when they
are fallen therein, as it is to keep out at first, and for the stay of such we
have thought it needful to publish this Treatise for their further information
touching the estate of Brownisme, as also to warn all such as have bin the
occasion of those Heresies and Schisms to conform themselves to the Church of
God, that these Caterpillars may no more rise out of them.

And although we be unlearned men which have composed this book, yet we hope
it will not be disked therefore, seeing we speak of nothing but which our own
knowledge and experience has taught us; and the admonition may take better
place, because that the most which are taken in the net of Brownisme are men of
our condition.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this Treatise.
The first Section.
Chapter 1. A Declaration of our procedings with Master Johnson and the Elders
in public in their Meeting House. Folio 1 Chap. 2. A copy of Christopher
Lawnes excommunication: with an answer thereunto. fol. 6 Chap. 3. A copy of
John Fo^er his excommunication: with an answer thereunto. fol. 12
The second Section.
Chapter 1. A True relation of the Schism, Dissensions, Blasphemies, Heresies,
and horrible crimes practiced by the Brownists or Separators. fol. 15 Chap. 2.
The testimony of father Tolwine against their injustice, schism and slander.
fol. 18 Chap. 3. The copy of Robert Bulwards suspension and excommunication:
with an answer thereunto. fol. 20 Chap. 4. A relation of Studley his
wickedness translated out of the Dutch. fol. 22 Chap. 5. A discovery of some
of the abominations of the Brownists in Amsterdam. fol. 26 Chap. 6. A
comparison between two notable Separatists, Daniel S^dley, and Richard
Mansfield. fol. 32 Chap 7. The testimony of William Gilgate, one of Master
Ains^orth his company, and one that had been Minister in England. fol. 41
Chap. 8. Letters that passed betwixt Master Ames and Master Robinson touching
the bitterness of the Separation. fol. 47 Chap. 9. A relation of the heresy
of Thomas Lemar. fol. 55 Chap. 10. The testimony of William Simpson against
the Prophets in Master Amsworth his Church. fol. 58 Chap. 11. Of the
dissension between John Johnson the father, and Francis the son: and betwixt
the brothers, George and Francis. fol. 59 Chap. 12. A taste of their detestable
slanders and reproaches concerning the Church of England. fol. 66 Chap. 13.
Concerning their mutual reproaches, dissensions, and curses against one an
other. fol. 70.
This Book is divided into two Sections.
THE first contains such matters as passed between these four persons
Christopher Lawne, etc. and the Sect of Master Johnson.

The second Section contains a true relation of the Schism, Dissensions,
Blasphemies, Heresy, and horrible Crimes practiced by these Brownists or
Separatists.

THE PROFANE SCHISM OF THE BROWNISTS OR SEPARATISTS. The first Section.
CHAP. I. A declaration of our proceedings with master Johnson and the Elders
in public, in their meeting house.
Having formerly refused to come unto their Consistory in master Iohnsons
house, in respect of the manifold abuse, scorn, and other injury, which there
they offered unto us; at length they consented to send for us unto their
public Assembly, although they had long denied the same unto us, who many
times had sought it of them, that there we might make a public renunciation of
our unchristian separation, which we with them had undertaken, from all the
Churches of Christ; to try also whether it might please the Lord to touch the
hearts of some others, and to give them repentance likewise by our example. And
thus the ninth of July 1611. being accompanied with diverse strangers, and
members of the English Church, unto which we have now joined our selves, we
came unto them in their meeting house, after their evening exercise was ended.

Being come unto them, and standing in the midst of them, the notorious
Daniell Studley, master Iohnsons chief Standard bearer, being for that day
the Proloquut^r of their Company, began first to make a Speech to the people,
and to relate unto them, How we had charged them to be Schismatikes in the
separation from England, and to be a profane people; and that we had nominated
one woman to be profane, and that we refused to prove the same; that we had
refused to come unto their Eldership; that we had given diverse Articles
against them, which we refused to prove etc. And that now therefore they
required answer for these things. Daniel Studley having ended his Speech: we in
the next place desired leave to speak some things unto the people, before we
gave answer in particular unto the Speech of Daniell Studley; either for
justifying of those things that were truly spoken, or for the reproof of
those things that were false. And so in the first place we acknowledged our
sin in the separation which we had made from the Churches of Christ: we
acknowledged the great mercy of the Lord, that had so graciously given unto us
to see our errors, into which we had bin led by the false doctrines of M.
Johnson, and others: we acknowledged the mercy of God, that had given us
hearts careful in some measure to manifest and show forth the fruits of our
repentance, both to the Lord and to his people; and that, both by word and
writing as occasion should be offered: We signified unto them, that as we had
done it more privately before their Elders: so now in the presence of them all,
with whom together we had been so deeply plunged into the gulf of schism;
we did openly renounce our covenant and profession of separation, which at our
first entrance among them we had made with them: we renounced it, as being a
most abominable and profane thing, against which the Lord had manifested his
anger from heaven, as agenst a Babilonious tower which the Lord would have to
be brought to naught, as appeared by the manifold confusions and dissipations
among them: we professed further unto them, that as we had bin instruments for
the strengthening and upholding of that Tower of Separation; so we did purpose
by Gods assistance, to use our best endeavors to bring down the same into the
dust: And lastly we testified unto them, that we came not unto them at this
time by virtue of power or authority that they had to command us, but in the
bowels of mercy and tender compassion toward them; hoping God would be
gracious unto some of them, at the least to pluck the^ forth as firebrands out
of this fire, as the Lord had therein dealt mercifully with us.

In the next place, touching that which was objected by Da. Studley, we
answered, That he had not rightly repeated our charge. Our charge was; that
they were schismatiks; that they were profane in their schism; that it led
them to the breach of all Gods commandments; And that thus they had it in
writing under our hands; And that these things being proved, their separation
from England would hereupon appear to be unlawful. Again, as for that
particular woman nominated by us for a profane person, we refuse not to prove
the same; yet desire we, that first of all this foul leprosy of profane
schism, imputed unto you all, may be cleared by you, if you can. According to
the counsel you gave others, we require you, first to pluck this great beam
out of your eyes, and then shall you the better see to help this poor woman.

Unto this answer made by us, Dan. Studley replied not; but then flew in upon
us M. Francis Johnson himself. The first word he spoke was a reproach; the
second railing also; the third was a lie; the fourth was a word of tyranny. The
first title he gave was Hypocrite; the second was railing Rabshakites; the
third, he said our charge was for England in particular; and fourthly, he said
he would hold us to that charge. And for the matter of profaneness, he would
first have that particular woman to be so proved. If his power had bin so
great, as his impotent passion, what would he not have done to us? M. Johnson
would not yet in any sort meddle with the defense of his doctrine; but instead
thereof he turned aside, and entered into a long discourse touching the estate
of diverse Churches in several ages. The sum of his speech was this. Having
showed how all the world was drowned in Antichristianisme, he then told them
how it pleased God in the first place to raise up John Husse, and such like, to
witness against the groffest evils in their times; then he told how Martin
Luther came afterward, by whom a further reformation was obtained; then in the
next place he showed how they of England had gone many degrees before either of
the former: Above all these he showed in the next place, how M. Calvin had
been an instrument of greater light, and reformation, in a higher degree than
any of the forenamed, though still in many things corrupt; but last of all, and
above all, in the highest degree of perfection he placed his own company,
preferring the bright estate of his Church above all the golden Candle sticks
that ever Christ walked amongst, since the days of reformation. He affirmed
openly, that they were by the mercy of God the purest Church, and the freest
from corruptions, and set in a more excellent order, than any Church that he
knew this day in the world; and therefore blamed us for leaving them, and going
into a corrupter estate. Thus did he exalt himself and his disciples, as
though he had been the brightest star in the fimament, above Husse, Luther,
Calvin, or the Martires of England; and so to proceed, as though Daniell
Studley, Edward Benet, Canadine Mercer, Christopher Bowman, and Jacob Johnson,
with the rest, the wandering Stars of their schismatic company, had
likewise excelled Beza, Morney, Iunius, Zanchius, Brad ford, Perkins,
Whitakers, and such like burning lamps, whose light has so comfortably shined
abroad: whereas (indeed) M. Johnson might with far better reason have more
fitly compared himself and his fellows unto Menno Simons, Derick Philips,
Hans-de Rees, and such other Authors of Anabaptistrie, who also have gone
before him in teaching all or the most of the very same points, wherein he
professes himself to differ from the reformed Churches; as in the particulars
may easily be showed when time serves.

After this, master Johnson took master Parkers book written against the
Cross, and by a large and impertinent discourse begin to show how many
corruptions and sins were committed, and maintained in the Church of England.
And hereupon we signified unto him, how vainly and idly he spent his time in
laboring to draw us from the maine matter of the charge which we had laid
upon them, touching their schismatic and false doctrine, taught by him, and
H. Barrow before him. And to the examination of this doctrine, we required him
to come to the examination of that their false doctrine wherewith we had
charged them; but he still refused, having been more then seven times urged
thereunto, as many witnesses can well testify. His desire was still to wrangle
about their practice, and to dispute of corruptions.

When master Johnson could not this way fasten any blame upon us, he then
sought to reprove us for going unto master Padget, and for talking with him.
And here (certainly) it is needful to observe their pollice this way; for
holding of those in bondage whom they have once seduced. They cannot endure
that their members should ask counsel of any learned man, or confer with any
other touching their doubts, except it be with their own guides and teachers,
or some among themselves. And therefore when diverse of them knew, that we went
to confer with master Padget, they were displeased with us; they reproved us;
and for justifying of their reproof they abused (as their manner is) sundry
points of Scripture; alleging unto us, Matthew. 1.7.
That the Priests lips should preserve knowledge; that they should seek the
law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. This they
alleged, as though there had been no lips, of knowledge but only in their
company; as though master Johnson, and master Clifton had been the alone Angels
of the Lord of Hostet; as though the Law of God were to be sought for only at
their mouth, and the mouth of Daniel Studley, Jacob Johnson, the Prophet
Pecksall, and such like.

It is a misery unspeakable to be separate from the worship of all true
Churches, and to be shut out from any other Teachers whatsoever besides their
own; but yet is it a further bondage to be restrained from private conference
with other learned men, and so to be deprived from the fruit of their counsel.
For this cause there are justly come upon them all the judgments that are
here threatened unto the despisers of counsel. We see they fall daily from
the Truth, from the Churches of Christ, from themselves and their own
opinions, from their own followers.

CHAP. II. A Copy of Christopher Lawnes excommunication with an answer
thereunto.
WHiles we continued constantly in the renunciation of their schism and
separation; and their Elders on the other side as obstinately despising our
reproof of their sin; they perceived that sundry of their members began more
and more to be troubled, and to doubt of their estate. And therefore to
withdraw their members from conuersing with us, and to make good their own
proceedings, and hold on their course against us, they resolved together to
excommunicate us. Which being done, and we often desiring copies of our
excommunication, at last they gave them unto us in writing; after this manner.

Christopher Lawne was proceeded against by the Church, the eight and twentieth
of the seventh month, July, 1611. for railing, slandering, abusing, and
despising the Governors and whole Church, etc. as he manifested by word and
deed, by writing and otherwise: among which were these and the like particulars.



etc. as is aforesaid.



Christopher Lawne was proceeded against by the Church; let it be remembered
that the Church has so done it, that diverse members of that same Church have
acknowledged that they did not consent unto that his excommunication; some
being absent when it was done, and some speaking against it; and some disliking
it; some going away at that present because they would have us hold it, though
not daring to speak against it, as they have confessed since unto us: and do
therefore still profess as much love and fellowship with us as formerly they
have done.

the seventh month, July, and again, In the copy of John Fowlers
ezcommunication.
in the eight month, August; why might not they have written July or August
alone, without that superfluous and idle addition of the seventh month, and
the eighth month? as well as they wrote since Narration, page 1.2.
the twenty ninth of May: September the fourth: the five and twentieth of
August.

railing, slandering, abusing and despising, for the ground of our
excommunication. As for their Governors; their eldest Elder, and the ancientest
pillar of their separation ought now to be thrust our of his government; so
that their own former doctrine, and their present endeavors cries so loud, and
opens so wide a mouth against their government, that all their Elders ears may
tingle to ear the same. And as for their whole Church, whereof they speak:
when it was whole; what is but a patcherie of a few Schismatickes that had
forsaken the Church of God? But now, being divided in the midst, and half of
them again being rent from the other, they might better have spoken of their
piece, then their whole: they being but the broken fragment of a schism. And
yet this broken piece exalts it self above all the whole Church of Christ.

That he charged us to be Schismatikes for our separation from the Church of
England; and hereupon also to be a profane company, etc.

Johnson had answered those grounds of holy Scripture which there are specified
for the maintenance of our Charge, he might then have had some color for this
his accusation: but until this be done, or until he repent thereof, the blame
and shame of those iniquities must rest upon his head, and lodge in his bosom.
And he might as well vant, the rebukes of sin by the Prophets to be railings
and standers, since all that we have there affirmed in our Charge is warranted
and justified by the word of God, which we have expressed against them.

Secondly, let it be observed, that they might as well charge the holiest and
learnedest men in all the Churches of God at this day to be slanderers and
railers, as us; seeing they do generally hold such doctrine, as we charged them
withal, to be false and schismatic; seeing they do all agree with us
herein. If any of their poor people think it to be otherwise, being deceived
by their guides; we dsire them to go unto them with us, and to hear their
judgment for confirmation hereof.

The second particular here objected against us, is for leaving their
Communion. Of this particular only they give a reason, taken from the
holiness and lawfulness of their Communion, to prove that we should not have
left them. The weakness and insufficiency of this their defense may appear
diverse ways. But let this one suffice.

What has master Johnson here said for himself, which master Ainsworth might
not as truly allege for his company? Master Ainsworth and his people
profess themselves as great enemies to Antichrist and his abominations, as M.
Johnson. And his profession also has as much show of sincerity, as that of M.
Johnson. And yet M. Johnson witnesses against them, as against a false church;
teaches that their Communion ought to be left, in respect of their schism
from him. And why then may not we for the same respect of schism leave M.
Johnson also? Or is it a greater sin for M. Ainsworth to leave the Communion
of M. Johnson, than for master Johnson to refuse and avoid the Communion of
all true Churches besides?

Thirdly, where it is said that to their knowledge and power they witness etc.
this appears to be false, and they are not to be credited herein. Their own
words, and their own dealings, will prove their dissimulation and hypocrisy
herein. For when complaint was made to master Johnson of their corrupt manner of
worship in singing their new rithmes: M. Johnson acknowledged that he had
sundry years together disliked the same; yet never witnessed against the same.
Yea after this admonition and confession he is still silent, and therefore he
does not according to his knowledge and power witness against known
corruptions. For when formerly complaint has been made unto master Johnson of
their naughty order in singing Psalms in such a meeter, and in such a ^ime,
as it seems they are ashamed that any should see them to examine them; (for
they keep them among themselves like a traditionall mystery, that few or none,
even of their own people, have any use of them, save when they are read after a
broken manner in public) when diverse reasons were alleged against them by
some of us; as that they served not for edification in their public, being of
so harsh and hard a phrase that they knew not what they meant, neither could
sing with understanding. Secondly, that these once being in use, and copies
thereof kept from the people, by this means singing of Psalms was shut out of
private houses, and the comfort thereof lost amongst them. Thirdly, that by the
uncouth and strange translation and meetre used in them, the congregation was
made a laughing stock to strangers, that by occasion came in to see them in
their public worship. When these things were thus related to M. Johnson, he
acknowledged that he also did dislike their order, and condemned it, but he did
not witness against it: Indeed D. Studley pleaded for the use of them still in
that order against M. Johnson. And what wonder, that he which had such a vein
in making filthy and obscene rithmes, which he taught unto little children? or
that his Client mistress M. May, the victualler, who used in her house to sing
such Songs as is a shame to report, (being more fit for a common bawd, than for
a person professing such pure separation from other Churches) as has bin
openly testified in their public meeting house by her own servant that is one
of them? what wonder if they should be content to loose the daily use of
spiritual Songs and Psalms, which cannot dwell together with such carnal
vanity and unclean rithmes?

Again, he has of late affirmed, That every man ought to bring up the tenth
part of that which he gets by labor, in his several calling, to the
maintenance of their Church; and that every one, which does it not, is a
thief. But seeing now he is not like to persuade his people to receive this
doctrine of Extortion, he is content to hold his peace. And does he not now
willingly suffer a company of thieves (in his account) among them? Is not his
company become a den of thieues, whilst he winkes with his eyes, and does
not daily witness against their theft, according to his knowledge and power; as
here he pretends?

Johnson by some of their own members at the reading thereof, that it was vain
and idle to seek matter against Christ. Laune, seeing he had himself said
much more before the^ all.

But who be those two subscribers, that set their hands to this
excommunication? These two be the two special champions of the Franciscan
schism, the two principal pillars of that rotten separation; the one by his
wit, and the other by his wealth. Dan. Studley by his wit and policy has often
turned good into evil, and evil into good, and brought many a man to
repentance for well-doing; and therefore he sits next unto S. Francis himself
in the usurped throne of their judgment, and eftsoons upon each occasion he
whispers in S. Francis ear, who bends and listens to him, to the grief of
many a person that yet remains in the same schism with them.

But if any would further know what this Dan. Studley is, let them ask Samuel
Fuller a Deacon of master Robinsons Church, and desire to see a copy of the
letter which Daniell Studley sent unto him; or let them ask master Thorpe a
deacon of master Ainsworths Church, and desire to see a book entitled, The
first part of the hunting of the Fox, and there he shall see Dan. Studley
traced up and down. He had a trembling Palsy in his filthy fist, when he
subscribed the copy of this unjust excommunication. Had S. Francis never a
cleaner fist to strike us withal, than this hand of Daniel Studley! Could he
have done us a greater comfort, than to declare our condemnation by that hand,
which by the best among themselves is condemned as well as by us?

As for this Edward Benet, he is to be considered as a horn of the beast, that
lends his power, wealth, and authority to the maintenance of the beast,
according to that in the Revelation 17.13. so that it is not vnfittely spoken
by some of master Ainsworths company, viz. As the King of Spain is unto the
Pope: so is Master Benet unto Master Johnson.

CHAP. III. A Copy of John Fowler his excommunication: with an answer thereto.
John Fowler was proceeded against by the Church, the 28. of the 8. month of
August 1611. for persisting in these sins following.

1 For leaving the Church. 2 For joining with those whom we have
excommunicated, as Christopher Lawne etc. 3 For contentious carriage in
refusing to speak to the Elders when he came unto them, otherwise than by
writing which he brought, and would have them also to answer him in writing
again. 4 He despised the voice of the Church, refusing to come in public at
their sending for him. 5 And while he stood a member of us, he refused to
partake in the Lords Supper.
Daniel Studley. Edward Benet.


Having answered unto the Copy of Chr. Lawne his excommunication, we desire it
may be considered, that therein also we have given answer touching the rest of
the men and women that were excommunicate at the same time; there being no
particular sin named and objected unto any of them in the copies of their
Excommunications, which was not contained in Christopher Lawnes, and therein
answered also. And for those that were a month after excommunicate with John
Fowler for giving testimony unto our cause, in answering this copy of his
excommunication we do herein also give answer for them: there being nothing
further pretended against any of them, than is here objected unto him. To come
then unto the answer hereof.

Objection

1. First they condemn him for leaving the Church.

Answer.

It is no sin to leave that Church, that leaves all other Churches.

Objection 2.

And joining with those whom we have excommunicate; as Chr. Lawne, etc.

Answer.

John Johnson the Father been alive at this time, and had testified as Chr.
La. Cl. Sa. against their schism, adding this unto the rest of his supposed
iniquities, we would not have feared to join with that Excommunicate, while
he in like manner would have embraced the Communion of a true Church.

Franciscanes themselves are one Body, with an Excommunicate of Master
Ainsworths company: whatsoever they can justly answer for themselves, in
joining with such an Excommunicate, the same may we also, and much more.

Brownists themselves do see the vanity of the Excommunications executed by
Fra. Johnson, Dan. Stud. Ed. Benet etc. and do receive their Excommunicates,
as appears in the practice of M. Ainsworth and his company. Are they
ridiculous among themselves, and shall they be regarded of others?

Objection 3.

For contentious carriage in refusing to speak unto the Elders etc.

Answer.



Johnson, that sought to See the letter of John Johnson, art. 3.
ensnare his own Father, and to pervert his words, whom will he spare? Now
writing might have prevented this danger.

Objection 4.

He despised the voice of the Church etc.

Answer.





Objection 5.

And while he stood a member of us, he refused to partake in the Lords Supper.

Answer.

Let the Reader know, that this refusal of participating in the Lords Supper
with them, was upon the point of leaving them, when he called their Schism
into question, and began to doubt of his estate among them. In this case he
could not (of Faith) come to the Table of the Lord with them.

SECT. 2.
CHAP. I. Containing a true relation of the Schism, Dissensions, Blasphemies,
Heresies, and horrible Crimes practiced by the Brownists or Separators.
Certain Articles against Dan. Studley, given to M. Johnson in their public
Congregation before their Elders, to desire his deposition from his office, of
being an Elder.







Marie May in some particulars, as we can plainly prove in due time and
place. This was a principal thing alleged to depose M. de Cluse.

now of late, with his beastly behauior to entice her to satisfy his own
lust, unmeet to be named.

To the second and to the fifth, Edward Tolwine, John Clifton, Ellen Vpton,
Henry Homline subscribed.



Judith Holder in known evil.

Marie May to lie with her husband before they were married.

A consideration of the common defenses and excuses made for the restraining of
Dan. Studley in his office.
Johnson, That the offenses committed by Dan. Studley are his personal sins,
and not the sins of his administration.

Answer.

Hereunto we answer; first, That suppose his offenses were only personal
sins, yet might they be a just cause of deposition. Abiathars sin and
Reubens sin were their personal sins: Likewise Adultery, Incest, Murder,
Treason, Drunkenness, Perjury, and Blasphemy, are personal sins, and yet
just causes of deposition; and therefore we hold it a great error in M.
Johnson so to plead for him.

Secondly, the sins of Dan. Studley are not only personal sins, but also
the sins of his administration; as namely, his partiality in perverting
justice and judgment, his favoring of the guilty, and his oppressing of the
innocent, and his taking of bribes to this end; as namely, joints of meat and
bottles of wine from Mistress M.M. as has been confessed by her self:
without which gifts (as she says) she had not continued so long in the Church.

Again it is pleaded for him, That he has acknowledged his offense, and that
he has repented for the same.

Answer.

Hereunto we answer; first: That suppose he had truly repented; yet is not
his repentance sufficient to retain him in office. An adulterer, traitor,
murderer, may, through Gods mercy, truly repent; and yet such ought to be
deposed from their office.

Secondly, the repentance of Dan. Studley is not to be accepted, because he
still seeks to excuse and diminish his faults; as namely, by pleading for
himself touching master Ainsworths daughter, that he knows not whether she be
male or female. For, if this were so, as he says (though indeed the contrary
is affirmed and testified against him) yet is it a praise of the maid who
resisted his leaud attempts; and not his praise. Who doubts but that he would
have known whether she had been man or woman, if she would have yielded to
his lust? This and such like excuses are no tokens of hearty repentance.

Further, it is often objected unto us by master Johnson, That by our dealing
against Dan. Studley We do (with Cham) uncover the nakedness of our Father,
and therefore are in danger of the Curse that was laid upon him by Noah.

First, we answer, It is not we, but Dan. Studley himself, that has in
shameful and horrible manner uncovered the nakedness of his own flesh; not
as Noah that once slipped, and was in his sleep uncovered ignorantly and
against his will, Genesis 9.24. but sundry times, being awake, wittingly and
purposely uncovered himself, and showed his nakedness; and this unto the eyes
of a maid: even as the Serpent, that showed the forbidden fruit unto the woman.
To what good end could this be?

Secondly, as he has uncovered his own nakedness: so has he also violently
uncovered the nakedness of others, of diverse maids; being such a servant of
Sin and strange Lust, he is liker unto Cham, and Canaan, whose curse was to
be a servant of servants. Is not his nose and ears to be cut for these things?

CHAP. II. The testimony of father Tolwine with us against their injustice,
schism, and slander.
THis old man (Father Tolwine) being about fourscore years of age, the
ancientest of their company, who saw the very beginning of the separation,
having often, of old, entertained master Brown into his house, where many
consultations were held about this matter, before the resolution of renouncing
communion with the Church of England was agreed upon; before master Johnson, or
any of the Franciscans, did dream of this way, upon the first separation of
Brown, was much moved to follow him in this schism; and when Brown went to
dwell at Middleborough, resolved to have gone after him him thither; and to
that end sold up his living: but by the providence of God, before he was paid
for the same, the man that bought it died suddenly, and so that bargain came
to nothing. And before he could again take order for his journey, he
understood of the great troubles among them of the separation at Middleborough;
the dissolution of their compony; the departure of Brown from that place; and
in fine, the departure of Brown from his profession also. But after this
again, the doctrine of Brown being taken up and received by H. Barrow, and
afterward by Francis Johnson, the mind of this old man was again troubled by
their books and writings; in so much that at length, after he had been long
tossed up and down with the wind of their deceitful doctrine, he left his
old wife and friends, and came unto Amsterdam, there to remain with the
Brownists, about some five or six years agone. And during this time of his
abode among them, he walked unblameably amongst them; he was generally honored
of them all, and respected above many others. But now at last seeing the
hateful contentions among them; seeing their schism to rend it self in
pieces into many other schisms; seeing Dan. Studley to be maintained in his
wickedness against so manifold and pregnant testimonies of those that sought his
deposition; seeing those that witnessed against their corruptions to be either
discouraged and faint on the one side, or to be rejected and excommunicated on
the otherside: it pleased God hereby to enlarge his heart to understand the
truth, and after long and serious consideration to see the error of his
schism, and to forsake the same. While he was thus pricked in his heart, and
perplexed about his estate, he came unto some of us whom they had
excommunicated; he came unto us with tears, weeping and wringing his hands,
scarce able to speak for sorrow; and when he had recovered himself he cried
out unto us, What shall I do? I see (says he) that the wicked are maintained
and vpholden in their wickedness; I see that the innocent are oppressed in
their innocence; I see that the communion of the godly is rejected; and those
that are most ungodly, are they that separate themselves from those which bring
forth better fruits of faith and repentance. When it was understood among them,
that Father Tolwine was troubled about their dealings, their Elders sent for
him, to whom he came, and there also witnessed his dislike of their courses.
After this, Father Tolwine withdrew himself from their schismatic
Assemblies, and left his separation which had so long time kept him in bondage;
and since that time has professed that his comfort and peace is now as great,
as his grief and perplexity was before; yea often since has he melted in
tears of comfort and joy, for that it has pleased the Lord to deliver him
from so great a thraldom.

Secondly, we desire master Johnson to remember the cause of Geffrey Whittakers
and Judith Holder. These being found in bed together, and the action being
naughty, yet Geffrey Whittakers excused the matter, that he did it not to
satisfy his lust, but to comfort Iud. Holder; being sick to keep her warm;
and with diverse words to that purpose, as though he had sought to perform a
duty of Christian love; and not an action of wanton lust. Geffrey Whittakers
in these vile excuses was by some maintained: Dan. Studley in special manner
seeking to clear him, and to excuse the matter. But how did it go in the end?
was not their wickedness found out at last? was not Geffrey Whittakers at
length brought to confess his filthiness, through the pursuit of some of them
which are now in master Ainsworths company? As Dan. Studley strove long in
vain for Geffrey Whittakers: so let master Johnson think he strives in vain
for Dan. Studley, whose leaud lust appears by his leaud attempt, as well as
the others.

CHAP. III. The copy of Robert Bulwards suspension and excommunication: with
an answer thereunto.
RObert Bulward was secluded from the public meetings of the Church. December
1. 1611. For contentious and troublesome dealing when the Church was met
together for ministration of the Word and Sacraments, partaking with Natth
Sanders.
another, that was the^ debarred the Churches meetings for communicating with
railers and excommunicate persons, and going about to defend his so doing: it
being then also signified unto him, again and again, by some of the Elders,
that if he did not rest, we would consider what to do with him likewise.

The thirtieth of January 1612. Robert Bulward aforesaid was cut off from the
Church. withstanding our public testimony concerning separation from the
Apostasy and corruptions of Antichrist, and such as maintain them, with
opposition against the truth of Christ. Studley in some things which he could
not prove against him.


All these are answered, as in the former Excommunications.

The testimony of the Dutch Church concerning the Brownists.
WHen as they sent their messengers with some questions unto the Dutch
Eldership, they received this answer from them, That they did not acknowledge
their Assembly to be an Ecclesiastical Assembly, or a lawful Church. And
when master Johnson and others of them were instant to hear reasons of this
answer from them; it was further answered, They would do it if they saw it
needful, or if they found any thing that was worthy of answer.

The testimony of the Magistracy of Amsterdam concerning the Brownists.
THe Magistrates both of old, against master White, and now of late in suit
about their meeting house; when they sought to lay in their action in the name
of the Church, they were repelled by the Magistrates that are members of the
Dutch Church; they would not receive complaint from them in the quality or
name of a Church, or the name of any Elder or Deacon, but as from private men;
The Magistrates told them that they held them not as a Church, but as a Sect.

M. Johnson his unnatural dealing with his brother.
WE G. Johnson his discourse of troubles and excom. p. 36. 37
read, that his brother George being in extreme want, living upon bread and
water only, Master Johnson did then hide his face from his poor brother, and
shut up the bowels of compassion against him, whilst others insulted against
the afflicted, and bad him sell his Books, his Couerlet, and his Cloak also,
as others witness. Does excommunication break the bond of nature, and
dissolve the duties of kindred and brotherhood?

CHAP. IIII. More of the wickedness of Studley, translated out of the Dutch.
THat the English Reader be not altogether debarred from the knowledge of the
Dutch story, concerning the notable exploits of this famous Franciscan, D.
Studley, let him know, that herein is described, 1. his memorable wrestling
with his wives daughter, his breathlesnesse, his blushing, his abashment, his
daughters color. 2. M. Hintons trouble for the construction of it. 3. The
pensiveness, weeping, and crying of Studleyes wife. 4. Studley his rising out
of his bed, and going into his daughters slap-camer to kiss her, to show, that
he loved his daughter for his wives sake. 5. His punching of his wife with
knees and elbowes, upon her admonition and counsel she gave him. 6. The
devise betwixt Mistress Hinton and the Mother, to chastise the daughter that
had occasioned her Mother so many beatings. 7. Studley his proceeding unto
further dalliance. 8. The blew eye that Studley gave his wife. 9. His respect
of the daughter above the Mother. 10. The repentance that Studley his wife was
brought to for complaining unto one that was not of their Church, and the many
stripes that she received for the same. 11. The fear of Studley his wife. 12.
The knowledge that others had of his dealing. 13. His mocking of his wife.

Those persons which are figured out unto us by the unclean creatures, unfit
to be sacrificed, to be eaten, or to be touched, may not be retained in office
in the Church; because those that by office bear the vessels of the Lord,
ought to be clean, Esaias 52.11. whereas on the contrary, those persons are a
means to defile and pollute every vessel that they touch, Leuit. 11.32.

Daniel Studley is such a person as is figured out by those unclean creatures
of all sorts. Verse. 4.
For to speak of the foure-footed beasts, and first of them which chew the Cud,
and do not divide the Hoof, he is like unto the great Camel, in respect of
the great uncleanness above noted: and therefore to retain this Camel in the
dignity of an office, even then also when those which did but hear the Word
of God preached in other true Churches, are not retained in Communion; What is
it else, but with those partial and blind guides to strain out a Gnat, and
swallow a Camel? Matthew. 23.24.

Verse. 7.
Again, of those beasts which divide the Hoof, but chew not the Cud, he is
like the filthy Swine; for that although by his repentance he seemed to be
washed from his former uncleanness, he has yet now of late, like the Swine,
returned to wallow himself in the same mire of uncleanness with other maids,
according to the true Proverb, 2. Pet. 2.22.

Verse. 9. and 10.
For unclean creatures in the waters having not sins and scales: first he is
like unto the slipperie Eele without scales: for what wickedness is there
which by his slipperie shifts and windings he knows not how to excuse and
cover? Is it not a common saying among them, If I had Dan. Studley on my side,
I care not what matter any should have against me?

Again, for the creatures in the waters without sins, he is like unto the
hard shellfish, being as bold and stout to maintain his devise, as he is
subtle and politic in devising the same. For when as in the midst of all
his iniquity he stands up in the Public to discourage those that complained
on him, professing that if any minded him, he would also mind them: Is not this
an hard shell of impudency upon him?

Verse. 13.14. etc.
Touching the unclean among the Fowls; first there are specially noted all
kind of ravening birds: as the Eagle, the Griffon, the Vulture, and Kite, after
his kind, and all Ravens after their kind. Now for claws to scratch and
gripe withal, how notable is Dan. Studley in his letter to Sam. Fuller? How
full of scratching and bitter railing is it? And for his administration at
home, there was never any poor bird that did move the wing, open the mouth,
whisper or chirpe against him, but this partial Griffon has set the print of
his claws upon him. As Ashur boasts of himself, Esaias 10.14. so, in effect,
have they boasted over them that rise up to complain of Studley.

Again, among the unclean birds the Night-fowles are often noted; as namely,
the Night-crow, the little Owl, the Back or Bat. And these also do represent
unto us the scandalous walking of Dan. Studley, so often and so ordinarily
haunting with other men's wives, at unseasonable times of the night, as namely
with Mistress M. V. C. K. D. and diverse others heretofore. And yet this
Night-crow being admonished of the great appearance of evil herein, has
refused to hearken thereunto, or to amend his evil.

Verse. 29.30. etc.
As for the creeping things among them; the Mouse, the Rat, the Lizard, the
Moule, that lurk in holes, and hide themselves in the dust, are noted for
unclean creatures: and these do very fitly represent the lurking nature of
Dan. Studley, that can so cunningly hide himself in his dealings. But
especially, among the creeping things, the Camelion, that is so famous for
changing it self into (almost) all colors, is most fit to represent unto us
an hypocrite, such an one as Daniel Studley, whose use is to paint over the
foulest faces with the fairest colors of Holiness, Religion, and Piety. For
example, Judith Holder being accused for unchristian and unnatural dealing
toward her husband, who being sick of the Plague, and being (as he thought)
ready to give up the ghost, having such grievous pangs of death upon him, she
then neglected him, yea shamed not then to sit over his head and sing. But here
Dan. Studley casts his color upon it, and says, That it might be a most
holy and religious action to praise the Lord with songs in adversity. Again,
M. M. being shut out of the Church for sin, and to come in again, she
boasted, That if she were in again, all the Devils in Hell should not get her
out. This speech being reproved by some of us, Dan. Studley in their Eldership
cast his color upon it, saying, It seemed to be a very holy speech, showing
her faith, and hope of assistance from the Lord. Again, when he was found
hidden behind the basket at Iud. Holders house, he made this holy pretense,
That he hid himself to see the behauior of G. P. who came thither after him:
so watchful and vigilant an ouerseer was he. Also, M. M. having been in a
whore-house upon some occasion, and creeping thence out at a window in a very
untoward manner, was excused by Dan. Studley, who alleged in her defense the
example of Paul, That by the Disciples was out a window, through the wall of
Damascus, let down by a rope in a basket, Act. 9.25. 2. Cor. 11.33. A number
of such instances might be brought to show the colorable dealing of this
hypocritical Camelion. And therefore, sithence such uncleanness of all sorts
is found in him, we are fully persuaded, that he is unworthy to bear office
and dignity, that bears so much reproach, and so justly, for his sin.
Further, raising sedition among themselves, the question is, Whether M.
Amsworth have carried away the Church with him, or whether M. Johnson keep the
Church still with him? And as they have an Ecclesiastical suit about the
kernel, which of them should be the people of God and the true Church, so have
they another civil contention about the shell and the husk, who shall have
the meeting house where this Church should meet together. In the mean time
the two houses, where the several factions of these two seditious Captains
do meet, being in the same street, and within one house of another, are much
like unto those two Wells Eseck and Sitnah (Sedition and Dissension) or strife
and hatred. Genesis 26.20.21.
But blessed be God, who has delivered us both from M. Iohnsons Apostaticall
Eseck, and from M. Amsworths schismatic Sitnah; and not only so, but has
also brought us unto Rehoboth, or Largeness, by enlarging our hearts to
embrace the Communion of those true Churches, from which the partition wall of
their separation had excluded us and shut us out before. Verse. 12.
We pray the Lord for them also, that they may be likewise enlarged, that the
chain of their Schism, which keeps them so strait, may be broken, and they
at length be brought to entertain Communion with the people of God.

CHAP. V. Under the hand of the Secretary and Seal of the City in this form
as follows.
Extracted out of a certain Book of M. Whites, entitled
Fol. 1. malice, adulteries, cousenages, and such other like enormities. Fol.
1. Namely Judeth Holder and others.
others) fitter for the Stews, than to be an Elder in any Christian Society.
Fol. 7. Fol. 17. Fol. 15. Fol. 13. They retain amongst them open offenders,
Judith Holder, Canadine, Jacob Johnson. Fol. 9. and 10.
Extracted out of a certain letter underwritten by M. White the 20. of Iulie.
viz the Brownists.
English Congregation of Amsterdam, that I speak not of br^kerage of whores,
and other filthiness, too too bad.

viz. the Brownists.
English are.

Concerning these articles which they laid in against master White, as though
he had slandered them therein: when as master White had once taken order by his
Atturny to answer the matter; whenas also he had for proof thereof brought
sundry witnesses before the Burgo-masters; which there did testify, and by
their oaths and depsitions confirm the things which master White had written;
then was master White discharged, and had liberty from the magistrates to go
for England, as his occasions or business should require. And beside their
speeches unto him to this purpose, this is manifest also by this authentic
copy of the sentence pronounced in this case by the magistrates; as follows.

Extract uyt to Arrest-Rolle der Stadt Amstetredam.
SChepeuen given de fante tegens Francoys Ianson, end Hendrick Answert, end
done voort profijt van dyen, aff to arrest op des opposants parson gedaen end
condemneren de verschleuen arrestaiten inde costen dezer instantie. Actum de
24. Febr. xvi. C. ses. presentibus vt in Registro.

Thomas Weyts. contra

Francoys Ianson, Jacob Ianson, Hendrick Answert, Francoys Blackwall, Daniel
Studley, Christosell Boman, Ian Nicholas, Iudick Holder, Willem Barbons, end
Thomas Bischop.

Coll. M. Bouwer.

Extracted out of the Arrest Roll of the City of Amsterdam.
THe Judges give default for not appearing against Francis Johnson and Henry
Ainsworth, and in regard thereof discharge the Opposant of the Arrest done on
his person, condemning the Arresters in costs and charges of this suite unto
this present time. Actum the 24. of February 1606.

Thomas White against

Francis Johnson, Jacob Johnson, Henry Ainsworth, Francis Blackwell, Daniel
Studley, Christopher Bowman, John Nicholas, Judith Holder, William Barbor, and
Thomas Bishop.

Conferred. M. Bower.

By this sentence it may appear, that master White was not only acquit from
their Arrest by the magistrates, but also, that they themselves being the
Arresters were condemned in the cost and charges of this suite unto that
present time. After which time there was never any other sentence given by the
magistrates to reuerse the same: in so much, that at length the Brownists
themselves (although troublesome and contentious in this as in other actions)
were content to let their suite fall, and ceased to proceed any further
therein. And much better it had been for them never to have begun it, than
with so much shame, and so many rebukes to leave it off.

And as master White himself was thus acquit, so was also mistress White his
wise, by authority of the magistrates acquit in this matter, as appears by
this copy of the Sentence given in respect of her.

Extract uyt to Arrest-Rolle der Stadt Amstelredam.
SChepeuen done aff t'arrest op de parsoon van des opposants huiistorowe
gedaen. Actum de 25. Februar. xvi. C. ses. presentibus vt in Registro.

Thomas Weyts als man end voocht van Rose Weyts. contra Daniel Studley.

Coll. M. Bouwer.

Extracted out of the Arrest-Rolle of the city of Amsterdam.
THe Judges release the arrest done on the person of the Opposants wife. Actum
the 25. of February 1606.

Thomas White as husband and head of Rose White.

against Daniel Studley.

Conferred M. Bower.

Here mark their notable partiality, in calling before the magistrates such
as in their speech do mention their adulteries, and yet let those alone that
commit the adulteries, and never call them before the magistrates, although the
facts be so manifest, that master Johnson himself in his answer to master
White could not deny the same; as namely of William Holder, Thomas Canadine,
Robert Baylie, etc. Had it not been as just and as necessary to have called
these malefactors before the magistrates, as to have called master White, who
did but publish what they had done? Is it a less matter for a Brownist to
commit sin, than for an other man to speak of it? Or shall the less sin
be called into judgment, when the greater shall be let alone? George Johnson
Disc. p 30.
tells us how often his brother Francis, and Daniel Studley wished for
magistracy against him: why could they not as well have sought the benefit of
magistracy against William Holder, Thomas Canadine, etc. when they might have
got the same?

But suppose they had some color in the former thing, yet what hinders them
that now they will not or dare not call John de Cluse, John Trappes, and
Richard Mansfield, before the magistrates, as well as master White? If master
White made mention of their adulteries and uncleanness, so do these testify
of their probable murder, approved whooredome, and wretched perjury, and have
also provoked them to go^ before the magistrates about these things. Are not
these offenses as great, if not greater, than those which master White
objected unto them? What is the cause of this their partiality? why do they
threaten extremity to us, and yet use so much lenity toward those that fall
so hard upon them?

As for the uncleanness of Judith Holder here objected by master White, it is
a thing as evident as may be. For Geffrey Whitakers has since that time openly
confessed in the midst of their Congregation, that he has lain with he
night after night; and this by his own open confession in so beastly and
abominable manner, as we are ashamed to report. Other of her vncleanenesses
are also noted before. And in fine, she is found to be so unclean, as by the
general consent of the Brownists she is cast out of their society.

But Dan. Studley did labor it even again to defend her, after M. White had
in print rebuked him for it; and when the greatest part of their congregation
consented to cast her out as unsavory salt, yet would not Daniel Studley
consent, but complained thereof and mourned for her; and not he only, but M.
Johnson also sought to cloak her uncleanness, and to diminish her sin, and
the shame of Geffrey VVhitakers her bedfellow, and would not have it to be
adultery, using his distinction of lying with a woman, and in a woman etc.
insomuch, that many of his Brownists were ashamed to hear him so to plead for
such a strumpet. Abraham Pulburie did then also very stiffely oppose himself
against Saint Francis at that time, and prevailed so far, by comparing the
matter with that place, John 8.4. that it was at length concluded, that Judith
also was found and taken in the very act. And how could he stand against his
people for the support of Judith in so plain a case, except he could have
pulled out their eyes?

Wherefore, howsoever the separation in show is a white Art, yet to them that
duly consider the same it may easily appear to be a very black Art. This
blackness first shows it self in the black spots, wherewith the Separatists
are of old stained. For some particular instance hereof read the Book of
George Johnson; and (beside other places) consider those Disc. of excom. page
180.
thirteen offenses, or black spots which he notes in his brother Francis;
see the Disc. of excom page 183.
seven spots noted in master Ainsworth; see the Page 183.
twelve black spots found upon Daniel Studley; consider the Page 190.
two and twenty black spots observed and reproved in their Eldership jointly;
and besides these, mark the ten black spots of the Congregation in
general. Page 196.
Secondly, as their blackenesse in themselves is thus to be noted, so in the
next place observe their Art, which they have to make others black by
slaundering and speaking evil of their estate. This Art of slander may well
be called a black Art. Now for the evidence of their skill in this Art, we
refer the Reader to that generation of slanderers hereafter discribed in this
Treatise, where Barrow and his disciples do so practice this black Art, that
in master Iohnsons own words it may justly be said unto them. Enquir. p. 7.
The very shame of men, if no fear of God, might have restrained their lying
lips, and kept them from blaspheming the godly with so black a mouth.

CHAP. VI. A comparison between two notable Separatists, Daniel Studley, a
Franciscane, and Richard Mansfield an Ainsworthian.
The iniquity of Richard Mansfield appears notable.
1 By his cruel tasking, oppressing, and exacting the task imposed; by ha^ging
weights of lead upon his maids arm while she spinned, as though otherwise the
work had bin too light and easy: and the inflicting a cruel punnishment when
the work was not accomplished. Though the Egyptian bondage was grievous, yet
amongst all Pharaohs taske-masters we read of none called Mansfield, nor yet
of none so wantonly cruel as he.

2 By a shameful and vile manner of whipping his Eli. Ap. and Do. Ha.
maids stark naked, being about eighteen years of age. All the particular
accidents therein are too vile to be spoken.

3 By his cruel nipping and pinching of his maids by the arms, in so much that
the skin of Do. Ha.
one of them first rent with whipping, and after crushed with nipping, has
broken out into soars, the filthy matter whereof has come running down to the
wrists of her hands, as she has sit at her wheel.

4 By his most barbarous and beastly manner of hanging up his Do Ha.
maid by the hands stark naked, first binding her hands with cords, tying them
up to some high place, then taking away the thing whereon she stood, and so
letting her hang from the ground while he spent diverse rods upon her: yea and
after this whipping he let her ha^g so a great while before he would take her
down. Alas for the daughters of the separation, is this the liberty of the^
that account themselves the only free people? The virgins of Sion in the days
of their captivity found more favor among the Babylonians, then this D.
Hanwell not handled well among the Brownists.

5 By executing judgment upon his maid, sometime before the show of any fault
was committed: as for example, by calling his maid out of her bed betimes in
the morning, not suffering her to put on her clothes, but making her further
to strip her self, making her also to fetch out the rods, then telling her
also that he knew she would not finish her task by the weeks end, and that
therefore it was best to give her correction beforehand, and so before the
fault committed, inflicted the punishment that might afterward happily be
deserved.

6 By using such rigor toward his servant in exacting the task of work
imposed, that her work being to spin bombasine wool, she has often for
fear been glad to eat up the wool, which she could not spin time enough,
lest some remnant of the wool being seen and found, it might thereby appear
that her task was not finished: and so she her self to have bin brought like
a sheep before the shearer, before Ma^sfield the stripper, and so not only to
have had her wool or woollen garments to be stripped off her back, but also to
have had her skin shorn with the sharp sheares of Mansfields cruel rods.

7 By his barbarous and beastly cruelty in compelling his maid to eat her
own excrements: for when she had once for fear eaten her wool, and the same
again was from time to time purged out of her body, according to the course
of nature, noted by our Savior, Matthew. 15.17.
Whatsoever enters into the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out into
the draught, yet this monstrous wretch coming to the knowledge here of; did
not only rake and take forth out of the draught that which the Lord would have
to be Deuteronomy. 23.13.
covered: but further in most abominable manner he shamed not to take that
dung, and by violence to put it into her mouth, and with a crane of brass to
thrust it down her throat, in so much that the poor maid crying miserably out
for water, was almost slockned before she could get redress against the
vexation of this loathsome tormentor, (has the like ever been read or heard
of?) It was a grievous vision and a type of great misery, when the Lord
commanded Ezechiel, to prepare and bake his bread Ezech. 4 12.13.14.15.16.17
with the dung that comes out of man, to signify the astonishme^t that should
ensue of the evils threatened; and the Lord in mercy spared the Prophet, and
at his prayer did mitigate the thing; but behold in this R. M. a more grievous
sight or vision, a type of astonishment, not to prepare meat with dung, but to
eat that dung as meat, not by commandment of the ^d, but by the lust of the
devil: It was horrible in Rabshaketh a Pagan, to threaten his enemies with the
eating of their own dung through famine; but it was more horrible, savage and
unhuman in Ric. Mansfield, a brother, even a brother of the separation, to use
this cruelty, and with his own hands by force to do it, not unto an enemy,
but unto a sister of the separation, etc.

8 By making his maids immediately after this whipping and hard usage to sing
songs of mirth in the midst of their sorrow and tears, contrary to their
feeling, and contrary to the order of the Apostle, Iam. 5.13. And not only
this, but also by mocking in profane manner at their singing; and for example,
the distressed person beginning to sing, Ps. 51.
O Lord consider my distress, etc. he would then in derision speak unto them,
Oh you are in great distress sure etc. Ps. 137.1.2.3.4.
As the cruel scoffing Babylonians of old required songs and mirth of the Jews
in their captivity, saying unto them, Sing us one of the songs of Zion; even
then when the Jews sat weeping by the rivers of Babell, and had hanged up
their Harps upon the Willowes: so this cruel scoffing Brownist did then
require songs and mirth of his captive maids, when they had hanged up the
Harpes of their mirth, and had rather to have fit weeping than singing; yea,
and constrained the^ to sing so as the Babylonians could not do the Jews.

9 By alleging Scripture (after the manner of the Brownists) to defend and
maintain the cruelty which he used toward his maids, as namely, That if a
man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and they die not under his
hand, but continue a day or two days, he should not be punished, because they
are his money. Exodus 21.20, 21. Whereas this Scripture can be no warrant for
his cruelty; both because his maids were no bondslaues unto him, bought with
his money, as also because that law was in peculiar to the Jews, and even then
was a judicial Statute, and did not free the offendour from all guilt of
sin, but only from the punishment of the civil Magistrate.

10 By his carnal security in the midst of all his impiety; by his usual
sleeping in the time of Gods worship: and this not only when M. Johnson
preached, (for then he plainly professed, that he did settle himself to
sleep, accounting M. Johnson a false Teacher, and unworthy to be hearkened
unto) but thus also he slept, when M. Ainsworth taught. And yet further, which
is more strange, he did not only sleep whiles other preached and prayed, but
even when himself has been praying at home with his family, his manner has
been to fall asleep in the midst of his prayer, as diverse then present have
testified.

11 By his notable hypocrisy in the midst of all his iniquity; and this not
only in his general Separation, according to which (together with the rest of
his companions) he says unto all the reformed Churches in the world, Stand
apart, I am purer and holier than you: Nor yet only by separating from other
Franciscan separatists, and namely from Dan. Studley, whom in special manner
he condemns, and says unto him, Stand apart Studley, for I am holier than
thou. But further, even above many other of M. Ainsworths company, wherein he
rests, he pretends more purity, is more smooth in his words, stricter in
the separation, and makes greater show of holiness and piety.

The iniquity of Daniel Studley appears notable.
1 By his oppression and preventing of Justice through the whole tenor of his
administration, as he himself being pressed and prosecuted by some of master
Ainsworths people has been brought to acknowledge in general. The terror
and fear of Studley have bin heavier tha^ weights of lead upon the fainting
arms of the poor people, that they durst not deal against him. Though the
Pharisees laid heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, Mat. 23. yet among
them al, we read of none called Studley, nor yet of any one whose manifold
oppressions are so often witnessed.

2 By a shameful and vile manner of dealing with one even of the same maids,
who coming out of the hands of Mansfield, fell into the hands of Studley and
was saine to cry out of Studley, as well as she had done of Ma^sfield before.

3 By his cruel nipping and pinching even of his own wife, as she her self
has testified unto diverse, and is in part noted before. Many people talk of
Fairies nippes, and of the blew arms they make; but it is hard to say whether
Fairies of the separation do nip harder.

4 Studley indeed in this point dealt more gently with the Eli. Ap.
maid; whom though he drew and haled violently at the first, yet did he not
hang her up so cruelly, but laid her and threw her upon his bed in more easy
manner. And yet in matters of suite and question, by the threeds of his substill
shifts he does as it were tie and bind the hands of many, both men and women,
which stand hanging in the cords of doubt and fear, waiting long for an issue,
and yet put off with delays. And yet not so, but that he himself also has now
long time hung in fear, with the cord of de position, as it were about his
neck, waiting when he should be turned off from the ladder of his dignity.

5 By executing judgment upon himself before the Judges of the Congregation
had pronounced the sentence of condemnation against him. For as Achitophel and
Judas that hanged themselves before the time, and as those thieves that murder
themselves before the time to prevent the sentence of the law, cannot be
defended therein; so Daniel Studley deposing himself, and leaving his office
before sentence, whether of despair to keep it, seeing the people so against
him, or whether in hypocrisy and policy to move the people unto
commiseration, always his untimely and unorderly executing of himself cannot
be justified, howsoever the cause of his condemnation might be ten times more
just then the cause that Mansfield had against his maid.

6 By using such rigor toward his wife, in threatening and beating her contrary
to that of the Apostle, Col. 3.19. in so much that by his cruelty, she has
sought, though not to eat her wool, yet to eat her word, by laboring that
she might not be called to speak those things which she knew of her husband,
and had already told in secret; yea and has charged some to whom she
complained of her miseries, that they should not utter the same during her
life, for fear of his rage against her. And yet the greatness of her misery
has made her to open her grief; and the regard of her word would not suffer
her to deny the same, when she was called to account for it.

7 By his tyranny common unto him with other of the separation, in drawing
those that had forsaken their error to return unto their vomit again, and to
eat up, though not the excrements of their bodies, yet the excrements of their
error. It is most ordinary with the Brownists to charge those that leave their
schism and return unto the communion of the true Churches to be as dogs
returned to their vomit: as though the fellowship of the Saints, in the holy
things of God in other true Churches, were but as the vomit of dogs, whereas
indeed their separation is but as the excrements and dung of schismatikes; unto
which dung notwithstanding they are often drawn to return, and to eat up the
same. As for example, Edward Benet having begun to purge out some of the
excrements, first by entertaining civil communion with the Church of England,
so far as to marry a wife from thence, and afterterwards in spiritual
communion by hearing master Burges; when as after all he was brought again to
repent for these things: what did he else but return to his own excrements?
Many such examples might be alleged, wherein as many among them have been
vehement, so Dan. Studley, especially in these cases has bin most severe, so
that as in respect of his policies he is generally noted for a Matchieuellian,
so in respect of his tyranny for a Mansfilian, that with Mansfield seeks to
bring and enforce men unto the eating of their own dung. Esa. 36.12.
Again, as this is done indeed, so in the account of the other Separatists,
both of master Ainsworthes and master Robinsons company, the Franciscans being
many ways become notable Apostataes, returning into errors about ministry
and government from which they seemed to be purged, in respect of this
apostasy, they can be accounted no better then dung-eaters, and dogs
returning to their vomit in the estimation of other Brownists: and those which
like Fra. Johnson, and Dan. Studley do most urge hereunto, can be accounted no
better then Mansuilians.

8 By teaching his scholars (the little children which learned of him) not the
songs of Sion, not the Psalms of David (for that is an use that Studley has
often condemned) but filthy, unsavory, and rotten rimes, such as we are
ashamed and loath to print or repeat the same, neither mean we to do it,
unless we be further urged thereunto. The children in Master Ainsworths
company, (...) then he taught, have not yet forgotten them. H. Barrow scoffing
at the Preachers in the Church of England, tells in his Discovery, How their
mouth distilles, and their lips drop down such old parables, etc. But much
more justly might it have been said of Studley, the ancient Elder, Prophet,
and Preacher in the Church of the Brownists, that his mouth has distilled, and
his lips dropped down such old parables, as might far better become the
streets of Sodom than of Sion, being indeed such unclean and stinking
stuff as any Christian ears might justly abhor to hear their children
repeating of the same.

9 By alleging Scripture in like manner to justify his filthy behauior
toward his wives daughter: being reproved for his unclean discoueries, not to
be named, the profane wretch sought to defend himself by the example of
Salomons searching out of all secrets. Is there not here just cause to exclaim
against him, as M. Johnson in another place does against M. Jacob? Fran.
Iohnsons answer to M. Iac. p. 32.
O shameless mouth, O unchristian heart! Can any godless Atheist abuse the
Scriptures more horribly tha^ this filthy Studley herein has done? De Cluse
their Elder should have bin deposed for discovering the secrets of their
Consistory: whereupon we would demand of M. Johnson these three questions:
first, whether De Cluse his uncovering of secrets, or Studleyes searching out
of secrets, be a greater sin? secondly, whether the secrets of their
Consistory, or the secrets of Studleyes private contemplation be greater
secrets? thirdly, whether it had not bin as just to have deposed Studley
betimes, as to have deposed De Cluse so hastily. Further, whether Studley for
defending his filthiness, or Mansfield for defending his cruelty, have more
horribly and wickedly profaned the name of God, we leave to be disputed
betwixt the Franciscans and the Mansvilians.

10 By the like security in his wicked course; his manner being also to sleep
in time of public worship, though an Elder, and sitting in a throne in a high
and eminent place, whereby his offense became more offensive and notorious.
These circumstances therefore being considered on both sides, it may be some
question, Whether of these two sleepers, Mansfield or Studley, have deserved
the more shame, and whether of them be the more slouenly sleeper.

11 By his notable hypocrisy in the midst of all his iniquity: He says
with Mansfield unto all the reformed Churches on earth, Stand apart, I am
holier than you, I must touch no unclean thing; your worship is Apostasy, if
I should join with you. The like he now says unto the Mansvilian Separatists,
and even unto Mansfield himself, whose wickedness he much condemned, when as
upon special occasion it was made known unto him. And besides this, even
above many of the Franciscane Separatists, his companions, he is smooth in
words, strict in separation, full of religious protestations, and can
cunningly allege the sins of the chiefest Saints to cloak his impiety, as
though he were as holy as the faithfullest servant of God upon earth.

Of these two, and sundry other such like, there may justly be verified this
Proverb, The strictest in separation,
The leaudest in conversation.


CHAP. VII. The testimony of William Gilgate, one of Master Ainsworth his
company, and that had bin a Minister in England.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath, for
thine arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me. There is
nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there rest in my
bones, because of my sin, etc.

Having now long time been afflicted with sharp and grievous sickness,
whereby it has pleased God to bring me unto more serious and deep
consideration of my estate, in separating from the Churches of Christ, and
still finding my separation to be more unlawful, the more I consider the same:
and while I felt my self at the weakest and sickest, and so pressed with the
force of my disease, that I even doubted of life, I felt my conscience most
pressed with desire, to revoke my separation; and therefore do now think it
my duty, before I be taken away hence, and be found no more, or how soever it
shall please the Lord to dispose of me by life or death, to give testimony
unto the truth, whereof I am persuaded in my soul.

And as mine own disease, and the hand of God stretched out upon me, moves me
to consider and testify these things, so the disease of the separation, and
the hand of God, which I see to be stretched out against it, does also draw me
on the other side unto the same thing. The disease of the separation is a hot
and burning disease, that consumes and destroys many with the poisonous and
contagious heat thereof; every company among them is as a flame of
condemnation to devour another; the boil of their contention swells and
burns incestantly, and they have yet no poulteste to break it, nor any oil
to mollify the same.

When as I first separated from the Church of England, and came to the Church
of the Separation at Amsterdam, I had not long continued therein, but that
Church did rend in the midst, and separate one half from the other. There
was I constrained to make a new separation again, and then I chose rather to
separate from M. Johnson, and to join my self with M. Ainsworth, who still
kept their old rules, where by we were directly led to separate from M.
Johnson. Being thus separate again, the contention grew so extreme betwixt
these two parts, that so many members on either side as submitted unto the
other, were by the rest given to Satan, and cut off by excommunication. In
this estate both of them boast against the other, each side glories they have
killed the other, dach exalt themselves, and each cast down and condemn the
other. When two harlots came before King Solomon, pleading earnestly against
one another for the living child, both laying claim unto it, Solomon called
for a sword, and commanded to divide the living child, and to give the one
half to the one, and the other half to the other. And upon this sentence the
King marking the compassion of the one to be kindled, and seeing the other
hardened and content to have the child divided, did thereby find out the
compassionat mother, to whom he gave the living child. But these two
contentious women of the Separation, these two companies of M. Johnson and M.
Ainsworth, when they strive for a member going from one to another, have not
their compassion kindled toward their children, like that tender and pitiful
mother, that got her right before Solomon, but both of them are hardened, both
of them do rather choose to slay and divide any of their children with the
sharp sword of their excommunication, than that they should lie in the bosom
of the others communion: What sentence should Solomon give now in this case?
Surely, neither of these women are the right mothers of those children, whom
they do so divide and hew asunder; it appears they never travailed in pain
of them, they never begot them by their Ministry, but having seduced and
stolen these children from the sides of other true Churches, the right mothers,
in whose wombes they were regenerate and borne anew, they are now become
hard-hearted and more cruel unto them than Ostriches unto their young. What
then remains to be done for the changelings of the Separation? Let them open
their eyes and look about them; let them learn to discern their own mother,
from whom they were taken and changed in their cradle; let them forsake their
separation, and suck the milk of Schism no longer; let them return to the
communion of the faithful, both in England and in these reformed Churches,
whom they have rejected as well as England.

I was once half persuaded, that M. Johnson and M. Ainsworth had been those
two witnesses that should prophecy in sackcloth, Reu. 11.3.4. etc. but now
finding that the fire which proceeds out of their mouths is to devour
themselves; finding that they use their power to shut heaven one against
another, esteeming one another Apostataes and Schismatikes, one binding the
sinners which another loses, and binding that which God does not bind;
finding that these two witnesses do not agree in their testimony, but bear
witness one against another, laboring to restrain the rain and deaw from one
another, and to turn the waters of their separation into blood; seeing the
spirit of the beast is in them, to make war, overcome, and kill one another;
insomuch also as their corpse do lie as it were unburied, and not in the
streets of Rome, but in the street of the separation; seeing also that the
disciples of these two Prophets do rejoice and congratulate one another in
their own vexation; and lastly, seeing they have thus layne, not three days
and a half, but more than three hundred and a half, and yet no spirit of life
comes into them to set them on their feet again: therefore can I not esteem
them as those two Olive trees, and two Candlestickes that stand before the God
of the earth. Yea, further I do desire those that yet follow them, that they
would, in the fear of God, be stirred up by these considerations, a little
better to examine the grounds of their unsound separation. As for my self, I
do now by this writing unfeignedly acknowledge my sin to be great, in
renouncing the communion of so many faithful servants of God, with whom I once
lived in the Church of England; I sinned against God, and dishonored his name,
in refusing to hear the word of Life preached in those assemblies: the life,
comfort, and salvation that I expect and hope for in the kingdom of heaven is,
by the faith of the Gospel preached in that Church, and preached there with
more power, fruit, and efficacy, than I ever yet heard in the Churches of the
separation: the faithful in that Church, whose fellowship in the worship of
God I did once reject, are those with whom I hope to rejoice in heaven, whom I
do now also long after in the Lord. I sinned against them, in disclayming their
communion, and thereby have given evil example unto many, and have been a
stumbling block unto the weak, whom I now desire not to be offended nor
scandalized by me.

I hear of late, that the Lady C. a woman of great estimation (though living
still in England) has yet desired to be received as a member of M. Iohnsons
Church: and it is reported by some of them, that in her sickness she has
wished to die as one of them, and to end her days in that profession: but for
my part having now had sufficient experience of their ways, I do freely
acknowledge and profess in this bed of my sickness (from which I know not
whether ever I shall arise unto my former health) That it should be my great
comfort to die in the communion of those Churches whom they have now rejected,
and to renounce my separation, before I be separated out of this world. And I
doubt not, but if that seduced Lady had in like manner with her own eyes
seen the bitter fruits of this miserable separation, she would then account it
her comfort to be free from such a snare.

1 There be at this present hanging over my head two swords of Separation; the
one is the sword of the Lord, who by this grievous disease does threaten to
separate my soul from my body, and to bring me unto the dust of death: if
this sword fall upon me, my hope is, that it shall make way for me into heaven,
into a glorious Communion with the Lord, and innumerable Saints and Angels,
Christ Jesus being the Lamb of God to take away my sins, and being entered as
a forerunner within the veil to prepare a place for me by the blood of the
everlasting covenant.

2 The other is the sword of the Separatists, whereby they threaten to
excommunicate and cut me off, if I live, and rise again to come among them,
and testify against their Schism: If this sword fall upon me, my hope is,
that it shall make way for me into an heaven upon earth, into a gracious
communion with the faithful servants of God in his visible Churches, there to
rejoice with the joy of Gods people: yea, whether they cut me off or not, my
resolution is (if the Lord prolong my days) to cut off my self from that
their schism, wherein I have stood with them. And though I cannot but expect
much reproach and many hard sentences (which they of the Separation will for
this cause pass upon me) yet my hope is, that the Lord (which of his mercy
has given me leave to see my error and his truth) will now also strengthen me
by his grace to bear the evil speeches which in this case they use to pour
out upon those that leave them.

Surely I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is ever before me.
When I declare my pain, and am sorry for my sin,
Then mine enemies are alive and are mighty, and they that hate me wrongfully
are many.
They also that reward evil for good are mine adversaries, because I follow
goodness.
Forsake me not O Lord; be not thou far from me my God.
Have thee to help me, O my Lord, my salvation.
WILL. GILGATE.

About a month or six weeks after this, when by the mercy of God he was
something recovered of his sickness, he then by his practice confirmed further
that which he had written before, both by embracing the communion of the
Churches, which he refused before, in hearing the Word, and praying with them
etc. As also by going unto M. Ainsworths Church, with which he had joined
himself before, and there openly, in the midst of their Congregation,
renounced his fellowship with them, testifying, that they were in Schism: and
for further proof hereof did afterward give unto Master Ainsworth diverse
Arguments in writing, to prove them to be in manifold Schism, and so finally
left them quite.

CHAP. VIII. Letters that passed betwixt M. Ames and M. Robinson touching the
bitterness of the Separation.
ONe point of Schism which M. Gilgate objected unto M. Ainsworth was, for
their separation in private from those particular persons, which might be
discerned to be true visible Christians, even by their own confession. This
point, because it is further discussed in diverse Arguments and Writings betwixt
Master Ames and Master Robinson, we have thought it meet to publish them as
they came unto our hands, because they serve much for the declaration and
manifestation of their Schism herein.

G. M. and P.
SIr, I do not desire to multiply many Letters, no^ many words in this one
Letter, I will pass by therefore your censure. Your manner of separation also
I omit, whether it be like or dislike to that of the first reformed Churches,
for you have yrons ynow in the fire about that question: Neither will I trouble
you about my associates here, whom you deem evil of, though they be unknown
unto you: Only that one point which contains indeed the very bitterness of
Separation, I would desire you again to consider of, as you do me; viz.
Whether there be not a visible Communion even out of a visible Church. These
reasons seem to euince it.

1 Whomsoever I can rightly discern to have communion with Jesus Christ, with
him may I have visible communion: the reason is, because that from visible
descrying of that inward communion, does necessarily follow external
communion. Neither can other sufficient reason be given, why we should
communicate with visible Churches, but only because we visibly discern, that
they have communion with Christ: Now quatenus ipsum and de omni conuertuntur.
But we may discern (even by your confession) of some, out of a visible Church,
that they have communion with Christ. Ergo

2 That which is lawful for them to do which are no members of a visible
Church, that is lawful for others to join with them in: for that which is no
sin in the principal, is none in the accessorie, Cateris paribus. And it
cannot be simply unlawful to join in any action that is lawful, Quatenus
talis; but it is lawful for Christians converted, even before they join in
any Church (perhaps wanting knowledge of the true Constitution, perhaps
opportunity) to worship God. Therefore

3 It is necessary, that before the covenant making (which you hold to be the
form of a Church) they that are to make it, should join together in prayer
for direction, assistance, and blessing, yet they are not a Church until
after: Therefore it is not only lawful but necessary also, that there be a
communion out of a visible Church. You may easily conceive the form and force
of this Argument. If you answer that they are a Church in desire; that is to
forsake your position: for desire to be, does imply, that as yet they are not;
A velle ad esse non sequitur ratio. I will not be further tedious unto you.
Fare you well. Feb. 25.

Your loving friend, WILLIAM AMES.


Mercy and peace be with you, Amen.
SIr, because I do understand by many, that you marvel I answer not your
reasons, having had your writing so long in mine hands, I thought good to
return you a brief answer. Your reasons to prove visible communion out of a
visible Church follow: Though that be not the question between you and me,
But whether we which are, or deem our selves to be of a visible Church, may
lawfully communicate with such as be of no Church?

Acts 2.41,47.
The order set by Christ and his Apostles is, that such as receive the word, and
are to be saved, join themselves forthwith unto the Church, and a large
remnant it is of the confusions which Antichrist has brought into the world,
that men fearing God should remain out of the true Church.

For the further clearing of these things.

If an innocent person (in mine absence) be excommunicated from the Church,
upon the testimony of two or three, yet will I for order sake (and so am bound)
forbear communion with him, till I have manifested his innocence to the
Church. On the other side, Though I know some great wickedness by a brother,
which he denies, and I can not prove, I must still for order sake keep
communion with him in the Church, till God discover him. It is evident
therefore, that in cases I am both to forbear communion with a godly man, till
we be orderly joined together; and to keep communion with a wicked man, till we
be orderly dis-ioyned.

Add unto these things, that upon this ground I may also lawfully admit one
out of the Church, to the Lords Supper, to the choice of Officers censuring of
offenders. And all other exercises of external communion: if by the judgment
of Charity I deem him holy in his person. And how can I deny him one part
of external communion, to whom I afford an other, but I make a schism in the
communion of Saints? and this also may serve for answer to the latter part of
your proof touching visible Churches; for they have not only internal
communion with Christ, but external also in the order which he has set. For
which we stand, and for the want of which alone, we withdraw our selves, as
we do in this case, not daring to break Christ's order for men's disorder.



I do first answer, That men in a Church are bound to, and from many things,
wherein men not in the Church may use more liberty, and upon the same ground
you might more soundly argue thus: Because two or three persons excommunicated
upon false testimony, may pray together, and therefore the brethren of the
Church may forthwith pray with them; Though prayer be in it self a lawful
thing, and they holy in their persons that perform it, yet it is unlawfully
performed out of the Church, in which men ought to be, and therein to use it.
So that although there be neither Vitium personae nec vitium rei. Yet is there
Vitium ordinis, and relationis: and this external religious order, and
relation is the Church Order, and religious communion, a work, does presuppose
religious union of persons.

take our selves to be in the order of an established Church; They then break
no order, though we should. Secondly, such persons are joined in will and
purpose at the least, the which is accepted as the deed. 2. Corinthians. chap. 8.
verse 12. though the outward ceremony be not as yet performed: So is Abraham
said to have offered up Isaac, Hebrews chapter 11. verse 17. and Priscilla
and Aquila to have laid down their own necks for Paul's life, Romans chapter
15. verse. 3, 4. Which notwithstanding they did only in will and purpose. Your
axiom a velle ad esse non sequitur ratio, has his use especially in rebus
naturalibus. But the urging of it thus absolutely in matters of religion, tends
to deprive the Church of her greatest spiritual comfort. Lastly, consider the
covenant in concrete, and prayer is a part thereof. And when men are so met,
with a purpose to unite, and do begin prayer for the sanctification of it:
They are in the door coming into the house, and not without. The Jews were
not to have religious communion with persons uncircumcised, and yet I doubt
not, but when a godly Proselite was to be circumcised, they might lawfully
join with him for the sanctification of the Ordinance. I cease further to
trouble you, and do heartily salute you in the Lord God, wishing you from him
all prosperity; and in him resting.

Leyden this second of the week
Your loving friend JOHN ROBINSON.


SIr, I did marvel indeed at your silence, when an answer was promised, and do
no less marvel at this your answer, that being so deliberate, it is no more
sound and pertinent. As for the state of the question, it was set down in your
own words (thus in the thesis, Whether there be visible communion out of a
visible Church) not to be denied or dissembled in this your answer, as it is
more than once, when you would draw it to an hypothesis. In the answer to the
first Argument, your denial is very strange, and the reasons of it as weak.
The Scripture does every where reason from that communion which we have with
Christ to that which we ought to have one with another. Our best Divines do
put one in the definition of the other. Sanctorum communio est actus and
officium singulorum membrorum inter se, ez union formali cum Christo, and
spiritu ipsius profluens: the sense is acknowledged by all good writers: The
words are taken from reverend Iunius. The same sentence is elsewhere by him
expressed so fitly for you (if you do not despise it) that I hope it may
something prevail with you. Ex illa autem societate (says he) and communione
quam Sancti cum Christo habent, omnino sequitur altera haec consociatio atque
communio qua membra inter se consociata and coagmentata sunt: nam idem qui nos
adunauit sibi eo ipso quod diuersa membra adunat sibi, eadem inter se adunauit:
quae cum it a sint, facile Christianus quilibet nobis assensurus est si
imperturbato animo ad haec legenda and expendenda venerit, non posse quenquam
Christianum bona fide renunciare communioni alterius, quem Christus aut
ad^unxit sibi, aut se adiuncturum spem facit.

The place note well worth your serious reading: Reason shows the same truth.
For, are you more holy than Christ, that you should beat him from your
communion, whom Christ has made a member of his body? does not our internal
communion one with an other flow from that internal communion we have with
Christ? Whence then does our external flow but from that external which we
have with him; or (which is the same) from visible discerning of that internal?

Your instances of Angels and Saints departed do make directly against you;
for we do not visibly and particularly discern of them and their communion
with Christ: but in extraordinary cases, and at such times, we may have
sensible communion with them. When the heavenly company did celebrate the birth
of our Savior, saying, Glory be to God on high, etc. I hope you will not say
it had been sin for the Sheepheards to say Amen to it; nor for the Disciples
to have given the like assent to any worship performed by those which came out
of their graves at the resurrection of Christ. Your other instance of an
innocent excommunicate has no force at all; for your self do not say, that
it is not simply unlawful to have any communion with him at all: but only for
some time: nor that co nomine, because he is out of the Church, but for order
sake. Now I do not speak of such a necessity as binds semper and ad semper,
neither am I against the confederacy of circumstances; but consider it simply
(scandal and contempt removed) it is lawful to communicate with such a one.

As for that consequence of yours, If one part of communion, then to all: It
does better serve the Anabaptist to exclude children from Baptism, than you to
exclude Christians from private communion, because you will not admit them to
some part of the public. He that can spy schism in admitting to one part
before, then to all, might far more easily see the same, in excluding visible
Christians from all, if he were not some way blinded: For is it not a monstrous
breach of charity to afford no more communion to a true Christian, than to a
Turk? Your reason which you give of having communion with visible Churches,
because they have external communion with Christ in the order which he has
set, does not infringe, but confirm my proof; for whence has that order
this force of drawing any to communion? because that is a sign of inward true
communion. Wheresoever then there is evident discerning of inward, there
outward is lawful.

I am not ignorant of some circumstantiall expediences which tie those that
live in well ordered Assemblies, more than other men; but (to omit that the
question is general, not only of such) There is nothing simply unlawful to
one in the nature of it (at least to give assent to) that is lawful for an
other: neither can there be any instance given of an action lawful in one to
perform, which is unlawful for any other to assent unto. That of
excommunication I answered before.

Your first answer to the third Argument is besides the question, which in
your own words is general of any: besides, it is a very strange order that is
broken, by saying Amen to a godly man's prayer, the Scripture knows no such I
am sure. In the second, you mistake that reason, from the will to the deed. For
howsoever before God in spiritual actions it so holds; yet before men,
especially in privileges belonging to any outward society; it nothing
avails to make profession of such a desire. But if it does as you say, then
does it great wrong unto all good Christians, in denying them communion, who
profess they desire to join in all the ordinances of God, so far as they
can discern them. So whereas you say, that such as intend a covenant, are in
the door; I hope all converted Christians are at the least in the door of the
true Church: or if you make the door so narrow, I nothing doubt but ye may go
into the Porch and Court of the Lords house to take a godly man by the hand.

These things considered I am half persuaded, that you will confess your
self to have sinned in separating those whom God has joined together in
communion, That is, all visible Saints; which God of his mercy grant.

Your true friend William Ames.


CHAP. IX. To the right Reverend, master Francis Johnson our Pastor, with the
other Elders his Assistants, Our overseers, grace and peace be multiplied.
SEeing, beloved, that we are fallen into perilous days, some faining unto
themselves one religion, and some another; and because the right way is a
strait way, every one whose way is strait, does think that they have that
right way. And considering the many sorts of the separation at this day,
cursing or rejecting one another: others thinking but basely one of another; as
to begin with our selves, whom master Ainsworth and his followers has left and
rejected as false Christians; master Robinson holding but key-cold brotherhood
with us, and master Ainsworth, and he, and we iarring about ruling Elders;
those in Suffolk holding it unlawful to eat blood; and to fly (as we have
heard) John Wilkinson and his disciples will have Apostles, Thomas Leamar will
have no Churches, with other his wicked differences.

The heresy of one Thomas Lemar, described by master Padget, with this title:
The Monster of Lemarisme.
THis Monster was set forth with seven heads.

1 Mahometisme, in that Lemar denied the holy Trinity, and the eternal
Godhead of Christ. 2 Iudaisme, in affirming that Christ should come shortly in
his own person, to reign here upon earth. 3 Papisme, in holding that a mere
creature is to be worshipped. 4 Lutheranisme, in maintaining the doctrine of
Consubstantiation. 5 Anabaptisme, in affirming that Christ took not his flesh
of the virgin Marie. 6 Libertinisme, in holding that there is no visible Church
now on earth. 7 Brownisme, in holding the doctrine of their separation.
Master Smith an Anabaptist of one sort, and master Helwise of another, and
master Busher of another. John Hancock will have a separation by himself. The
ground of master Neuils errors was also separation; though now he be further
run backward then ever he was forward; to speak nothing of Pedder, Henry
Martin, with the rest of those Anabaptists. These are motives forwarding our
meditations this way together with our mortality, and the justice of God
punishing sin, so that we dare not defer to make known our repentance unto
you, for the space of an hour longer: we might note the hand of God against us
in our estates, a just punishment for sin, by the law of God. The thing then is
this; whereas some years since our minds were much affected and troubled with
the horride estate of the Churches of our native country, and whilst we were
thus musing many ways, and reading such books as came to our hands, amongst
other we light upon some book of this cause, laying open more corruptions in
all estates, and that with more simplicity and plainness (as we thought): so
still the way was prepared unto Separation, and we pricked forward as with
spurs and goads. But then insisting further, that the Church of England was a
false Church, and that known sin not purged out does defile the whole Church,
as leaven does the lump, and we perceiving so much sour dowe, we needed no
eloquent Rhetoritian to persuade us unto separation. For had those two things
been true, and a jealous eye and heart making them his object, it would not
make them go but run to separation, and to be as the Hee-goats before the
flock, so have we done until of late, and persuaded as many to follow us as
we could, if they look or hope for salvation: the Lord pardon us for it. But
seeing that the discovery of the Churches of England to be false Churches, is
now by our selves discovered to be but a fiction, we cannot perceive but that
our Separation in that behalf is at an end: for, the cause being removed, the
effects must needs vanish; and so in those two respects it repents us that we
have separated. And sithence that repentance cannot be known to be sincere,
except it be showed forth by action, or speech, or both: therefore by this
writing we do make it known, and by voice and by our actions we shall make it
known, as God shall minister just occasion. Thus (Reverend and well beloved)
in treathing you to read this unto the Church, or to deliver the whole
substance of it by speech, that they may take knowledge of it, lest we be
blamed of many hereafter that we did not make our minds known unto them, we
cease, praying the Lord to show us all mercy to go with a steedie foot in the
truth. Amen. The eighth of July 1611. new style.

By two of your feeble flock, fearful any longer to go astray. MAT.
SAVNDERS. CVTH. HVTTEN.



CHAP. X. The testimony of W. Simson against the Prophets in master Ainsworths
Church.
Beloved and reverend in the Lord, the consideration of our estate, does so
disquiet my conscience and trouble my mind, that indeed I can have no
resolution of peace in my thoughts thereabout. The first maine cause of this
grief is, our rejecting communion with all the reformed Churches on earth, and
all true Christians in the same; even those whom our selves do account true
Churches, we do yet forsake and separate from their communion: this practice
can have no warrant from Gods word. And for the reproof of our severity in
this evil course; consider how you called master Abram to repentance for
joining to the Dutch Church of London, and how never a word was spoken of those
great scandals he fell into before, upon which he departed and left the Church.

Secondly, as we despise all other worship in true Churches, so our own manner
of exercise on the Lords day, is with such confusion and contradicting one
another, so that even our own profession of separation is indeed quite
overthrown thereby: for example, Thomas Cocky in his prophecy, witnessing
against England, says their ministry is Antichristian, and being so they can
beget no true faith, and no true faith can have no true salvation, and so
consequently in the Church of England is taught no salvation (a fearful
sentence in my judgment.) Again, our beloved master de Cluse in his doctrine
of prophecy, labored to prove separation from a true Church for any
corruption obstinately flood in; this doctrine was by another in prophesying
then showed to be absolutely contrary to that place of Reu. 2.24. which how
unsoundly it was concluded by our Teacher, was then observed by many. Also it
was since by another delivered in the way of prophecy, that even amongst our
selves did reign many sins, as namely, fullness of bread, pride, and
idleness; fullness of bread, in that many were not satisfied with neither
spiritual nor temporal food; pride, in that many did strive to go above their
calling; idleness, in that many were negligent in their calling. If these
things be so, and be not redressed by the admonition of this prophecy, we
must according to master de Cluse his doctrine make a new separation: how often
do the Brethren except one against another for their doctrine, whereby much
heart-burning and strife is kindled betwixt them? These things being well
considered, I entreat you well to mind whether this new way of prophesying on
the Lords day can be for the edification of the Church, or not?

CHAP. XI. Of the dissension between John Johnson the father, and Francis the
son: and betwixt the brothers, George and Francis.
IN the writings and dealings of George Johnson, there appears more
simplicity and plainness then in Francis, whose politic shifts and courses
are as the way of an Eagle, in the air: now such courses are much to be
suspected, whereas commonly plain dealing and honest dealing are as loving
companions, that go hand in hand together. To omit manifold instances of this
crooked and uncertain dealing of Francis Johnson, let this one authentic
testimony thereof, given both by the French and Dutch Ministers, deputed of
their Presbiteries to be considered indifferently.

Narrauit nobis Ioannes Iansonius Anglus, se hominem septuagenarium ex Anglia
in hanc vrbem difficili itinere venisse vt duos filios suos Franciscum and
Georgium Iansonios dissidentes, quorum ille pastorem agit coetus Anglici, qui
degit apud nos, hi^ ab eodem coetu excommunicatus est, in gratiam reduceret:
quumque hoc negotium reconciliationis ageret, incidisse se in controuersiam cum
filio suo Francisco and senioribus totoque caetu cui praeest ille, cui
componendae commodius remedium inuenire non potuisse dixit, quam si se ad
Belgicam and Gallicam Ecclesias, quae in hac vrbe sunt, consilij auxilijque
causa conferret. Qua causa petijt a nobis vt ipsi consilio and open nostra
adesse vellemus, summittens controuersiam totam iudicio arbitrario duarum
praedictarum Ecclesiarum. Nos vero honesti senis petitioni id concedendum
putauimus vt a Francisco and nonnullis senioribus coetus Anglicani supra dicti
peteremus, an etiam parati essent eandem controuersiam arbitrario earundem
Ecclesiarum aut synedriorum vtriusque iudicio summittere? cui quaestioni, licet
multis id conati sumus, responsum Categoricum obtinere ab illis nequiuimus.
Quod cum videremus, existimauimus nos nihil porro apud illos in hoc negotio
effecturos. Cuius rei testimonium petenti Ioanni Iansonio denegare noluimus.
Actum Amstelredami inter deputatos synedrij Ecclesiae vtriusque Belgicae and
Gallicae octauo Nouembris anni millesimi sexcentesimi secundi, stilo nouo.

Ioannes a Vinea in Ecclesia Gallobelgica Minister Euangelij. Petrus Plancius
administer Euangelij. Iacobus Arminius administer Euangelij in Ecclesia
Belgica. Simon Goulartius administer verbi in Ecclesia Gallobelgica.


Francis Johnson excommunicateth his father and brother.
1 TO curse any man rashly and unjustly, is sin; but to curse parents is more
vile.

2 But in M. Johnson, the pure Separatist, father of the Fra^ciscan order, for
him to curse his own father is yet more vile.

3 When he did this, and drew his whole company to consent and approve
thereof, it was the more vile, for poisoning others with his sin.

4 This curse being not a common reproach or evil speech, but the heavy curse
of excommunication in giving his father to the devil: is not this more
fearful?

5 This censure given out upon so slight a cause, yea so unjust a cause, while
the father sought peace betwixt his children; was it not the more horrible for
the son so to entertain the father a stranger, so to condemn him for
contention, that passed the seas only to make peace?

6 This done so violently and cruelly, that no advice, counsel, no nor threats
of the Dutch Church might restrain or stay the rage of Saint Francis.

7 This done against such a father as had bin at so great cost in bringing up
his son to learning, and he to use his Sophistry, even against his Father: how
vile!

8 Thus to judge and condemn his father, who also with so much labor, cost and
grief had sued to sundry Judges and nobles in England for releasing of that
son; as may appear by the general copies of those humble petitions and
supplications which John Johnson made for his sons Francis and George unto the
high Commissioners; and to others.

Furthermore, in that M. Johnson did thus proceed to exco^municat his father,
after he had before condemned his brother George, this also does aggrauate his
offense: for the reiection of his brother first might something have softened
his heart, and the conscience thereof might have stayed him from greater
cruelty toward his father.

Lastly, in that M. Francis did continue and persist obstinatly unto the death
of his father without reuocation of his error, or reco^ciliation to his father,
sending his father down to the grave with this curse upon his back, rolling
the stone of his censure upon the graves mouth, sealing it up with his consent,
as it were engrauing the sentence of excommunication for an Epitaph upon his
fathers tomb; in all this he has filled the measure of his iniquity, and so
increased both the height of his sin, and weight of his judgment, unless in
time he judge himself and repent his wickedness.

How they curse and excommunicate one another.
MAster Smith in his Epistle to the Reader.
Character of the beast, comparing himself unto Caligula a monstrous beast,
uses these words touching them of the Separation; I could wish (says he) as
the tyrant wished concerning the people of Rome, that all their heads were
joined into one, and all their strength comprised into one writing, that with
the sword of the Spirit, it might be smitten off at once, etc. As master Smith
wished to be, so has master Johnson labored to be, even as Caligula, or as
Nero, and worse than Nero. It is recorded of Nero, That he set Rome on fire,
that in the mean time he might sing Homers verses which he made upon the
burning of Troy. But master Johnson has set Jerusalem on fire, by kindling the
wild fire of Separation, even upon true Churches, through his schismatic
doctrine, that in the mean time he might sing the words of the Angel, spoken
upon the destruction of Rome, saying; It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that
great, etc. Nero is said to have slain his own mother, and to have ripped up
her belly, to look into her womb, where once he had lain; Francis Johnson is
said to have slain his Father with the sword of Excommunication, and with the
knife of his sharp schism to have slain his mother church, and to have rent
and ripped open her womb, wherein he acknowledges himself to have been
regenerate and borne anew.

Nero is said to have slain Seneca the Philosopher his master, that taught
him: S. Francis with the sword of his censure, has cut off all his Teachers in
England, that instructed him in learning, has also cut off his special
Teacher M. Ainsworth, and deposed him from his office, though once he praised
him as Preface to D.B. Sect. 1.
his worke-fellow to the Kingdom of God. And further, as those Tyrants
Caligula and Nero did rage cruelly and strangely toward their own kindred, so
have these Separatists done the like: for whom will they spare that spare not
their own parents? If we make a computation of the persons that have been
led into this Schism of Brownisme, we shall not find one of ten, but their
curse is lying upon them. Yea, there is not a Brownist alive this day, but
either he has (or at least by their rule should have) the curse lying upon
his head, and his communion avoided as an unclean thing; every one is
devouring another, every one eating the flesh off his brothers arm, and every
one drunken with another blood. As for the ancient company of the Brownists,
that were under the feeding of Brown himself, those that cursed the reprouers
of pride therein, were swept away as dung by the testimony of George Johnson,
and not one of them alive in his time that continued faithful, but became
Apostataes. Not to speak of the manifold curses that flew abroad in the time
of Barrow, nor yet of the manifold curses which the company of the Brownists
remaining in London have often laid upon one another, one half devouring
another at once; consider those that remain in these parts of the Low
Countries at this time.

M. Johnson and his company are now accursed and avoided by M. Ainsworth and
his company.

M. Ainsworth and his company are again rejected and avoided by M. Johnson
and his.

M. Smith and his company are rejected both of M. Johnson and M. Ainsworth.

M. Robinson and his company holding M. Johnson and his to be in Apostasy by
their own grounds, must avoid them.

And M. Johnson him again, for taking part with M. Ainsworth in his Schism
against him.

And by this reckoning, where is there one of them that can lift up his head
this day without a curse upon it? Which of them can say, I am free from the
curse? As for those straggling Brownists that walk alone, as they avoid all, so
are they avoided and rejected by all the rest. Is not this a cursing and a
cursed generation, cursed even by their own mouth, by their own sentence, by
their own rules both of doctrine and practice.

But of all the separation, it is M. Johnson that has the haughty eyes above
them all; it is S. Francis, whose lofty looks are noted and observed of those
that know him and have to deal with him. Master Ainsworth, though a
Separatist, yet is he well known to be far more moderate in his carriage,
and looks not half so high. Master Clifton, though a Teacher of the
Franciscanes, yet is he known to be far from the arrogancy of the other;
yea, he is pitied as being a bondslaue unto S. Francis. Master Smith himself,
though drunken with the dregs of error, and strange fantasies (the beginning
and ground whereof he boasts to have sucked from his tutor S. Francis) yet is
he in his demeanor nothing so haughty and proud, as his Tutor declares
himself: But for further proof of the uncouth pride and arrogancy of S.
Francis, let us hear the testimony of his own father.

John Iohnsons writing, the Father of Francis Johnson.
Son, you asked me also in the presence of M. Studley, Wherein you were
unnatural? I answer you by these things following, you urging me thereto.

1 That I coming in my old age so far, so hard and dangerous a journey to
seek and make peace between you, the Church and your brother, I could never
see the least inclination in you to peace: neither tendered you my old age, but
so used me, as if God strengthened not me, you might presently bring my gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave. 2 Lodging in your house the first week, you
were so far from peace, and so unkindly used me, that you made me weary before
the week was ended: so was I forced to shift to my other sons lodging. 3
When I dealt with you for peace, you sought to catch and ensnare me in my
words, and afterward (as I perceived) also seduced the Elders, and the people
to the like dealing. 4 You vpbraided me with things secret between me and my
child in the Country, which were untrue, and if they had been true, you ought
not to disgrace me, as Cham did, Genesis 9. You did worse than he did, but
God have praise, they were not true: yet your unnatural and unchristian
dealing appeared herein both in vpbrayding me untruly and unjustly, and if it
had been true, so to do, it is as to vex and disgrace me. 5 To let me stand
two hours on my feet before you and the people, and your self sat all the
time, and not once bid me sit down your self, neither speak to the people
to bid me. 6 Not once in the space of six weeks did you come to visit me, or
ask how I did, being in the same City with you, and having come so far for
your peace. 7 You denied to give me your hand unto that, which before you had
granted to others. 8 You would not trust my word; but forced me to
protestatio^s. 9 These, and such like things made me call to mind your
unnaturalness, that in the space of five years and more, you had not written
to me that you were desirous to see my face, or that I should be welcome to
you, when I wrote to you of my purpose in coming: So little thankfulness and
nature have you showed unto me, for all my care and pains for you from your
youth, and I fear your example will make many fathers (if they be not
vpright-hearted) to hold their children from learning and studying in the
Universities. 10 You heard me scoffed and gibed by diverse in the Congregation,
and not once rebuked them; which many children not professing godliness, but
led only by nature, would not have endured to hear against their father. 11
But no wonder, for at length you became so hardened, that you sat as
principal, and heard your father excommunicated, being come to be a
peacemaker. Has the like unnaturalness been read or heard of? 12 Coming
afterward to you, and talking with you, you said you might not keep company
with me: does Excommunication cut off duties of children to fathers? etc.
CHAP. XII. A taste of their detestable slanders and reproaches concerning the
Church of England.
A Generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaws as knives. By lying,
slaundering, and scorning, their teeth are as swords to wound others, and their
jaws, as knives, to eat up and devour one an other among themselves. For
example; in Barrow; to note a few of his outrageous speeches; he tells us
concerning the Church of England; Disco. pa. 9.
That whether we consider the whole estate, or any particular part thereof,
we shall find it wholly corrupt and deeply set as in the days of Gibeah,
etc. Page 10.
There is no faith, no mercy, no knowledge, or fear of God in the land etc.
Neither a has all kind of sin and wickedness more b universally c reigned in
d any nation, at e any time, than here at this present in this land; etc.
Behold five notable lies in one line.

Page 12.
And having mentioned their government he says; Now unto this their
Apostaticall and bloody throne, and Antichristian power, and unto all the
abominations, proceeding from the same stands all the land both great and
small, rich and poor priest and people, in most servile subjection: and
therefore in this estate cannot be held or numbered among Christ's faithful
servants, which are fully redeemed by the price of his precious blood, etc. And
thus this foul mouth yelleth.

Page 141.
Touching the Ministers he says; Likewise if I should here stand to relate the
falsehood, deceit, and hypocrisy of these priests (let me here be understood
even of those best-esteemed, forward learned Preachers, commonly called good
men) how cunningly and craftily they teach the Law; never touching or
offending their Auditory (at least the mighty or rich of them) be their sins
never so heinous and manifest; especially if they will countenance, esteem,
feast and hear these Preachers, they are in them but infirmities and
imperfections, be they never so deeply set and incurable.

Touching the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford Barrow says; They are like
unto the Popes Seminaries, being as ready upon the least change of the weather
now to serve him as ever they were: How did Barrow know their hearts, that he
could slander men for things to be done in time to come upon occasion of
danger? Could the father of lies himself utter a more presumptuous lie than
this his disciple?

In fine, to omit hundreds of such raylings and blasphemous speeches; when he
speaks of the Churches or Temples where they meet to worship God, he
calls them Idol Synagogues, abominable sties, the Pulpit he calls a
Privileged Table; their Baptism he calls Adulterate Baptism; the Lords
Supper, as it is there administered, a Two penny feast, a She shake supper, the
word preached, he calls, Preachments and Sermocinations; The People and
Ministers he calls Babylonish reprobate stones, Sodomits, Canaanites,
Balaamites, Chamites, Kainites; here is a Diabolus indeed.

Ainsworth excuses these bellish raylings, and calls them but severe
speeches; and again adds also, I suppose you can hardly show any hard speech
that Master Barrow there writes, which the Prophets and Apostles have not used
before. Master Smith also calls it Parallel p. 134.
Master Barrowes Tartenesse, whereas he might more justly have called it Adder
poison, and the Gall of Aspes.

Master Robinson says; Page 84.
That he knew not by what particular motion of the Spirit he was guided to
write in those phrases. But master Johnson justifies further, to make good
Master Smiths and his own dotage, by adding these words; especially
considering with what fire and zeal the Lord has furnished such his servants
at all times, as he has stirred up for special reformation. Let the example
of Luther alone suffice, whom into what terms his zeal carried him his
writings do testify.

For further declaration of their lying and reproachful dealing, let this
testimony following concerning the slanders of Samuel Wats and Francis
Johnson be here considered of the Reader.

I Was certified (Christian Reader) long sithence of a vain rumor spread of me
in England, as if I had joined with the Schism of them, who are commonly
called Brownists. This report was much strengthened (as I was then informed) by
the slanders of one Samuel Wats, who gave forth about Sarum, that I had read or
seen the fantastical book which he a little before had printed: a fond and
frivolous untruth, yet so prevailing with some, forgetting the Commandment,
Thou shall not receive a false tale against thy neighbor, as that thereupon my
deprivation was hastened. The truth is, that receiving commendations by him
from some of my acquaintance (not well acquainted, as it seems, with the
vanity of the man) I spoke with him once; afterward inquiring of him, I
forbore ever to see him: yea, more I dealt by my friend, with the Printer, to
have his book stayed; which I could not obtain, the Printer answering, that
the bargain was already made, and a good part of the money aforehand
received. Now it grieved me not at this time a little that Satan should be so
impudent, as to fling the dung of that Sect into my face, which with all my
power I had so vehemently resisted, during the whole course of my Ministry in
England: howbeit I comforted my self in the common and continual love of Gods
servants, walking through good and through evil report before me. Since I have
of late received fresh news by M. Michael Seroyen, my good friend, That this
report (which should not by right have lived longer than the lie of the
Gibeonites) runs still on foot, even to this hour. Hanniball said once,
there was not so much as one in all the enemies Camp that was called Gisco; so
may it truly be said now; not so much as one of the godly Ministers that
suffer in England about the discipline, that may deservedly be called a
Brownist. The harder is my hap that I should be reputed one of them, who am
joined against them with that Orthodox Church here, which like a beautiful
army, and terrible, as under tents, and lies in the field (and that with
happy and good success) against that Schism. I think no other, but that
many of them love the Lord, and fear his name: howbeit, their error being
enemy to that breast of Charity wherewith Cyprian covered his, Qui ab Ecclesia
nunquam recessit, as Augustine speaks: They can not stand before his
Tribunal, but by the intercession of our blessed Savior, Father, forgive
them, they know not what they do. Think not these words are applied to their
sect amiss: for in effect what does it less than even persecute the Lord
Christ Jesus in his host, which it reuileth, in his ordinances which it
dishonors, and in his servants last of all, whose graces it blasphemeth,
whose foot steps it slaundereth, and whose persons it dispiseth; and that
well near with the pride of Acesius, to whom Constantine once. Scalas sum
Acesi and solus in Coelum ascend. This is found in special manner in Master
Johnson, and his company above the rest, whose spirits are bitter above
measure, and hearts puffed up with the Leaven of Pride, and whose walking is so
crooked, and built on such grounds of colorable deceit and guile, that out of
Solomon it may not unfitly be resembled, to the way of a Serpent upon a stone.
He himself defameth me, without cause, without color, without ceasing he
arraigneth my Book in open Consistory, and there sitting magistrate-like he
demands of me, though absent, wherefore he may not allege, Hosea chap.
14. ver. 92.2. Corint. chap. 6. ver. 16. John chap. 5. ver. 21. against the
Church of England, as well as I have done in the beginning of my book? As if
these Scriptures were not pregnant against communion with Antichrist in the use
of his Idolles, which are by him unjustly wrested against communion with a true
and a Christian Church, in the holy things of God? He that wringeth the nose,
says Solon, causes blood to come forth, and he that charneth milk, brings
forth whey. A fit resemblance of Brownists arguments, whose forced allegations
of the Scripture, charne and wring it, for the bringing forth of bloody
contentions, rents, and schisms, I say bloody in the sense of Isay and Hosea;
and turns the wholesome milk thereof, ordained for the growth of the Saints
in peace, and in comfort, and in the joy of the holy Ghost, into a bitter and
sour humor, as distastefull to the Lord, as it is disgraceful to his Church
and servants. Howbeit I purpose not to dispute the case, only thus much (good
Reader) I thought needful to make known to thee, for the clearing of these
imputations, wherewith I am unjustly burdened. Farewell.

ROBERT PARKER.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning their mutual reproaches, dissensions and curses against
one another: divided into three parts.
PART. 1.
Having seen the reproach which this generation of slanderers lays upon
others which condemn their separation; let us consider how they whet their
teeth against one another mutually.

To begin with master Johnson, and to let him have the first place in
reproching, and the pre-eminence in biting, he tells master Ainsworth, and
his company, that they are Schismatikes, and that therefore they are no true
Church: And thus he sets them in a worse estate then he places Rome in, which
he now acknowledges a true Church: Reuelat. 11.8.
According to his account a Romist, a Papist, is in a better estate for the
constitution of their Church, then is the Ainsworthian. Rome is spiritually
Egypt and Sodom, as master Johnson tells us: that master Ainsworths company is
not so true a Church as Rome is, and therefore in a worse estate then Sodom or
Egypt, and consequently are to look for greater plagues then the plagues of
Egypt, and sorer condemnation then the fire and brimstone which was rained from
heaven upon the Sodomites. Master Johnson tells them that unless Rome were a
true Church, their Baptism could not be true Baptism: Hence it follows that
master Ainsworths Church being no true Church, there can be no true Baptism,
but such as are there baptized by master Ainsworth are to be re-baptised:
Though the Infants baptized in England or in Rome are not to be re-baptised,
yet the Ainsworthians must; The practice of this is to be expected when any
Infants come with the reuolting parents from the Ainsworthians unto the
Franciscans, who unto them must become Anabaptists. Again, master Iohnsons
ordinary speech, occasioned by the Schism and departure of master Ainsworths
people from him, is this, viz. That God stands with his fan in his hand, and
that God would purge his floor, and take the chafe from the wheat: Thus he
notes master Ainsworths company to be but Dross, and as Chafe for the fire;
the reason why he thus sets his teeth upon them, is, because they forsook him,
in that he has changed his government. And since that time he has spoken of
them as of the uncircumcised Philistims, comparing them to Gath and Askalon
upon this occasion of reproving some of us, for keeping company with some of
master Ainsworths people, saying we had declared the wickedness of Studley in
Gath and Ashkalon; upon this occasion they may put him in mind of his Answ. to
master Whites preface to the Reader. p. 1.2.
words concerning master White, they may tell him of the two sorts of
adversaries which the Church has: The one of such as be without: the other of
such as arise from within the Church it self. Both heavy enemies: but the
latter far more grievous, many ways: They may further proceed and say unto
him in his own words which he uses against M. White, Of late has risen up
one Francis Johnson despitefully reuiling us, and wickedly blaspheming the name
and Tabernacle of the Lord. A man that was himself heretofore not only a
joined member, but also a Minister among us, and has often in our public
meeting before us all, with his own mouth, testified his consent with us, in
the faith which we still profess, from which he is now revolted, and of which
he is become a notable adversary, setting himself tooth and nail (what he
can) against us and our cause: and that both privately and publicly, as now
himself has manifested to the world. So as himself, etc.

Master Johnson also did so reason against M. Ainsworth about their government,
that master Ainsworth has often told him, he did overthrow the constitution of
their Church: and master Robinson has so written unto him, that with his new
grounds he would overthrow the constitution of their Church; which writing
being openly read in their meeting house: master Johnson has thereupon said,
let master Robinson then look to the constitution of his Church: And this
being so; must they not of necessity think his teeth to be as knives and
swords, that does so without pity devour the constitution of their Church?

And moreover, master Johnson has declared master Ainsworths people to be so
wilfully blind, and deaf, and hardened with the fatness of obstinacy in
their erroneous course, that he applied and denounced against them that
fearful and terrible prophecy, Act. 28.25.26.27. yea he acknowledged that it
was Gods special providence once more to bring again master Ainsworths people
after they had departed from him, that they might hear that heavy rebuke
applied unto them: And therefore while he gave them such memorable farewell,
how can they deny but that his tongue was as a sharp sword to consume them?

Further, whereas there is but one Elder de Cluse that went with M. Ainsworth,
when he carried away the Church from the Franciscans, what do the Franciscans
say of him? It is testified of him by Jacob Johnson now an Elder with master
Francis Johnson, as also by M. M. that he is a notable drunkard, yea such a
drunkard, so far oppressed with drinking, that he has bin scarce able to go;
and as his body has bin oppressed, so his mind and understanding also, insomuch
that Jacob Johnson admonishing him of his drunkenness, he was not capable of
his admonition, but began to talk of other matters, viz. How fit Jacob Johnson
would be for the Pastor of a church, etc. what purity is to be expected in that
church, where he that should be che chief is so scandalous, where there is but
one governing Elder, and he a drunkard? How bewitched are those people, that
seeking purity do join to such pollution? Thus do the Franciscans by their
testimony set their teeth upon the Ainsworthians; but what say they to master
Robinson and his company? whereas master Robinson in his book does vainly
boast of the beauteous estate of their Church against master Barnard in these
same words; John Robinsons answer to R.B. p. 212. 213.
But for our selves Master Barnard, and that whereof we take experience in this
our popularity, as you term it; I tell you, that if ever I saw the beuty of
Sion, and the glory of God filling his tabernacle, it has been in the
manifestation of the diverse graces of God in the Church in that heavenly
harmony and comely order, wherein by the grace of God we are set and walk:
wherein if your eyes had but seen the brethrens sober and modest carriage one
toward an other, their humble and willing submission unto their guides in the
Lord, their tender compassion toward the weak, their fervent zeal against
scandalous offenders, and their long suffering toward all, you would (I am
persuaded) change your mind, and be compelled to take up your parable and
bless where you purposed to curse, as Balaam did, Number. 23. But whatsoever you
and all others do, these our experimental comforts, neither you, nor any
other shall take from us. Whereas master Smith also in his book does vainly
boast against the same M. Bern, and being in the same order of popularity with
M. Robinson, saying; John Smiths parallel p 70.
O M. Ber. if you knew but the comfort and power of Gods ordinances, of
admonition and excommunication, as we do (blessed be God) in some measure, and
that reformation which is in some of us thereby you would be so wonderfully
ravished with the power of Gods ordinances, as you would acknowledge the church
to be terrible as an army with baners, and yet amiable, lovely comely and
beutifull: insomuch as Christ says, that the love of the church is fair, she
wounds his heart with one of her eyes etc. Touching both these boasters of their
popular government and estate, consider the Judgment and Sentence of master
Johnson, who has often times passed this censure upon them, that the order of
popularity which they plead for is, The confusion of Korah and his company:
often has he affirmed in their public meeting, that the pretenses which
they aledge for the power of the people in judging of causes, are no better
than the plea of Korah, when he said against Moses and Aaron: You take too
much upon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy, every one of them, and the
Lord is among them; wherefore then lift ye your selves above the Congregation
of the Lord? Number. 16.3. Thus does M. Johnson by his Sentence obscure their
beauty, and stain the brightness of their glory, in showing them to be
Korites, a rebellious route, pleaders for confusion, usurpers rising up against
Moses and Aaron; And in this estate, seeing the like sins procure the like
judgment, what can these popular Korites expect, but as Korah for taking fire
in his censure was consumed with fire proceeding from the Lord, and his
followers swallowed up quick of the earth, which opened her mouth to devour
them; even so these new Korites taking in hand such fiery censures and
unlawful judgments should also be consumed with the fire of their unjust
censures and excommunications; and that their followers and disciples should be
swallowed up quick, by the gaping mouth of an earthly, sensual, and carnal
contention? But M. Smith and M. Robinson insist against M. Barnard, alleging
their experience and experimental comforts in their popular estate; Oh M.
Bern. if you knew but the comfort (says M. Smith) if your eyes had but seen
it, says M. Robinson: well, to come to experience with them, M. Johnson may
tell them, he has known their popular order; his eyes have seen it, and
this, before ever their eyes saw it, and with long experience has he seen and
considered the same, yea in respect of his experience M. Smith and M. Robinson
are but nouices and punies, that came but yesterday to this practice, wherein
M. Johnson has bin long exercised: And what says master Johnson upon his
fight, knowledge and long experience? He says not as M. Robinson foolishly
flatters himself, and imagins that M. Bern. would speak and Take up his
parable to bless where he purposed to curse as Balaam. No, M. Johnson takes up
his parable quite contrary; where he once blessed himself and others in that
estate, he now upon experience taks up his parable and curses that popular
order, by proclaming the woeful fruits thereof. And as M Ber. makes the same to
be the nurse of confusion, the mother of schism, the breeder of contention,
even so M. Johnson himself now declares it to be Fra. Johnson exposition of
Matthew. 18.17. prefat. p. 1.
a great means and special occasion of strange opinions and aberations, of
lamentable divisions, of opposing and despising the Elders government, of
emulation and debate among people, with sundry other evils arising and
spreading themselves daily, to the great dishonor of God, and their own
continual grief, and much reproach from others abroad. Thus in steed of the
glory of the Lord filling his Tabernacle, whereof M. Robinson boasts, M. Johnson
tells us of an horrible confusion filling their meeting house to the great
dishonor of God; Instead of the manifestation of the diverse graces of God, M.
Ioh. tells of the manifestation of diverse works of the flesh and the diuil;
instead of heavenly harmony and comely order M. Robinson dreams of, M. John
tells of hellish disorder, of strange opinions and aberations; Instead of the
brethrens sober carriage, M. Johnson tells of lamentable contentions and
divisions; Instead of the humble and willing submission to guides which M.
Robinson prates of, M. Johnson tells of opposing and despising the Elders
government: and finally, howsoever master Robinson tell M. Bern. that neither
he, nor any other, shall take experimental comforts from them, yet here we see
M. John's. has taken them away, and by his testimony, which is in this matter
much more to be respected than M. Robinsons late experience, these
experimental comforts do lie in the dust.

Again, whereas M. Robinson disputes on this manner, John Robinsons answer to
M B. pa. 170.
Well, the words are clear as the Sun, tell the Church, that is, the
congregation or assembly etc. M. Johnson on the contrary side compares this
interpretation to the erroneous exposition of the Papists and Anabaptists,
insisting upon the letter of the scripture, perverting Christ's words: Fra
Johnson expos of Matt. 18, pref. page 1.
This is my body etc. Teach all nations, and baptize them etc. Swear not at
all; Resist not evil etc. While M. Robinson accounts the words as clear as
the Sun for his purpose, while M. Johnson counts his interpretation erroneous,
even as the most gross, popish and anabaptasticall expositions; what can M.
Robinson and his disciples think of M. John's. words herein, but that his
expositon is as the smoke of that bottomless pit that rises to dark their
clear Sun with the grosenes thereof? And while M. Ioh. like such a locust in
their eyes obscures their glorious truth, and hereby declares them to be
Korites and the children of confusion: what can they else judge of him, but as
an horrible slanderer? therefore besides his other slanders, even in their
account he is to be reckned among this generation of slanderers, whose teeth
are as swords, and their jaws as knives etc. M. John. for the further
manifestation of M. Robins. errors since that time also brought M. Robins. book
against M. Bern. into their meeting house, and there before the congregation
made a solemn testification against the manifold errors contained in it, which
he disclaimed, and not only so, but wrote letters to M. Robinson to rebuke him
for the same. Dan. Studley the principal. Franciscan is so apt in reproach,
that he runs upon the letter, making as it were an alphabet of slander, having
it so perfect as his A.B.C For trial hereof see how he grinds his teeth
against Sam. Fuller, a deacon of M. Robinsons company, whom with his friends he
describes as being The flowers of Studleyes eloquent letter to Sam. Fuller.
ignorant idiots, Noddy Nabalites, dogged Doegs, fairefaced Pharisees,
shameless Shemeites, malicious Machiuillians; Thus does this Alphabeticall
slanderer flourish among them, with the tanting and flanting figures of his
profane conceited spirit. And either M. Robinsons company is a cage of
unclean birds, and a knot of vile persons, or else Da. Studly is a notable
Rhetorical railer, which sets such a range of sharp teeth upon them.

To conclude and seal up this point of the Franciscan slanders, let the
testimony of his own brother George he here produced against him, who
witnesses of Francis being their Pastor, that he George John's. Discourse. page
21.
changed the voice and tune of a comfortable shepherd to an unsavory scoffing,
inueighing, yelling, and cruel hunting of the souls, whom he ought to
strengthen and comfort.

Again, Habel Johnson tells us how he rebuked Cain Johnson openly for Page 34.
perverting, wresting, and abusing the Scriptures, as also for making the
pulpit a place to revenge himself, and to vomit out his vile and filthy
affections: And mark what he adds, but he neither then, nor yet repents
thereof, neither could George Johnson obtain of the Church to draw him to
repentance: but he having with D. Stud. once gotten head, he did what he list,
and as he list. Further, Hab. Ioh. witnesses of the Page 43.
fretting, railing reuiling, scoffing, and flouting used by their Pastor and D.
Stud And when the Pastors father separated and showed the causes thereof, then
does this poor Habel groan at the remembrance thereof, and with a woeful oh he
tells us, how they became not only hot and warm, but fierce, outrageous, and
passing the bounds of goodness, civility and nature.

If thus they whet the teeth of slander against their own father and brethren,
both in the flesh, and in the faith of the separation, what wonder if they bite
and bark at others?

PART. 2.
COme we in the next place to see how the Ainsworthians or old Brownists do
whet and sharpen their teeth against other of the Separatists. And here first
of al, let us behold how M. Ainsworth himself, with some other of the chief
of his company have manifested master Iohnsons Apostasy and backsliding from
their ancient Catholic and Brownistique faith, which in former times had been
generally received and professed by the whole fraternity of all that sect: In
the suit in law, which the Franciscans and the Ainsworthians have now a long
time had before the Judges and civil Magistrates about the meeting house; the
Franciscans have alleged that they are the Church, and that therefore they
ought to have the meeting house which was built for the Church, that M.
Ainsworth and his company were schismatikes from them, and therefore for their
schism could not be accounted a true Church, and consequently had no right
unto the synagogue or meeting house: Again on the other side, M. Ainsworth and
his company have pleaded that they were the Church, because they held the
ancient faith upon which their Church was first founded, from which M. Johnson
and his company had fallen away into Apostasy, and therefore could not be the
Church, nor have any right unto the meeting house: M. Ainsworth and his people
for the manifestation of M. Iohnsons Apostasy, have given forth a writing to
show the particular points wherein he has revolted: The occasion was this.
During the time of their suite, there were certain men deputed and appointed
by the Magistrates to hear and examine the cause as arbiters, and if it had
been possible to have agreed them; unto these arbiters did master Ainsworths
side give in this writing, wherein it is specified from how many articles of
their faith master Johnson and his company have Apostated, and how they have
forsaken both their profession made in their Apology, and their confession in
their authentic Creed.

The articles of his Creed forsaken by M. Johnson.
THe words of this declaration taken from the original copy which was given
to the arbiters, are these as follows.

1 The 23. article of the confession of our faith (whereto also our Apology
agrees, page 46. 47.) professes that every Christian congregation has power
to elect and ordain their own ministry, etc. and upon desert again to
depose, yea and excommunicate them. These have defended that a Congregation,
without Ministers, cannot ordain officers. And that if the Eldership fall into
heresy or wickedness, the whole Congregation cannot depose nor excommunicate
them. And that a Congregation, without an Eldership, cannot excommunicate any
wicked person whatsoever.

2 The 24. article (confirmed in our Apology, page 60. 62. 63.) professes
that the power to receive in or to cut off any member, is given to the whole
body together of every Christian Congregation. Matthew. 18.17. etc. These have
pleaded for the Eldership to be the Church, Matthew. 18. and to have both
rightful power to excommunicate, though without and against the consent of the
body of the Congregation.

3 The 29. article (as also our Apology, page 51. 52.) professes that the
Hierarchy of Archbishoppes, Lord Bishops, Priests, etc. are a strange and
AntiChristian Ministry and Officers, not instituted by Christ's Testament, nor
placed in or over his Church. These have placed over them one that was made
Priest by a lord Bishops ordination, so as (because of it) they did not ordain
or impose hands on him, when at the same time they ordained and imposed hands
on others, whom together with him they set over the Church.

4 The 31. article (and also our Apology, page 109.) professes that such
ecclesiastical assemblies as remain so in confusion and bondage under that
Antichristian Ministry, Courts, Canons, etc. cannot be esteemed true visible
Churches, etc. These now plead not only for them, but for Rome it self, to be
the true Church of God.

5 The 32. article (whereto our Apology agrees, page 52. 53. 44.) testifies
that all such as have received any of those false offices (of Lord Bishops,
Priests, etc.) are to give over and leave them: and so has it been practiced
here before by all such Priests as came to our faith and Church: now one is
Minister over them, ordained Priest by the Prelates, as is before said.

6 The 32. article (which our Apology also confirms, page 45.) professes
that people being come forth of the Antichristian estate, etc. are willingly to
join together in Christian communion and orderly covenant, and to unite
themselves unto peculiar and visible congregations, etc. These have pleaded
that all are bound to communion, by virtue of their Baptism received in the
Church of Rome, or other Antichristian assemblies.

7 The 33. article (corfirmed also in our apology, page 46. 47. 48.)
professes that a people so joined together, may proceed to choice and
ordination of officers, except they have officers before to do it.

8 In our apology, page 113. it was mantained to be gross error, and
notorious absurdity, either to hold the Popish Church to be a true Church,
having a true Ministry and true Sacraments; or else that men are unbaptized,
and must admit of the Anabaptists re-baptisation. These have themselves, much
objected to us, that either the Church and Baptism of Rome is true, or else we
must be re-baptised: Both which we still deny.

9 The 38. article of our confession, professes that Congregations are by all
means convenient to have the counsel and help one of another in all needful
affairs, etc. The practice of this was denied, when in our greatest need and
trouble they would not consent to have the comfort and help of the English
Church at Leiden, which professes the same faith with us.

1 Before our parting, we offered, that notwithstanding our differences of
judgment, that we would continue together, if our former practice might be
retained: but this was refused.

2 We desired that then we might have apeaceable parting; and to be two
distinct Congregations, each practicing, as they were persuaded; yet nourishing
brotherly love and unity: This also they would not agree to, unless we would
leave this City.

3 We procured, though without their consent, the help of the English Church
at Leiden, who labored our peace; a way of peace by these themselves
propounded, and by the Church of Leiden and us agreed to, these after ^uersed,
and stood not unto, unless we would go dwell out of this City. And although
in the treaty of the Agreement it was testified by the Elders of that Church,
That unless it were to the apparent undoing of us, and of our families, we
should not be dismissed again to dwell here: yet because we would not
absolutely promise to leave this City, they would not stand to the agreement
which themselves had made.

Thus have they manifested, how M. Johnson has forsaken the Faith, and cast
away his old Creed in nine special Articles, which they have here numbered
out: yea, and besides that have also added, in the end thereof, three other
articles against him and his company, wherein they are manifested as enemies
unto peace, whereunto they were so deaf to hearken; and not only that, but
also are showed to be truce breakers, violaters of their promise, and
falsifiers of their word, by reuersing the way of peace that was once
concluded, and for not standing unto the agreement which themselves had made.
And thus by this writing, and by the twelve articles thereof, nine concerning
faith, and three concerning peace and truth, the Franciscanes are showed to be
without faith, without peace, and without truth. And thus has Master Ainsworth
set twelve sharp teeth upon the Franciscans, and thereby made twelve wounds in
the body of their honesty and faith, until with some probable answer they
can salve the same.

But alas how shall M. Johnson with any sound answer salve his faith and his
honesty, by writing against M. Ainsworth, that does now become his accuser?
Seeing by M. Iohnsons own testimony and confession M. Ainsworth Fran.
Iohnsons inquiry of Tho. Wh. p. 43.
for his learning, wisdom, and godliness as also for his faithful teaching
of the Church, and upright walking toward all, is so well known and approved,
as neither he not we need regard any adversaries malice and opposition against
him. These things being so, what need M. Ainsworth to regard the malice and
opposition of M. Johnson now his adversary, unless M. Iohnsons malice be
above the malice of other men, and unless his opposition be more terrible than
the opposition of all adversaries besides? If M. Ainsworths learning be so well
known and approved, then what needs he to regard M. Iohnsons sophistry? If
his wisdom be so well known and approved, what needs he to regard the
policies and subtleties of Fran. Johnson and Dan. Studley? If his godliness
and upright walking toward all be so well known and approved, then what great
cause has every man to regard the witness of M. Ainsworth, which he brings
against M. Johnson? And what cause has M. Johnson to be ashamed of his ways,
that is accused of Apostasy, Contention, Error, Falsehood, Lying, and
Promise-breaking, and all this by M. Ainsworth, whom himself does acknowledge
to be so godly and upright a walker toward all? It is therefore as like that
M. Ainsworth has now walked as uprightly toward Francis Johnson as he did
before toward Th. Wh.

Again, the Ainsworthians scoffing at M. Johnson now that they have rejected
him, they say, That M. Ainsworth has long time wrought iourney-worke under M.
Johnson, but that now he sets up The two shops of Error and Schism.
shop for himself, and this under M. Iohnsons nose, their meeting house being
the next house but one unto M. Iohnsons shop or meeting house. Nay, further
they say, that M. Ainsworth seeks to take away M. Iohnsons shop from over his
head, while by their suit in law they contend for the meeting house it self,
hoping that M. Ainsworth and his company shall get the same.

Further, to come unto more heinous matters, it is witnessed by some of M.
Ainsworths company, That there is probable murder and approved whoredoms
maintained or suffered in M. Iohnsons Church. This has bin testified by John
Trappes. M. Johnson and his Elders also do know, that this is avouched against
them: for this has John Trap witnessed unto their messengers, solemnly
September. 8. 1611.
sent from their Church, to enquire about this matter, and has also offered to
prove this before the magistrates, yea and has provoked them much to bring the
matter into question. It is witnessed also unto the messengers of their Church,
That M. de Cluse hearing it spoken, that there was approved murder maintained
in M. Iohnsons Church, should also grant unto the same, saying, Yea, it is too
true, or it is too true indeed, the more is the pity, or the more sorry he
was, to like effect, etc. Are not the teeth of the Ainsworthians like knives
unto the Franciscans? Do they not cut and bite deep in such speeches and
testimonies which they give touching the evils that are tolerated or maintained
among them? Are they fit men to separate from all other true Churches for
corruptions, while the charge of such abomination is tolerated among
themselves?

To conclude this point, let it be considered, that even then when M. Johnson
and M. Ainsworths company were yet one, long before any show of this great
division that is now amongst them, it came to pass, that Thomas Cocky and
Jacob Johnson, two men of note amongst them, both of them Prophets, falling
into variance one with another, one of them brings in before the Church a List
of fifteen lies wherewith he charged the other; the other again to requite
his pains brings in at the next turn against him a List of sixteen lies;
betwixt them both they make up the sum of 31 lies: Is it not a token, that
the father of that Company is the father of lies, when as the children thereof
are so fruitful in lies? Is it probable that the truth of God should be tied
and treasured up only among these lying companions, whiles all the true
Churches in the world beside are not able to comprehend the mystery of that
Separation, which they say is revealed unto them? What wonder is it, that these
men should raise many lies and slanders against others, when as thus they
heaped them upon themselves mutually? And what wonder if they bite one another
now that they are rent in two, seeing when they were undivided they spared not
one another?

PART. 3.
M. Robinson writing in defense of the popular government against M. Bernard,
does therein utter many hard speeches against the oppugners thereof. Now M.
Johnson being an oppugner thereof, as well as M. Bernard, and using the same
reasons that M. Bernard does to that purpose, it follows necessarily, that
those speeches and rebukes which M. Robinson lays upon M. Bernard, do through
his side pierce and wound M. Johnson also, when he holds the same opinion and
uses the same arguments with M. Bernard. And this is the rather to be
observed, because M. Ainsworths people excusing M. Ainsworth for his not
answering of M. Iohnsons Expos. of Mat. 18.
book, they allege and plead, that M. Robinson has answered him, and confuted
his reasons in the confutation of M Bernard; and therefore the rebukes which in
that point and in that behalf are laid upon M. Bernard, are many of them also
to be as well applied unto M. Johnson: For example

M. Robinson Answer to M Bernard, p. 124.
writing, That their practice is answerable to their profession, and showing
their profession what it is, from the confession of their faith, Artic. 24.
infers from thence, that they cannot be charged with bastardly runagates.
But on the contrary side, M. Ainsworth (as is noted in the former Section)
declaring that M. Johnson is fallen from their faith even in that very article,
it follows hereupon from M. Robinsons speech, that M. Johnson and his
company forsaking that profession of faith, are therefore to be deemed
bastardly runagates.

M. Robinson affirming, That they are Page 152.
miserable guides, which teach, that the power of the keys is given to the
chief officers, showing also, that it is Page 153.
erroneous and derogatorie to the nature of the Gospel and free donation of
Christ thus to impropriate and ingrosse the keys; He does hereby declare M.
Johnson and M. Clyfton to be miserable Guides: yea, that they are sacrilegious
ingrossers of the keys, contrary to the nature of the Gospel and free
donation of Christ, because they teach that doctrine as well as master Barnard.

Answer to M. Bernard, p. 160.
M. Robinson reproouing the envious dealing of them that oppugn popularitie,
for arrogating all the power of the people into their hands, does declare this
by alleging of 1. Ki. 22.24. and hereby it follows upon his reproof, that
master Johnson and master Clifton, holding the point with master Bernard, are
also like the arrogant and proud Zidkiah, that smote the Lords Prophet on the
cheek. Thus is master Johnson noted as a cruel persecutor, making himself
to be Page 162.
thought all eye from top to bottom, and making his people in the mean time
to be a blind beetle, even stone-blinde, that cannot see one step before
them.

M. Robinson reproouing master Bernard, for alleging the charge of Princes
and Ecclesiastical Governors together, does blame him herein, as though he
lai^ a Page 164.
Corner stone of Babylon hereby: now master Johnson yoaking these Civil and
Ecclesiastical officers together in this Exposit of Mat. 8. Reu. 3.
allegation also does hereby incur the same rebuke, and is hereupon in his
account, a builder of Babylon, as well as master Bernard.

M. Robinson imputes unto master Bernard, the occasion of a strange and new
kind of Answer to M Bernard, p. 234
Schism, for teaching, that the power of Excommunication is in the Officers;
for hereby (says he) All the communion passes betwixt the parties admonishing
and admonished, excommunicating and excommunicated, whereof the body of the
Church is neither, but a very cipher and a hang-by: Now master Johnson
practicing and teaching that which master Robinson here reprooueth, by his
Sentence is become guilty of Schism, making his Church to be a cipher and a
hang-by.

M. Robinson speaking of the power of binding and loosing, says; Page 244.
These knots are to be tied and loosed only by the Chauncellours or
Officialls fingers, this power have they enclosed with hedge and ditch etc.
This contumely may as justly be returned upon master Iohnsons head with master
Robinsons words, that those knots are to be tied and loosed only by master
Johnson and his officials fingers, especially the filthy fingers of Dan.
Studley his Quondam.
chief Chancellor, and that he has captiued his Church, and seized the
substance and kernel, as it were, into their hands, leaving the poor people
only the shell and shadow to feed upon.

Further, master Bernard writing about ordination and succession of the
Ministry, is tasked by master Robinson as being Answer to Ber. page 421.
either a marked servant of the Pope, or one that cared not what he wrote for
some present seeming advantage. Now master Johnson arguing in like matter about
ordination and succession of the Ministry, and fetching the same from Rome,
the reproach does fall as strangely upon master Iohnsons pate. Master Robinson
writing about the Temples wherein we worship Saints, that they are as Page 443.
execrable things to be avoided, and yet further says, that they are the least
Page 4^5.
difference betwixt him and master Ber. The matter therefore of popular
government and the peoples power, is acknowledged to be a matter of greater
weight, and therein master Johnson erring, falls into a sin more then
execrable or accursed.

To omit many the like speeches, by this it does evidently appear how master
Robinsons teeth are like knives, and his jaws like swords to eat up master
Iohnsons company, while he thus bites them by his doctrine, while he makes
master Johnson and his elders to be bastardly runnagates; miserable guides;
engrossers of the keys; arrogant Zidkiahs, laying the corner stone of Babylon;
Lucians or skoffing Atheists; Schismatikes, making their Church a Cipher and a
hang-by; wanting an honest heart; like Chancellors and Officials captiuing of
the Church; either marked servants of the Pope; or such as care not what they
say for some present seeming advantage; using a power more then execrable or
accursed.

Thus having showed what he writes against master Johnson, let us see in a
word what he witnesses against master Ainsworths company. When some of
master Ainsworths company wrote unto master Robinson, desiring him to come and
help the Lord against the mighty (against master Johnson, whom they had
accounted as the strongest Giant of the Separation) master Robinson at last
came unto them to dispute with master Johnson about the change of his
government: and being come and entered within the listes of that disputation, he
found master Ainsworths faction so disorderly and clamorous, that he often
desired them to be still and silent, and reproved their unseemly and
unreasonable behauior: but at length when he saw the tumult increase, (looking
upon them round about, as a man amazed and aghast, with fierce and outrageous
carriage) he did then openly testify among them, That he had rather walk in
peace with five godly persons, than to live with five hundred or five thousand
such unquiet persons as these were. Having spoken to this effect, master
Johnson told him further, That this was a small thing, and nothing in respect
of their unpeaceable and disordered carriage at some other times. And these
things being so, alas how evil do they provide for their own peace and
comfort, which join themselves unto such a contentious and tumultuous band of
Schismatikes?

As for master Smith and his disciples, they do at once as it were with open
mouth swallow up all the Separation besides, by Charact of Beast. Epistle
protesting against their false constitution, false worship, false Ministry,
and false Government. For howsoever master Robinson did heretofore seem to
agree with master Smith in the reproof of the triformed Presbiterie, as he
calls it, and has had much question with his people about the same;
howsoever master Robinson has followed master Smith in his doctrine and
practice about the separation in alms, and so has one special kind of
separation more than master Johnson or master Ainsworth in their Companies do
practice, and therefore might seem to have a more holy treasury, and a more
pure sacrifice of alms, free from that rigor and pollution wherewith the
treasury of the Franciscanes and Ainsworthians appears to be defiled: yet
notwithstanding all this, while they retain a false constitution, master
Smith still protests against them all without exception, Epistle to the
Character.
That there is no one true ordinance of the Lord among them: And how they have
on the other side laid him open, as a Schismatike, an Heretic, and an
Apostata, their Books against him do plenteously declare.

We might here proceed yet further to show, what bitings there be among the
other lesser factions and broken pieces of the separation, and among those that
walk alone; but having already led the Reader a rough way, and being our
selves weary thereof, we do here rest our selves, and sit down for the
present, hoping that this which is already done will be sufficient to show what
bitter fruit grows upon the trees of the separation; and withal, desiring
the Lord to keep his servants from tasting of this forbidden fruit, which in
our own experience we have felt so bitter, we here take our leave, and
heartily bid the Christian Reader farewell in the Lord.

MATTHEW. 7.15.16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep
clothing, but inwarly they are ravening wolves.

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs
of thistles.


FINIS.

