portrait of Petrus Ramus or Pierre de la Ramee PETRVS R. M. S. AET LVII


THE LOGIKE OF THE MOST EXCELLENT PHILOsopher P. Ramus Martyr, Newly
translated, and in diverse places corrected, after the mind of the Author.

PER M. Roll. Makylmenaeum Scotum, rogatu viri honestissimi, M. Aegidij Hamlini.

printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackefrieres.

ANNO M.D.LXXIIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The lyuelie pithe of Platoes wit and Aristots ingeine,
The pleasant vain of Cicero, and of Quintiliane
The judgment high, here thou may see: therefore if thou be wise,
No farther seek but in this book thy self do exercise.
TO THE WORSHYPFVLL M. ROBERT WYKES OF Dodyngton in the Countye of Glouceter
Esquyer.
ALexander King of Macedone (most Worshipful Mecaenas) not so much for his
valiant and martial factes (although they were most victorious) as for his
great love and ardente zeal which he bare to virtue and knowledge, has been
of all men hade in most worthy estimation and goodlye memory. Job called the
servant of God, although he was worthy to be praised of all men for his
justice and equitye, yet he was most commended for his syngular patyence in
time of tribulation and great calamytie. But when I considere with my self your
insatiable desire and most fervent love, not only in the followynge of your
own study, but also in the promouinge and furtherynge of others: your great
patience and incredible constance, in sufferynge affliction and abydyng
aequitie: I am compelled to confess that there is none neither amongst the
profane and ethnycke authors, neither amongst thecclesyasticall and
spyrytuall fathers (of what estate or quality so ever they were) with the
which ye may not be compared, yea or rather preferred. For if Alexander were
praised that in the myddest of his triumphant victories he did bear abroad
with him Ilyas the famous work of homer containinge the battayles and
destruction of Troy: How much more are ye to be commended that in the myddest
of your calamity do both night and day where soever ye be, carry and read a
more worthy and precious work? Alexander in prosperity took pleasure to
read Homere treactinge, of martial factes, to the end he might guide his
army according to the exact rule therein declared: ye take pleasure in
adversity to read the holy Scripture and word of God, to the end ye may
govern your life according to the will and commandment of God. Where
Alexander was, there was profane Homere: where ye are there is the holy
Bible. When Alexander did sleep Homere was his boulster: when ye do sleep,
the Bible is your pyllowe Alexander for all his riches is praised for the
continual reading of one book: what shall I then say of you that have
bestowed no little part of your goods in buiynge of most worthy works. Job
which is set before our eyes thexample of a syngular patience being extremely
afflicted in outward things, and in his body, through his great torments
and afflictyons brasted forth into many inconuenyences both of words and
sentences, and showed him self as a desperate man in many things, and as one
that would resyst God, Ye having no less occasion to complain being most
unjustly spoiled of your goods troubled in mind and conscience, threatened
daily by your enemies do notwithstanding constantly resyste acknowledgyng
God to have secret judgments, to chastyse those fatherlye whom he loves, and
to let the reprobate run to destruction. These and other your most
singular virtues having considered and experimented the good will and mind
which you bear to the furtheraunce and setting forth of all sciences, I
could find none more apt, or worthy under whose name this golden treasure
should come abroad, then his whose virtue and good behavior, might give some
place and authority to the same. For although therebe many more adorned with
riches and possessions of this world yet in setting forth of virtue and
singular patience I find none at all. Now therefore to conclude (Sythens, I
know you to be most alienated from all ambition) I beseech you to receive,
this my small present in good part, having rather respect to the mind of the
giver then to the gift it self, although most precious. So I commit you to
the protection of God almyghtie wishynge his heavenly Majesty, that ye may
constantly persevere as ye have begone, both in your spiritual and
temporal affairs, to the end that ye living godly in this world may obtain
that heavenly Crown of glory which our Savior Jesus Christ has prepared
to all those that do patiently: watch for his appearing to whom with the
father and the holy Ghost be all laud, honor and praise world without end.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER CONTAINING the occasion of the setting forth of
this book, the utility and profitte of the same, the use and facility, with
the declaration of three golden documents or rules appartaining to the matter of
every art, and last a brief declaration of the method and form to be
observed in all arts and sciences.
SEEING it is the duty of all Christians (beloved Reader) to labor by all
means, that they may profytte and aid their brethren, and to hyde or keep
secret nothing, which they know may bring great utility to the common
wealth: I thought it my dewtie (having perceived the great commodity which
this book bryngethe to the Reader of what state and quality soever he be) to
make thee and all others to whose knowledge it shall come per takers thereof.
But least thou think that thy labor and pain should be lost in reading of
the same, seeing so many books going abroad under glorious names, having in
dead little or no utility, but wrapped al together with innumerable
difficulties: I shall in few words show the, the matter contained in this
book, the method and form of the same, how easy it is above all others to
be apprehended, how thou shall apply it to all arts and sciences, and
shortly that no art or science may either be taught or learned perfectly
without the knowledge of the same. As fore the matter which it containethe,
thou shall understand that there is nothing appartayning to dialectike either
in Aristotle's xvij. book of logike, in his eight books of Phisike, or in his
xiiij. books of Philosophy, in Cicero his books of Oratorie, or in
Quintilian (in the which there is almost nothing that does not either
appartayne to the invention of arguments a disposition of the same, but thou
shall find it shortly and after a perfect method in this book declared.
For thou shall find no argument which is not either referred to one of the
nine arguments artificial, or to the vnartificiall: no sort of disposition
which does not appartayne either to the judgment of the proposition,
sylogisme or method. But thou wylt say how is it possible that this little
book is able to contain all that, which the forenamed books (being so
many) does entreat? In deed thou have no little occasion to marvel, but
(having more deapely considered the matter) I believe thou shall not marvel so
much. For in this book there is three documents or rules kept, which in deed
ought to be observed in all arts and sciences. The first is, that in setting
forth of an art we gather only together that which does appartayne to the
Art which we entreat of, leaving to all other Arts that which is proper to
them, this rule (which may be called the rule of Justice) thou shall see here
well observed. For here is all which does appartayne to logike, and nothing
neither of Grammar, Rethorike, Physic, nor any other art. This is that
documente which Apelles many years ago did signify to us, for when as the
Shoemaker reprehended the shoo of Apelles image, Apelles took it in good
part, because it did appertain to the Shoomakers art: but when passing his
bounds he began to find fault whith the clothes also, Apelles said to him,
Nihil Suitor vltra crepidam, which signify the that the Shoemaker should keep
him with in the bounds of his art. And therefore (beloved Reader) all those
which either write or teach either divinity, Physic, the law or any other
thing do violate and break this documente, when they degresse from their
purpose and do rail upon other things nothing partayning thereto. For
howsoever they write or teach (so it be from their purpose) it is to be had of
no estimation. Is he not worthy to be mocked of all men, that purpose the to
write of Grammar, and in every other chapter mynglethe something of Logic,
and some thing of Rethoricke: and contrary when he purpose the to write of
Logic does speak of Grammar and of Rethoricke? that takethe a text to
preach of fasting and disputethe the most part of his hour of images or
swearing? that promysethe to show me the causes and signs of the stone, and
tellethe me many tales pertainning to the gowte? that when he is asked of
contractes or obligations, aunswerethe of liberty or bondage? Or if the
Astrologian being asked of the eclips of the son, should answer me some
thing concerning the motion of the stars? And yet we see the most part of
our learned me^ both in their teaching and writing (to the great hurt and
damage of youth) most vnshamfullie do use the same which I would to god were
amended. The second document (which diligently is observed in this book) is
that all the rules and precepts of thine art be of necessity true, which
Aristotle requirethe in the second book of his Analitikes and in diverse
chapiters in his former book. Thou shall violate this document, whenever
amongst thy precepts in writing or teaching, thou shall myngle any false,
ambiguous, or uncertain thing: as if in theaching me my logic, which
consistethe in rules to inuente arguments, and to dispone and judge the same,
thou should begin to tell me some tricks of poysonable sophistry: and when
thou should teach me the word of God truly, thou go about to deceive
me by tellyng me man's inventions: and if thou should (being destitute of
good arguments to prove thy matter) be lie some aunciant writer to beguyle the
rude and ignorant people, or forge some Authors to color thy knauerie which
never was, or wrote at any time. I doubt not (gentle Reader) but thou have
read of such fellows: always call thou upon god that it will please his
heavenly Majesty to plant this our rule of verity in the hearts of all men,
but most chiefly in the breasts of the Pastors of the Church, who have the
charge and dispensation of his holy word. The third documente which thou
shall note herein observed, is, that thou entreat of thy rules which be
general generallye, and those which be special specially, and at one time,
without any vain repetitions, which does nothing but fill up the paper. For
it is not sufficient that thou keep the rule of verity and justice, without
thou observe also this documente of wisdom, to dispute of every thing
according to his nature. Do not entreat therefore general matters
particulerly, nor particular matters generally, for in so doing thou playest
the Sophistes part, as Aristotle teachethe in the first book of his
posteriors, and shall be compelled to use tautalogies and vain repetitions
which thou know to be most pernicious to all arts and sciences. For if I
ask thee what is Logic? and thou aunswerest, that which teachethe to inuente
arguments, thou aunswerest truly but not wyselie, because thou intrearest a
general thing particulerlie: I ask the for the definition of the whole art,
and thou geuest me the definition of invention, which is but a part of the
art. And contrary, if I ask the what is invention, and thou aunswerest an
art which teachethe to dispute well, surely thou aunswerest not wyselie, for
thou intreatest a particular thing generally: I ask of thee, the definition
of a part of the art, and thou geuest me the definition of the whole art.
Note well these three rules in reading of thine Authors: see, if they ^ntangle
them selves, with things nothing appar^eining to their purpose: if they
trouble thee with ^mbiguous or deceiptfull speakings, and do not handle every
thing after his nature. Take the forena^ed books, and with thy rule of justice
give to ^uery art his own, and surely if my judgment done not far deceive
me, thou must give some thing to the art of Grammar, some thing to Re^oricke,
some thing to the four mathematical ^rtes, Arithemeticke, Geometry,
Astrology and ^usicke, some thing also (although but little) to Phi^^cke,
natural Philosophy, and divinity. And yet all ^^at is in these books (only
the fore said digressions ^^cepted) does appartaine either to the invention ^f
Logic, or else to the judgment. Now gather ^geather that which remainethe,
after every art (...) the received his own, and see if there be any false,
^mbiguous or uncertain thing amongst it, and if ^here be (as in deed there is
some) take thy docu^ente of verity, and put out all such sophistical
^^eakinges. And last perceive if all things be hand^^d according to their
nature, the general gene^^lye, and the particular particulerlie, if not, take
thy rule of wisdom, and do according as the third documente teachethe thee:
abolyshe all tautalogies and vain repetitions, and so thus much being done,
thou shall co^prehende the rest into a little rome. And this much concerning
the matter entreated in this book. The form and method which is kept in this
art, comaundethe that the thing which is absolutely most clear, be first
placed: and secondly that which is next clear, and so forth whith the rest.
And therefore it continually procedethe from the general to the special and
singular. The definition as most general is first placed, next folowethe the
division, first into the parts, and next into the forms and kinds. Every
part and form is defined in his own place, and made manifest by examples of
ancient Authors, and last the members are limited and joined together with
short transitions for the recreation of the Reader. This is that only perfect
method which Plato and Aristotle did know observed by many noble writers,
both Historiographers, Orators, and Poets, and now last (being suppressed by
ignorance many years) raised as it were from death, by the most learned and
Martyr to God, Petrus Ramus, who has not only proved with strong arguments,
but in very deed set before our eyes that this perfect method may be
accommodate to all arts and sciences. What shall we say then of those, that
in teaching and writing (to the great hurt of the memory) does put as it
were the tail formest, having no regard how every thing is placed, but even
as it chaunsethe to come into their Mouths, so lettethe it go. Did ever Plato
or Aristotle so? no in deed. But that thou may a little the better perceive
the utility of this art, and how far the use of it does extend, I will
shortly show thee how thou shall accommodate the same to all arts and
sciences, setting before thine eyes one or two for an example. And first what
art so ever thou purposest to entreat of, thou must come garnyshed with
thiese three, Justice, Verity, and Wisdom, as before is said: and then if
thou be a divine this method willethe thee that in place of the definition,
thou set forth shortly the so^me of the text, which thou have taken in hand
to interpret: next to part thy text into a few heads that the auditor may
the better retain thy sayings: Thirdly to entreat of every head in his own
place with the ten places of invention, showing them the causesi, theffectes,
the adioints and circunstances: to bring in thy comparisons with the rest of
artificial places: and last to make thy matter plain and manifest with
familiar examples and aucthorities out of the word of God: to set before the
auditor (as every head shall give the occasion) the horrible and sharp
punyshing of disobedience, and the joyful promises appartayning to the
obedient and godly. If thou be a Physician and willing to teach (as for
example) of a fever, this method willethe thee to show first the definition,
that is, what a fever is, next the deuisio^, declaring what sort of fever it
is, whether the quartane, quotidian, hecticke, or what other: thirdly to come
to the places of invention, and show first the causes of the fever every one
in order, the efficient, as may be hot meats, the matter as melancholy,
choler, or some rotten humor, and so forth with the formale causes and final.
The second place is theffecte, show then what the fever is able to bring
forth, whether death or no. The third place wishethe thee to tell the
subject of the fever, whether it be in the veins, artiers, or else where. The
fowrthe to show the signs and tokens which appear to pretend life or
death: and to be short, thou shall pass thoroughe the rest of the
artificial places, and do that which is required in every of them: And last
come to the confirmyng of thy sayings by examples, aucthorities, and (as
Hippocrates and Galen have done) by histories and long experience. After this
method Heraclitus the Philosopher examyned the physicians which came to heal
him, and because they were ignorant and could not answer to his
interrogations he sent them away, and would receive none of their Medicens:
for (said he) if ye can not show me the causes of my sickness, much less are
ye able to take the cause away. So the lawyer shall plead his cause, in
prouyng or disprouyng after as his matter shall requier, with these ten places
of Invention, and dispone every thing orderly into his propositions,
syllogismes, and method. So shall the Orator declayme: the Mathematician set
forth his demonstrations: and to be short both in writing, teaching, and in
learning, thou may always keep these three golden documentes in intreatyng
thy matter, and this most ingenious and artificial method for the exact
form and disposition of the same. After the exact observation of the forsaid
material documents and natural method thou have this little book set furthe
to the, which being well perused is able to bring more profytt to the (I
speak after experience) then all thy four years study in Plato or Aristotle
as they are now extant. And besides the great utility wiche thou shall
apprehe^de of this book, the facility and easynes of the same is not a little
to be commended. For hear thou have nothing to learn (and yet thou shall
learn all) but only ten places of invention, with the disposition of the
proposition, syllogism, and method. Every place of invention and every sort
of disposition is made so clear and manifest with examples chosen out of the
most ancient Authors, that almost by thy self (if thou have any quicknes of
spirit) thou may attain in the space of two months the perfect knowledge
of the same. Hear I will speak nothing of the envious, that thinkethe it not
decent to write any liberal art in the vulgar tongue, but would have all
things kept close either in the Hebrewe, Greek, or Latin tongues. I know what
great hurt has come to the Church of God by the defense of this mischeuous
opinion: yet I would ask them one thing that thou may know their
deceiptfull policy, and that their saying has no ground of verity. Whether
wrote Moses (the Hebrewe and deuyne) and after him Esdras in the Hebrewe and
vulgar tongue or in some other strange tongue? Did Aristotle and Plato Greek
Philosophers, Hipocrates and Galen Greek Phisitio^s, leave the Greek tongue,
because it was their native language, to seek some Hebrewe or Latin? Did Cicero
who was a Latinist borne write his Philosophy and Rethoricke in the Greek
tongue, or was he content with his mother tongue? and suerly as he testifiethe
him self he had the perfect knowledge of the Greek tongue, yet he wroth
nothing therein which we have extant at this day. Shall we then think the
Scottyshe or English tongue, it not fit to wrote any art into? no in deed.
But peradventure thou wylt say that there is not Scottyshe words for to
declare and express all things contained into liberal arts, truth it is:
neither was there Latin words to express all things written in the Hebrewe
and Greek tongues: But did Cicero for this cause write no philosophy in Latin?
thou will not say so, lest I take the with a manifestlye. What then did
Cicero? he laborethe in the Latin tongue, as Aristotle before him did in the
Greek, and thou envious fellow ought to do in thy mother tongue what so ever it
be, to wit he amplified his native tongue, thinking no shame to borrowe from
the Hebrucians and Grecians such words as his mother tongue was indigent of.
What, shall we think shame to borrowe either of the Latin or Greek, more then
the learned Cicero did? or find some fit words in our own tongue able to
express our meaning as Aristotle did? shall we I say be more unkind to our
native tongue and country then was thiese men to theirs? But thou will say,
our tongue is barbarous, and theirs is eloquent? I answer thee as Anacharsis
did to the Athenienses, who called his Scithian tongue barbarous, yea sayethe
he, Anacharsis is barbarous amongst the Athenienses, and so are the
Athenienses amongst the Scythyans, by the which answer he signified that
every man's tongue is eloquent enough for him self, and that others in respect
of it is had as barbarous.

Thou see (good Reader) what a ground they have to defend their opinion,
and how they labor only to root out all good knowledge and virtue, and
pla^te mere ignorance amongst the common people. Now for to conclude, it
shall be thy duty to receive this my little pains in a good part, and to call
upon God that the use thereof, may tend to the glory of his holy name, and
profitte of our brethren.

THE FIRST BOOK OF DIALECTICKE.
CAP. I. Of the definition and divisions of Dialecticke.
DIalecticke otherwise called Logic, is an art which teachethe to dispute
well.

It is diuyded into two parts: Invention, and judgment or disposition.

Invention is the first part of Dialecticke, which teachethe to inuente
arguments.

An argument is that which is naturally bente to prove or disprove any thing,
such as be single reasons separatly and by them selves considered.

An argument is either artificial or without art.

Artificial is that, which of it self declareand is either first, or has the
beginning from the first.

The first is that which has the begi^ning of it self: and is either simple
or compared. The simple is that, which symplie and absolutely is considered:
and is either argeable or disagreable.

Agreeable is that, which agreethe with the thing that it prouethe: and is
agreeable absolutely, or after a certain fashion.

Absolutely, as the cause and the effect.

CAP. II. Of the cause efficient.
THe cause is that by whose force the thing is: and therefore this first place
of invention is the fountain of all sciences: for that matter is known
perfectly, whose cause is understood: So that not without good reason, the
Poet does say: Happy is the man withouten doubt,
Of things who may the causes well find out.


The cause is either efficie^t and material, or formal and fynall.

The efficient is a cause from the which the thing has his being. Of the
which although that there be no true forms, yet a great abundance we find
by sum certain means distinct.

And first the thing that engendrethe or defendethe is called the efficient
cause. As Ouide, in his first book of the remedy for love callethe
Slouthfullnes the efficient cause of love, which being taken away love
ceasethe: for thus he there sayethe.

When curable thou shall appear therefore,
By my science thy health for to attain.
Give ear, this is my counsel evermore,
From slouthe and Idleness thou do abstain.
For thiese to fylthy lust thy mind prouokethe
And do maintain that, which they have once wrought
Thiese be the causes with food that norishethe,
This evil which now is pleasante in thy thought.
The father also, and the mother which engendrethe, and the nursses which bring
up, ar causes efficients. As Dido. in the 4. book of Eneidos being sorely
offended with Aenee, and sekyng a cause of his cruelty, denyethe him to be
Venus or Anchises son, and faynethe other parents to him.

O false Aenee thy self why do thou feign,
Of Venus fair the gods son to be:
Or that Anchise which dardam hight by name.
Thy author was by way of parentie,
For dreadful Caucasus did thee begett
On terrible and ragged rocks in filde:
And raging Tygres noryshes was set,
To give the suck of vdder rude and wild.
So Romulus was buylder of Rome, and after him, Kings, Co^ulls, Emperors and
Tutors were the vpholders of it: which all are called causes efficients.

CAP. III.
Secondly the cause efficient is either solitary or joined with some others,
of the which some be principal and chief doers, others helpers and seruers to
the principal. An example of the cause solitary we have in the 9. of Eneidos:
Here, here, am I (o Rutilleus) in me
Your swords bare, thrust in with pythie hand.
The fraud is mine, I am the cause only
The impotente nothing durst take on hand.
The solitary cause with others diverse both principalls and adiuuantes in
the Oration which Cicero wrote for Marcus Marcellus is diversely showed.

For often time (sayethe the Orator) some uses to extenuate martial virtues
by words, and pull them away from the Captain and principal doers, and
comunicate them to Soldiers, that they should not be proper to the Governor
of the war: And certainly in war, the fortitude of the Soldiers, the
opportunity of places, the aid of the Alies, nauyes, and provision of
victuals helpethe much: and fortune lawfully does ascribe to her self the
greatest part, so that whatsoever is prosperously done, that almost all she
estemes her own. But of this glory (o Caesar) which thou have not long ago
obtained thou have no fellow: for all how much so ever it be (which verelie
is most great) all I say is thine, for neither the Centurion, the Captain,
the bonds of men, nor yet the troops, may pluck any thing of this away from
thee: yea that more is, fortune that mystres of all things offerethe not her
self in the society of this glory. She geuethe thee place, and co^fessethe
this glory wholly to be thine own.

The instruments also are nombred amongst the causes adiuuantes. By this
argument the Epicure prouethe that the world was never made, as Cicero
testifiethe in his first book of the nature of Godds.

With what eyes of mind (sayethe he) might your Plato behold that composition
of so great a work, by the which he makethe the world to be made of God:
what laboring: what toolles: what bars: what scaffoulds: who were servants
of so great a work?

This ungodly Epicure knew not that God was able to make the world without
any instrumente, or other causes either material or adiuuante.

CAP. IIII.
Thirdly the cause efficient workethe by it self, or by accidente.

The efficient by it self is that, which workethe by his own strength, such
as by nature or counsel do work. As for example the natural workyng of the
wyndes is set forth in the first book of the Eneidos.

Then Eurus rose with northeast raging blast,
Upon the sea, all tossing from the ground.
And Nothus with a cruel noise right fast,
Of whystlyng wind did blyster up and down.
And Affricus with ruffling tempest rusht,
Furthe of the Sowthe, the roaring sea to move.
So that the stormy waves from deape out busht,
And raised was the sandy banks above.
The confession of Cicero containethe an example of counsel, as.

The war being taken up, yea and almost ended (o Caesar) by no strength of
hand, but of mine own mind and will I come unto thiese wars, which were
raised against thee.

By accident the cause workethe, which by some external power workethe, as in
those things which are done by necessity, or by fortune.

By necessity, when the efficient is compelled to do, Such a one is the
excusation of the Pompeyans:

If I would seek (sayethe the Orator) a proper and true name of this our
sorrow, there appears a fatal calamity to be suddenly fallen, which has
prevented unawares the minds of men: So that no man ought to marvel that the
counsels of mortal men are overcome by the fatal necessity of the Godds.

Fortune is a cause by accident, when besides the intent of the worker, some
other thing chauncethe: as,

By chance (sayethe Cicero in his 3. book of the nature of Godds) Jason was
healed by his ennemie, who with stroke of sword opened his rotten impostume,
which the Physicians could not heal.

Amongst thiese sort of causes, ignorance or lack of forsight is nombred:
as, Ouide, in the 2. book of sorrowful matters excusethe him self and
lamentethe that he had seen by chance some of Cesars secrets: as, Why did I
see or yet behold with eye,
What was the cause, I did by sight offend
And unto me unwise and folyshe why,
Was ever the fault by any manner kende
Although by chance that Acteon did see,
The nude Diane upon the hearrie bent.
Yet for all this she did make him a pray:
To his own dogs which him in pieces rent.
Wherefore I see, that happ or negligence,
Among the Godds, no mercy has at all:
But who so does by fortune or by chance,
Offend the Godds, they shall in trouble fall.


Here rysethe the asking of pardon, as Cicero for Ligarius.

Pardon and forgive father he has erred, he has done amysse: he thought not
to do so: if ever he shall do such a thing again? etc. And a little after, he
sayethe, I have erred: I have done rashelie: I repent me of my doing: I fly to
thy clemency, I ask pardon, I pray thee that thou wylt forgive me.

The ignorance of the cause raysethe the opinion of fortune. For when any thing
chances beside the hope and entension of the doer, it is commonly called
fortune. And therefore wisely it is said of Iuuenall.

If wysdom present be,
There is no God absente:
But fortune we thee set on hie,
And eeke a Gods vaunte.
CAP. V. Of the material cause.
THe matter is a cause of the which the thing has his being: as, Ouide in the
2. book of the Metamorphosis, settethe forth the composition of the Sons
house, by the material cause, as gold, carbuncle stone, yuorie, and silver.

The pryncelie Palace of the fyrie Son,
Which Pillor hawte, surmounted far the sky:
With glystering gold, and eke with precious stone,
In form of flame, ascending up on hye.
Whose top above was laid in fine order:
With Iuorie smothe in color white to see,
The duble doors were made of silver pure:
Casting their beams upon the door entry.
Caesar in the first book of civil wars commaundethe his soldiers to
build Ships of such a matter as they had learned before in Brytayne, To
wit, that they should make the keele and bottom of some light and lieger
matter, and the rest of the body of the Ships with twigges covered with
leather.

CAP. VI. Of the formal cause.
THe efficient and material cause being expounded, now folowethe the formal
and fynall.

The formal cause is that by the which the thing has his name and being. And
therefore every thing is distingued from another by his form.

The form also is engendered together, with the thing it self: as, a
reasonable soul is the form of man, for by it Man is man, and is distingued
from all other things. The Geometrical figures have their form, some being
triangles, and some quadrangles. So has natural things: as the heaven, the
earth, trees, fyshe and such others. So that every thing is to be expounded
as the nature of it is, if we may attain to the knowledge thereof, as in
artificial things is more easy to be found. Caesar in his 7. book, settethe
forth the form of the walls of France.

The walls of France are almost builded after this form: The beams of one
piece direct in longitude, every one being equally distante from another, are
set on their two ends in the earth, hard bound within, and covered with a
great countermure. The places betwixt the beams are stuffed up before with
great stones: Thiese being so placed and set together, there is added, to
over above the same another rank, so that the same space and distance is
always kept, that none of the beams do touch another, but each beam being
distant from the other by an equal space, is fast joined together with
stones, set in betwixt beam and beam. And so consequently, the work is
joined together, until the height of the walls be accomplished and filled
up. And this work is both well favored, by reason of his form and variety:
having here a beam and there a rank of stones one after another, observing
their ranks in a straight line: And also it is much convenient for the
profitte and the defense of cities. Because both the stone does keep it salf
from danger of burning, and likewise the stuff and matter from rushing or
beating down: Which for the most part being made fast forty footes inward
with continual ranks of beams, may neither be broken through, nor beaten a
sundre.

On this manner does Virgill describe the form of the heaven.

There is with in this long place solitare,
An I Will extending out two points right far.
Making a rode, where banks on every side,
From the deep sea the waters do deuyde.
And turn in manner of a goulf right deep,
On either side be hylls and banks so stepe.
Most huge and high eke from the sea do rise,
Two fearful rocks, which seem to touch the skies.
Under whose tops, the waters in their place,
Came without stir, does seem to hold their peace.
Fast by a grove and wood are to be seen,
With fearful shade, and shaking leaves grene.
Right over against his front thou may perceive,
On hangyng rocks, a dark den or a cave.
Within the which are springing waters sweet,
With seats of stone, a house for Nymphs most meet.
Within this haven, when wearye Ships do land,
They have no neade of cable nor of band.
Nor crooked ancors pytched to make fast,
For they be sure from all tempestuous blast.
CAP. VII. Of the final cause.
THe fynall cause is that for the which the thing is made or done. The end, of
natural things is man, and of man God. Also every art has the final
cause: as, The end of Grammar is to speak congrouslie, Of Rethoricke,
eloque^tlie, and of Logic to dispute well and orderly. Juno. 1. of Eneidos,
promysethe to Aeolus the fair Nymphe diopeian for solace and procreation of
children.

Nymphs I have of body fair and bright,
Fowrteen, whereof she that diopeian hight:
Most beawtifull, I will in wedlock give,
To thee Aeole that she with the may live.
For thy reward the whole course of her age,
Indoting thee with gift of parentage.
In the defense of Ligarius, Cicero vrgethe his accusator Tubero, with the
fynall cause of the wars raised against Caesar, and surely (sayethe he) he
joined battle against Caesar in arms.

What did thy naked sword (o Tubero) in the Pharsalike army? whose sides
pierced the point thereof? which was the sense and fealing of thy weapons? what
mind, eyes, hands? what feruencie of spirit? what did thou couett or
desire? what did thou wyshe?

CAP. VIII. Of the effect.
THe effect is that which rysethe of the cause. And therefore the moving of
things that are engendered, corrupted, or by any other manner of way moved: and
the thing also that by the mouyng rysethe is called the effect, as for
example, Christ in the 11. chap. of Math. prouethe himself by this place, to be
the true Messiah promised: being asked of John Baptists disciples, Art thou he
that should come, or shall we look for another? And Jesus aunswering said
unto them.

Go and show John what things ye have hard and seen: The blind receive their
sight: the halte go: the leapers are cle^sed: the deaf hear: the dead are
raised up: and the poor receive the Gospel: and blessed is he that shall not
be offended in me, the sayings and works of men ar contained under this place
as the wise men's seynges and Platoes and Aristotls works, counsails also and
deliberations although the never take effect.

Virtue also and vice have their effect, as Horace in the first book of his
Epistles, settethe forth the effect of dronke^nes: as, What thing is not
through dronkennes commytt?
For hyd secrets he makethe come to light:
Hope most unsure, full sure is made by it,
And naked men constrained for to fight.
From pensive minds, all care it takethe away,
Science and arts full often does he teach:
Full cups of wine, at some time do not they,
Make ignorance be eloquente in speech?
The strength of wine, does it not eke make free,
The poor man from all care and heaviness:
Forgetting all his former poverty,
Vnmyndefull of his dolorous distres?


CAP. IX. Of the subject.
NOw folowethe the argument which does agree after a certain fashion: as the
Subject and the Adioynt. The Subject is that which has any thing adjoined
unto it, as, the soul is the subject of knowledge, ignorance, virtue, vice,
because thiese are added to the soul, besides the substance of the same. The
body is the subject of health, sickness, strength, infirmity, beawtie,
deformity, and such others. A man, is the subject of riches, poverty,
honors, infamy, clothes, and of his train. A place is the space in the which
the thing placed, is contained: So the Philosophers do attribute to their
deuyne substances (although void of all magnitude) a place: So the
Geomatricians unto their figures Geometricalles, give both place, and the
differences of places. The natural philosophers also more accurately in the
heaven, simple elements, and compounde things, does acknowledge a place:
Which is nothing else, but the subject of the thing contained in it: as for
example.

The land of Canaan (a subject) is praised in the 12. of Numeri by the
adioyntes or things adjoined unto it.

So Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto them: go
up this way toward the southe, and go up into the mountains, and considere
the land, what it is, and the people that dwell therein: whether they be
strong or weak, either few or many. Also what the land is that they dwell
in, whether it be good or bad: and what Cities there be that they dwell in,
whether they dwell in tents, or walled towns: And what the land is, whether
it be fat or lean, whether there be Trees therein or not, and be of good
courage, and bring of the fruit of the land. And after fortye days they
returned again and toulde Moses, saying, we came into the land whither thou
have sent us, and suerly it flowethe with milk and honye: and here is of the
fruit of it, never thelesse the people are strong that dwell in the land,
and the cities are walled, and exceeding great: And moreover we saw the
sons of Anacke there: The Amelekytes dwell in the sowthe country, and the
Hethites and the Iebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the mountains, and the
Cananites dwell by the sea, and by the costs of Jordan.

Here Canaan is the subject: The people of the land, the cities, the fruytes,
trees, and the goodness and badnes thereof is the adiointes for the which it is
either praised or dispraysed.

CAP. X. Of the adiointes.
THe adioynt is that which has a subject to the which it is adioined: as,
virtue and vice are called the adioyntes of the body or soul: and to be
short all things that do chance to the subject, beside the essence, is
called the adioynt: as, time, quality, either proper: as laughyng to men:
barking to dogs: or common: as in the example following. Cicero in the Oration
for Rossoius Comodus.

Does not his very head and over browe altogether shaven and scraped so
clean, signify that he is malicious and sauorethe of knaneuerie? do they not
utter and cry that he is a crafty fox? Does he not appear from the top
of his head to the sole of his feet (if the proportion and figure of the body
without any speaking or uttered words may bring a conjecture) that there is
nothing in him but craft, deceipte, and lying: who therefore has his head and
over browe always scrapen and shaven, least some should have the occasion to
say that he had an hear of an honest man. So does Martial in his 2. book,
mock Zoilus.

Thy hear is redd, thy mowthe is black with all,
Thy feet are short, one eye thou have to see:
Zoyle, if thou be good, we may say all,
There is no little fact comitte by thee.
Clothes also, and things partaining to our train are nombred amongst the
adiointes: as, Dido, passing to the hunting, is set forth magnifickly by her
adiointes, in the fowerthe book of Eneidos.

In the mean time while that Aurora bright,
Left the main sea ascending up on height:
And Phoebus rising brought the light of day,
The chosen lustye yowthe in best arraye
Went out the streets toward the port or gate,
Having their nets with meshes wide and great:
And hu^ting staves with Iron heads sharp and broad
The marciall horsemen, next after rushing roode:
With Spaniall, dogs, which hunte by perfect sent.
Great multitude also were there present:
Them which of Carthage greatest Princes ben,
Abiding all the coming of the Queen.
Which as yet in chamber did abide,
Thou should have seen eke standing there beside:
A princely horse most goodly to behold,
Richly arrayed in purple and fine gold.
Of courage fierce, a beast for fight most fytte:
With frothing teethe biting his bridle bitte.
And last of all the Queen her self comes out,
Accompanied with soldiers in great route:
With purple cloak besett about with gardes,
Having a queauer, well furnished with darts
Behind upon her shoulders eke did hang,
Her platted hearres like bright gold glystering:
Her purple clothes most comely to behold,
Were knite and tied with claspes of shyning gold.
CAP, XI. Of differing arguments.
THe agreeable argument being expounded, now followethe the disagreable, which
dissentethe from the matter. The arguments disagreable are equally known
among them selves, and disprouethe equally one another: yet by their
dissension, they do more clearlie appear. They be parted into differing
arguments, and gaynesettes.

The differing arguments be such, as be disagreable by some fashion only:
and are known by thiese notes: not this, but that: although, not
withstanding: as, Cicero for Pompey.

They did not bring home the victory, but the signs and tokens of the
victory. And Ouide 2. of love: Ulysses was not fair, but he was eloquent.
Also Virgill. Although Priamus was almost dead, yet he did not abstain:
Likewise Terence in Eunuchus: Although I be most worthy of this contumely,
yet thou art vmworthy to do it unto me. Also Cicero for Ligarius, Call thou
it a myscheuous act o Tubero? Why? surely as yet it was called by no man so:
some in deed called it an error, others fear: some namyng it more hard,
either hope, desire, hatred or obstinacy, those that call it most hard, name
it rashness: a myscheuous act, no man as yet but thou.

CAP. XII. Of gaynesettes, or opposita.
GAynesettes are arguments always disagreing, so that they may not be
attributed to one part of a thing after one respect, and at one time: as,
Socrates can not be white and black on one part: father and son of one:
sick and whole at one time: yet he may be white on a part, and black on an
other, father of one man, and son of another: hole this day, and sick to
morrow: And therefore upon the affirmation of the one, followethe the negation
of the other. And contrary wise also. Gaynesettes are parted into disparates
and contrary arguments.

The disparates are gaynesettes of the which the one is opponed to many: as,
grene, ayshe color, read, are mydde colors betwixt white and black, of the
which every one is a disparate argument both with the extremities, and among
them selves also. So liberality, a Man, a tree, a Stone, and other things
innumerable, because that one of these ca^ not be said to be the other: as,
Virgill 1. of Eneidos.

O Virgyn what should I call thee, for thy visage and voice declarethe that
thou art no mortal woman, Truly thou art a Goddess.

CAP. XIII. Of Relatiues.
Contrary arguments are gaynesettes, of the which the one is only opponed to
the other: and be parted into affirmatiues and negatiues. They are called
affirmatiues when they both affirm: as the relatiues and repugning argument.
The relatiues are contrary affirmatiues, of the which the one has his being
of the mutual society and affection with the other, for the which cause they
are called Relatiues: as, he is a father: which has a son, and he is a
son which has a father for by this mutual relation they are and cease to
be both at once. So that whosoever knowethe the one perfectly, knowethe the
other also, as Martial against Solibian.

Thy father when Solibian,
Thy master thou do call:
Thy self then do thou grant certain,
Seruaute to be withal.
Athanasius prouethe the eternity of the son of God thus: as, It is not
possible that a father may be before the son (meaning of the relation) But
the father has been father from the beginning (as all men do grant) ergo the
son has been from the beginning. And Quintilian in his 5. book the 10.
chapter sayethe thus, If it be honest to the Rhodians to set out the custom,
it is honest also for Hermacrion to hyer it Here (set forth) and (hyer) are
relatiues. After the same manner Cicero in his book de Oratore sayethe: Is
there any danger (sayethe he) lest some should think it filthy, to teach
others a glorious and excellent art, the which to learn was most honest. Here
(teach) and (learn) are relatiues. Thiese also the advocate and clyent: the
lessor and the lessee: free and bond: byg and little: the host and the guest:
the husband and the wife, with such others.

CAP. XIIII. Of repugning arguments.
THe repugning arguments are contrary affirmatiues, which among them selves
do repugne continually: as, Eneid. 11.

There is no health in war, therefore we ask the peace. So hot and could,
white and black, virtue and vice, repugnethe. Likewise Cicero in Parad.
against the Epicuria^s. They held this opinion stowtely and diligently do
defend, that pleasure is felicity, which appears to me to be the voice of
bruyte beasts, and not of men, for thou when God or the mother of all things
nature, has given to thee a soul of all things most excellent and divine,
so thou contemptously castest away and abasest thy self that no difference
thou esteamest betwixt thee and a bruyte beast.

Here Cicero opponethe beasts and men, as pleasure is beasts felicity,
therefore it is not man's, So liberty and servitude: as in Tibullus 2. book.

Hard servitude I see to me prepared
In time to come my mystres for to be:
Fare well therefore thou which have me decored,
Fredome and eke paternall liberty.
CAP. XV. Of denying arguments.
Contrary negatiues, are when the one affirmethe and the other denyethe the
same. And are parted into denying and depryuing arguments.

Denying arguments are contrary negatiues, of the which the one deniethe
every where: as, Just not just: a beast, not a beast: blude not blude: as
Cicero in the defense of Murena.

Thou shall forgive nothing, yes some thing, not all. Grace shall have no
place, yes when office and duty requirethe. Be not moved with mercy, yes in
dissoluing of severity, yet there is some praise of humanity. I stand to my
purpose, yea surely, without a better get the victory.

Also Martial in his first book, We know fabella thou art fair,
A maid also, true thou, so are:
And rich with all who may withstand?
But when thou do to much prepare,
Thy self with praises to up bare:
Then neither art thou rich nor fair,
Nor virgyn I dare take in hand.


Likewise Cicero in the first book of his Tusculane questions compellethe the
Epicurian by this argument to grant that the dead are in no misery: which
thing the Epicurian defendethe. Now (sayethe he) I had rather thou should
fear Cerberus the dog with three headdes porter of hell, then that thou
should so unadvisedly speak these words. Atticus. What his the matter?
Marcus. The same which thou denyest to be, thou admittest to be. Where is the
Sharpnes of thy understanding? For when thou say that the dead be in
misery, that thing which is not thou admittest to be. And after a long
disputation, Atticus sayethe, Now I grante that they are in no misery which
are dead, because that by strength of argument thou have obtained that those
which be not at all, are nowyse in misery. This fellow (sayethe Terence in
his Eunuch.) sometime affirmithe and sometime denyethe.

CAP. XVI. Of depryuing arguments.
DEpryuing arguments are contrary negatiues: of the which the one denyethe
upon that subject only, in the which the other which affirmethe, is naturally
contained. And the affirmative is called the habit, the denying argument, the
privation. So moving and quietness: Sobrrietie and dronkennes: as Martial in
his 9. book.

There is no sober man that would do so, Ergo thou art drunk.

So to be blind and to see: Rich and poor: as Martial in his 8. book.

If poor thou be, thou shall always be poor Aemilian, for nothing is now
given: but to the rich. Of this sort be life and death: as Cicero for Milo.
Sit you reuengers of this man's death, whose life if you thought it might be
restored ye would not.

To speak also and to hold peace: as the first for Catiline: Why do thou
wait for the authority of the speakers, whose minds, thou perceiuest by
holding their peace.

CAP. XVII. Of equal arguments.
COmpared arguments are those which are compared amongst them selves, and are
equally known, although the one be sometimes more manifest and clear then
the other.

The comparaison is either in quantity or quality.

Quantity is that whereby the things compared are known how much or how
little they are.

And quality is either of equal or unequal things.

They be equal which be of one quantity. The equal argument is, when an
equal is declared by an equal: whose signs and notes be, equal, alike, the
same that, as well as, as much as, asmanye as, neither more nor less: There is
a great abundance of such comparisons in the holy Scripture, as the most
part of the parables which Christ uses: as in Matthew. 11.

The Kingdom of heaven is like a grain of muster seade, Deuteronomy. 11. Also I will
cause thy seade to multiply, as the stars of heaven. This argument is
diversely, used by the Ethnicke authors: as Cicero for Silla:

Neither may I perceive wherefore thou art moved against me: if because I
defend him whom thou accusest: why am I not moved with thee also that accusest
him whom I defend: if thou say I accuse mine ennemie: I answer a like, I
defend my friend. So the 5. of Tuscul. When as they grant no little strength
to be in vice, to live a miserable life: must it not be also granted, the same
strength to be in virtue to live godly? This also I pray thee tell me
Xenophons wife (sayethe Aspasia) if thy neigbour had gold more precious then
thou have, whether had thou rather have hers then thine own? hers sayethe she,
and if she had clothes and the rest of the ornaments of women, of greater
estimation then thou have, hadest thou rather have hers? yea sayethe she: Go to
then if she had a better husband? then thou, hadest thou rather have her
husband also? here she was ashamed to answer. Then Aspasia began to speak to
Xenophon, I pray the sayethe she, if thy neighbor had a better horse then
thou, whether hadest thou rather have his or thine? his sayethe he: and if he
had a better ground then thine, hadest thou rather have his? his, to wit the
best: and if he had a better wyffe then thou, had thou rather have his
also? here Xenophon held his peace also.

CAP. XVIII. Of the more.
THey be unequal which be of a diverse quantity.

The unequal be either more or less: That is more, whose quantity
exceedethe: whose notes are, not only, but also: I had rather this then that:
seeing this much more that: as, Eccle. 24. Behold that I have not labored for
my self only, but also for all them that seek wisdom. Psalm. 84. I had rather
be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of
wyckednes. Romans 5. But God settethe out his love, that he has to us, seeing,
that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us: much more then now (seeing
we are justified in his blood) shall we be saved from wrath thoroughe him. For
if when we were ennemies we were reconsiled to God by the death of his son:
Much more, seeing we are reconcilied, we shall be preserved by his life. Not only
so, but we also joy in God by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we
have received reconsiliation. And Cicero for Milo: Not only he yielded him self
to the people, but also to the Senate neither to the Senate only, but also to
the stronghe garrison of souldiars: yea not to these only, but to his power and
authority to whom the Senate has given cure of the whole common wealth, of
the whole youth of Italy, and of the whole munition of the people Roman.
Ouide in the remedy for love, Seeing the body for to bring out of thrall
Both sword and fire gladly thou wylt endure:
Thy soul for to relieve, nothing thou ought at all,
For to refuse, seeing it is more pure.


CAP. XIX. Of the less.
THat is said to be less which an other does excede by quantity: whose
notes be thiese: not this only, but not that: this before that: as Cicero for
Catiline. 2. There was no man not only in Rome, but in no corner of Italy
ouerlayed with debte who^ he had not associate to the incredible leage of that
mischeuous entreprise. Cicero to Philippica 9. All men whatsoever age they be,
which in this city have the knowledge of the laws, if they were gathered
together in one place, are not to be compared with Seruius Sulpitius.

CAP. XX. Of the similitude.
THe comparison as yet has been in quantity, now folowethe the comparison in
quality: By the which we know what kind of one each thing is, whether like
or unlike. These are said to be like which be of one quality: as Math. 23.

Who be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye hypocrites, for ye are like unto
whytned tumbes which appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead
men's bones, and of all fylthynes, so are ye also: for outward ye appear
righteous unto men: but within ye are all full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
Genesis 1. Furthermore God said, let us make man in our own image according to
our lykenes. Phillip. 2. Let the same mind be in you that was even in Christ
Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, but he made him self of no reputation, and took on him the form of a
seruante, and was made like unto man, and was found in his apparel as a man.
And 1. Eneid. Both his mouth and shoulders were like a God. And Cicero in 9.
Philip. Although Seruius Sulpitius might leave no monume^te more clear, the^
his son, which is the very picture and shape of his conditions, virtue,
constancy, piety, and engeyn. The similitude is either separated or joined
together. The similitude separated is when the 4. or single terms are
separated and distingued: as in Math. 23. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kyllest
the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent to thee, how often would I
have geathred thy children together, as the hen gatherethe her chickens under
her wings, but thou would not. And Virgill in Eglog. 5.

What thing that sleep and rest on grass,
To weary men appear:
The same to me of thy sweet verse
The melody so clear.
Here, as the hen to her chickens, so God is to the Israelites: And as sleep to
the weary, so verse is to the hearer. And again Cicero ad fratrem 1. As the
best governors of Ships often times may not overcome the strength and rage
of the tempest: So the most wise man may not always vanquyshe the invasion and
violence of fortune. The joined similitude is when as the first term has it
self to the second, so the second to the third: as Cicero 3. Ligar. Perceive
ye not that the magistrate has the power to ouersee and prescribe good and
profitable things agreing with the laws, For as the laws are above the
magistrate, so the magistrate is above the people.

CAP. XXI. Of the dissimilitude,
THey be unlike whose quality be diverse: as 2. Peter 6. Lord God of Israel
there is no God like the. And therefore the ethnicke Antistenes uses this
argume^te. There is nothing like God, therefore God can no wise be known, by
any image or sign made by men. The author of the book of Kings 2. the 18.
chapter. Having declared the good qualities, the which Esekyah was adorned
with, sayethe thus: He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him,
was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, neither was there any such
before him, Cicero 2. Phillipic. Has a great company of dissimilitudes,
speaking of Varro his grounds which Antonius had obtained by strong hand. O
miserable buyldinges (sayethe he) by how unlike a master (but how is he a
master?) were they with holden: Marcus Varro they should have been for his
studies, and not a resorting place for filthy lusts, what excellent things
were spoken before within that manner place, what things there written? The
laws of the people Roman: The monume^tes of our forbeers, all manner of
wysdo^ and learning: But now sense thou have dwelled on his grounds (having no
right thereto) all the house ryngethe with the clamor of dronkardes, the flore
ouerfloweth with wine, the walls be moist: children of good inclinations with
those that were set for advantage, and whoores amongst men's wives were
dwelling.

CAP. XXII. Of ofspringes.
WE have hitherto expounded the first arguments: Now do follow those which
have their beginni^g of the first, which bearethe them selves to the thing
that they prove or disprove: as the first whence their are driven. Such be
ofspringes: the etimologie, distribution, and definition.

Ofspringes are arguments which do begin alyke, but end diversely: as just,
justice, justly: fredom, free, freely: love, lover, lovely: good, goodness,
goodly: man, manlynes, manly: as, Justice is flede out of the Realm, therefore
there is no man just whithin the Realm. Propercius lib. 2.

Sense fredom to no lover does remain,
No man is free, that does to love give mind.
Here fredom is the cause why thou art free. Cicero 3. book of the Nature of
godds, when he speak the of Dionysius the tyra^te: Now (sayethe he) he
chargethe that all the golden tables should be taken out of the Temples in the
which (after the fashion of the Grecians) it was written of good godds, saying
he would use their goodness. The godds are good, therefore their goodness is to
be used. Here he disputethe from the effect to the cause also, He is a man,
why may he not be then manly.

CAP. XXIII. Of the notation or etimologie,
THe Etimologie is the interpretation of a word: For words are nothing else
but notes of matters signified: as Isaac, was so called because his mother
laughed at the promise of God made to her. And in the 25-of Genesis, is said,
After ward came his brother out, and his hand held Esau by the hele,
therefore his name was called Jacob: that is to say: an ouertbrower or
deceiuer. And therefore Esau being twyse deceived by Jacob, sayethe thus in the
27. of Genesis. Was he not justly called Jacob, for he has deceived me now
two times: He took my birth right: and lo now he has taken my blessing.
Exodus 2. And she called bis name Moses, because said she, I drew him out of
the water. The Hebrews use to give their sons and their daughters names
which might ever put them in remembrance of some point of religion, and know
when they come to perfection, that they were of the chosen people. And therefore
Nabuchadneser 1. of Daniell, commaundethe the chief of the Eunuchs to give
other names to Daniell, Anania, Misaell, and Azaria, which were chosen to
stand in te Kings palace, and teach the learning and tongue of the Caldeans.
The Grecians did use the same, for some were called Timotheus, that is to say,
an honorour of God: some Philotheus which is a lover of God: some Demosthenes,
the strenght of the people: and therefore (some say) that Aeschines his mortal
ennemie should have said thus: should thou be called Demosthenes? no not
so, but rather Demouorus, that is a deuowrer of the people. So do we in the
Scottyshe tongue (to stir the youth to the imitation of them whose name they
bear) call some Abraham, others Isaac or Jacob, and some Susanna after the
Hebrews: And again other some Timothy, and Christofor after the Grecians.
This argume^te is copiously used amongst the Ethnicke authors: as Cicero 4.
Verr. O trymme Swyppinges? for to what place did thou ever come, to the
which thou did not bring with thee this day? To what house, to what city,
yea and shortly to what Church? which thou did not leave spoiled? clean
swipped behind the? Therefore these thy doings may well be called swyppinges,
not so much for thy name (although thou be named verres, which may signify a
swypper) as for thy manners and nature. Cicero 2. Philip. Bambalio was father to
thy wife, a man of no estimation, and above all things contempned: who for his
stutting and stamering of his tongue and dulnes of spirit, had this surname
Bambalio, for a rebuke and a taunte. The phisicions also do give names to their
herbs: to some from the cause: as Hirundinaria, from the inuentor:
Filipendula, from the form: To other some, from the effect and working: as
Selfwhole, and such like: from the subject and place: as parietaria, and sea
trifolie. From the adiointe and quality: as styncking marubium dead nettle:
from the similitude which they have with other things: as Mouse ear, fox
tail, dogs tongue: And so forth from the rest of the places of invention.
The use then of this place is, to prove or disprove, praise or disprayse any
thing by the Etimologie of it: as in the former examples, thou may perceive.

CAP. XXIIII. Of the distribution.
YEt there remainethe of the arguments which have their beginning of others.
The distribution and definition: both the one and the other does reciprocate:
in the distribution, the whole with the parts: in the other the definition,
and the thing that is defined. Distribution is a division of the whole into his
parts. The whole is that which does contain some parts within it. The part
is that which is contained of the whole: And as the dividing of the whole into
his parts, is called distribution: So the collecting of the parts to the
whole, is called Induction. The distribution rysethe of arguments, which
does agree with the whole, but among them selves does disagree. And therefore
how much the whole with the parts agreethe, and the parts among them
selves disagreethe: so much is the distribution the more accurate.

CAP. XXV. Of distribution taken from the cause.
THe first sort of distribution is of those that agreethe absolutely, to wytt
the cause and the effect. The distribution is taken from the cause, when the
parts are causes of the whole. So Grammar is parted into Etimologie and
Syntaxe. Rethoricke, into Elocution and Action: Dialecticke, into Invention and
Judgment. For of these parts the arts do consist: So Virgill deuidethe his
Georgickes into four parts: as, Hear first I will descriue what is the cause,
Does make the corn so pleintifull to rise:
Under what sign and monethe of the son,
Thou shall begin, to till thy filde and ground:
Eke at what time thou may unto the elmes.
Setto the wines, and so shortly after this,
What care thou ought to have of thy oxen,
And of thy cattle the food and husbanding:
And last of all how great experience,
The sparing bees have into their science.
Cicero for murena. I understand (honorable Judges) that their was three
parts of the accusation, one in rebuking and blaming of his life: an other in
contencion and strife of dignity The third to consist in the crimination of
unlawful suit for offices. Catullus does use this argumnete both from the
parts to the whole, and from the whole to the parts: as, Fair Quintia to
many does appear
White, long, and straight, she does also to me:
Yet will I not for this say she is fair,
Seeing in her that there is no beauty:
Nor yet in to her body large and bygge,
A wshyt of grace or any plesanutnes.
Fair Lesbia in beauty does excede,
And from the rest has stolen all pleasant grace.


CAP. XXVI. Of the distribution from the effect.
THe distribution from the effect is when the parts are effects, as in the
similitude of Cato, wherein he shewethe them to have erred that said, old men
did nothing. Those (sayethe he) that affirms old men co^stitute overseers of
the common wealth to do nothing, sayethe as much as if they should say the
Governor of the ship does nothing, when some of the Maryners clymethe the
mast, others run the hatches up and down, some do make the pomp empty the
Governor in the hinder part of the ship guydethe the rudder and stern.
Hear the distribution af the general argument into the special does
excel. The general is the wohole, of one essence with his parts: The
special or kind is a part of the general, as Animal, a living thing is the
whole, whose essence or definition, (to wytt, a corporal substance having life
and senses) does alyke appartayne to men and beasts, which are the specialles
contained as parts under the general animal. So is Man the general to syngle
men, and a lion to syngle lions: and again syngle men are the specialles of
man, and single lions, of the lion. The general argument is either chief
general or subalternall. The special argument is either subalternall or most
special. The chief general is that which has nothing a boue it more
general: as in our division set furthe in the first chapter, the argument is
chief general of arguments artificial, and of the inartificiall: The most
special which might not be divided into other inferiors was the marter and
the form. The subalternall which may be the general in respect of one, and
special in respect of another as the cause contained under the artificial
argument, as a special, and was general to the matter and form which it did
contain under it self. The general and the special are notes and signs of
the causes and the effects. For the general containethe the cause, which
does equally appartaine to his specialles: and again the special containethe
the effect of their general. This is then the reason wherefore the universal
excellethe in dignity, by reason it containethe the cause, as, Ouide in his
Metamor. deuidethe the general, to wytt, A living thing into his specialles,
as stars (to the which he geuethe a life, as the Philosophers do) fowls,
beasts, fyshe, and men: as, That no kind, place, or region should be,
Of living things left void or else empty:
The Godds do make their habitation,
Among the stars, into the high Region:
The scalye fyshe also, by lotte and keuyll,
The flowddes clear obtained therein to dwell:
The earth received the beasts fierce and wild,
The easy sturred dyre, the flying foul:
But yet the living thing, which does these all excel,
In holiness, and eke more capable:
Matters deuyne in mind for to conceive,
Was not present, the rest in guide to have.


Therefore at last was man borne, etc. So, Cicero, in the first book of his
Offices, deuidethe virtue, into four special kinds: Wisdom, Justice,
Fortitude, and Temperaunce. All things (sayethe he) that are honest, does
rise of one of thiese four parts, either it consistethe in the perfect
knowledge of the truth and quycknesse of wytt, or in the defending of the
Society and felloweshipp of man, by geuyng to every man his right, and
fullfilling of things promised: Or in the noble courage and strength of a
valyante and mighty spirit: Or last in observing a good manner and order in
all things, either done: or said, in the which modesty and temperancie
consistethe.

Sometime we argue or reason from the general to the special: as, All men
may marry who have not the gift of Chastity, ergo, Preistes and ministers
may marry. And contrary from the special to the general in a part: as,
Abraham was justified by faith, therefore man may be justified by faith.

CAP. XXVII. Of the distribution from the Subject.
NOw folowethe the distribution of those that after a certain fashion does
agree: as of the Subject and the adioynte. The distribution is said to be of
the subject, when the parts are Subjects: as, The xii Trybes of Israel had
the Land of Canaan, which was a subject parted among them, unto the
Rubenytes the plain of Medeba, etc. unto the Gaddes, Iazer and Gylyad, etc.
unto Manasses the Kingdom of Og, etc. unto Judah was given the wyldernes of Zin,
etc. unto Ephraim from Jericho to the wyldernes, etc. unto Benjamin from Jordan
up the side of Jericho on the north part, etc. unto Semeon was given
Beersheba Sheba and Moladah, etc. unto Zabulon from Sarid eastward unto
Chisloth, etc. unto Issachar Izreelah Chesulleth, and Shunen, etc. unto Assure,
Nephtali, and Dan, every one his portion: as is described the 13. 15. 19. 18.
and 19. chapiters of Joshua. Cieero 5. Tuscul. There be three sorts of goods:
Goods partaining to the body: goods partaining to the soul. and external
goods. He who does attain the heavenly goods partaining to the soul, is
rather to be named most blessed, then blessed.

CAP. XXVIII. Of the distribution taken from the adiointe.
THe distribution from the adiointe is: when the parts and members of the
distribution are adiointes: as Of men some be whole, some sick, some rich,
some poor. So Virgill 1. of his Georgickes, partethe the world after the
adiointes into five parts, whereof the myddle is parching hot, the two
extremities could, and the rest temperate.

Circles there by which part the firmamente,
In number five, whereof is one ardente,
With the hothe beam of glistering son and fire,
About the which one other does appear
On every side with frosen ye congeled
And storms black: eke those there does divide
Two other, which does hold the mydde region
Granted to pensive men for habitation.
By gift of God.
Caesar the first book of French wars. Gallia (now called France) is
parted into three parts, whereof the people called Belgi, do hold one: Aquitani
an other part, and Celti, the third part.

CAP. XXIX. Of the definition.
THe definition is an Oration which does clearly declare what the thing is,
The definition, is either perfect and called properlye definition, or
imperfect and called description. The perfect definition is a definition
which consistethe of the sole causes that accomplyshed the substance of the
thing defined. Such as be the general argume^te and the special or form. So
Man is defined a reasonable living thing: Here (by living thing) which is the
general argument, we understand a corporal substance partaker of life and
sense, which is the matter of Man: and part of the form: unto the which, if
ye will put to (reasonable) yeshall comprehend the whole form of man: So that
the perfect definition is nothing else but a collection of the causes which do
constitute and parforme the substance and nature of the thing defined: such as
be the definition of Arts. Grammar an Art which teachethe to speak well and
congruouslye: Rethoricke eloquentlye: Dialecticke, an Art which teachethe to
dispute well: Geometrye, to Measure well.

CAP. XXX. Of the description.
THe description is a definition which definethe the thing not only with the
causes, but with other arguments also: as, a Man is a reasonable thing
mortal, and apt to learn: Here with the cause are joined both the common
and proper adioynte. This compendious and short briefnes is not always to be
fownde in this sort of argume^te, but desyrethe somtymes to have a more
excellent and magnificall explication: as Glory, is described by Cicero in his
oration for Milo. yet of all the rewards of virtue, if there were a respect
to be had of rewards, I judge glory to be the most great: which only does
comfort the shortenes of this life with the memory of the posterity to come,
which does make us when we be absente, to be as present, and when we be dead
does make us to live. And likewise fame is that, by whose occasion and mean,
men seame to ascend and mount up to the heavens above. So fame is described
by Virgill 4. Eneidos.

Anon through all the Cities great,
Of Affricke fame is gone:
The blasing fame a myschief such,
As Swifter there is none.
By mouyng more, she breades, and as
She rounes, her might does rise:
By low for fear, she lurkethe first,
Then straight alofte in Skyees,
With pride on ground she goethe, and, perchethe
The clouds with head on hight:
Dame earth her mother brooded furthe
(Men say) that child in spite:
Against the Godds, when Gyantes first,
Of Serpents feeted line:
ENCELADVS and CEVS wrought
Hye heavens to under mine.
Then for disdain, (for on them selves
Their own work Jove did flyng)
Their Sister crauled furthe, both swyfte,
Of feet and wight of wyng
A Monster ghastly great for every
Plume her Carcas bears:
Like number leering eyes she has,
Like number harkenyng ears,
Like number tongues and mouths she wagges,
A Wondrous thing to speak:
At mydnyght furthe she flies, and does
Under shade her sound squeke.
All night she wakes, nor slomber sweet,
Does take, nor never slepes:
By days on howses tops she syttes.
Or gates of Towns she kepes:
On watching toures she clymes, and she
Great Cities makes aghast.
Both truth and falshed forth she tells
And lies abroad does cast.
Such be the descriptions of plants, and beasts in natural things: Of
flowdes, mountains, and towns in geographicall and historical.

CAP, XXXI. Of divine testimony, The first sort of the vnartificiall argument.
THe artificial argume^te being expounded followethe consequently the
vnartificiall. The argume^te vnartificiall or without art is an argument
which prouethe or disprouethe not of his own nature, but by the strength
which it has of some argument artificial. And therefore when the matter is
deapelie considered, it has but a little strength to prove or disprove. In
civil and temporal affairs, the authority of the disputer geuethe no little
creditte there unto if he be wise, virtuous, and have the benevolence of the
auditour: all these by one name may be called a testimony. The Testimony is
parted into a divine and human. Amongst divine and spiritual testimonies
are nombred not only the Oracles of the godds, but also the answers of
prophets and deuinours: as Cicero the third for Catiline. And to omit
(sayethe the Orator) the lightning torches which did appear by night in the
Occident, the vehement and parching heat of the heavens: as thrawes of
lightninges, and fire breaking out of the clouds, earthquakes, and many other
such tempests, which (I being Consul) did appear, so that the godds with a
loud voice seamed to sing those things which be now present. And a little
after, he sayethe: At the which time when out of all Hetruria the Southsayers
being gathered together, concluded that great slaugther and burning did
approach, the destruction of the laws, both civil and domestical wars,
and the utter ruin of the whole town and impire: without the immortal godds
by all means appeased had by their divine power, changed almost the very
fatal necessity. Tibullus.

If that in holy Church the oracles,
Does tell the truth, on my name tell her thus,
Appollo Delius does sure to the promise,
An happy marriage: therefore if thou be wise,
Keep well thy self, seek not the company,
Of other men, for that is not godly.
CAP. XXXII. Of human testimony.
THe testimony human is either general or singular. General, as the law,
and famous saynges. There is an example of the law, both written and unwritten
in the oration of Cicero for Milo: as, There is a law (honorable Judges) not
written, but naturally spronge up, which we have not learned, read, nor received
of others, but taken, received and drawn from nature it self, the which to
attain, we are not taught, but made: not instructed by other, but taught by
nature. To wit, That if our life should fall into an ambushe or co^spiracie,
into the power and weapons, either of robbers, or of our ennemies, that we
should by all honest means, deliver our selves from all danger. And a little
after. If the 12. tables would a thief taken in the night to be killed by any
means, and a thief taken in the day (if he by weapon defended him self) to be
killed also without danger: who is he that think the Slaughter to be
ponyshed, howsoever it be committed, seeing he may perceive, that the very
laws them selves: do offer to us sometime the sword to kill men. Proverbs
are nombred amongst famous sentences: as like drawethe to like. The sayings
also of wysewen: as, Know thy felf. Mediocritie is best of all things. There
is an exemple of the singular testimony. Cicero 1. ad fratrem. And surely that
prince of engeine and knowledge Plato, had this opinion that the common
wealths should then be most happy and blessed, when that either learned and
wise men began to govern them, Or that those who had the care over them,
should give them selves to wisdom and knowledge. So Christ him self, the
Apostles, and Evangelists do confirm their doctrine, by the law of Moses:
The Phisicians, by the authority of Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Galen, and such
others: the Philosophers, by Plato and Aristotle: the lawyers, by Justinian:
and the mathematicians, by Euclides. So when there rysethe any question or
controversy of lands or slaughter and such other matters, we use to produce
their obligations, and bind them whith their confession and oath, we have an
example of Obligacion, of Cicero, in 5. Phillippicke. Yea I shall be bold to
bind my faith to you (belowed Judges) and to the people Roman, which if
nothing compelled me I would not take in hand but would very much fear (in
a most dangerous matter) the fame and suspicion of rashenes. I promise, I
undertake, I bind my self (honorable Judges) that Caesar shall be at all times
such a Citizen as he is this day, and such a one as you ought to wyshe and
desire him to be. We may comprehend under the name of obligations, gages
given for the suertie of any thing: as, Virgill 3. of Eglogs. A herdman having
no artificial argument to prove that he could sing better then his fellow,
braggethe that he will lay down an heyfer for a gage. The confession is
either voluntary, or forced. Voluntary, when we do grant any thing of our
own will. Forced, when by torments we are compelled to grant that which
otherwise we would not, and is properly called a question. Miloes ennemie
uses such an argument against him, but it is mocked of Cicero: Go too I
pray you (sayethe Cicero) what was the question, or after what fashion? hoe,
hoe? where is Rushio? where is Casca? has Clodius wrought treason against
Milo? he has wrought, then a certain Gibbett for him. He has wrought none,
then there is a hope of his liberty. Hereto also may be referred the sort of
argument which we use, when we do offer to prove our sayings by experience:
as Cicero 4. of Verren. Is there any body that would have given to Volcatius
(although he comethe of him self) the tenthe part of a denyer? Let him come
now and see: there is no man that will receive him within his house. Terence in
Eunucho. Examyn in knowledge and learning, in wrestling and fygthing at the
bariers I shall give you one conynglye learned in all things, which is decent
for a gentleman to know. And Oath is also nombred amongst the testimonies:
as, Virgill 6. Aeneidos.

I was thy cause of death, alas,
Now by the stars I swear:
By all the godds, and if there be,
Remaining yet one where
Unfeigned faith, if truth on ground
Or under ground may be
Against my will (o Queen) from thy
Dominions did I fly.
FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF DIALECTICKE CONtaining the disposition.
CAP. I, Of the definition and division, of the disposition and proposition.
WE have entreated in the former book the first part of Dialecticke, which is
invention: Now followethe consequently the other part, which we did name
Judgment and disposition. Disposition is a part of Dialecticke, which
teachethe to dispone and place orderly the arguments invented, to the end we
may judge well and rigthly: for we judge of every thing according to the
disposition thereof. And therefore this part of Logic is either called
judgment or disposition under one signification. Disposition is parted into
the proposition (otherwise called enunciation) or sylogisme and method.
Proposition is a disposition in the which one argument is spoken for another.
The proposition has two parts, the first is called the antecedent, the
second the consequent: Of the which the qualities of propositions do rise. And
first the affirmation and the negation. The proposition affirmative, is when
the consequent affirmethe upon the antecedent: as, a man is mortal. The
proposition is negative, when the consequente denyethe upon the antecedent: as,
Man is not mortal: and here rysethe the contradiction of propositions, when
one consequente does both affirm and deny upon one antecedent

CAP. II. Of the true proposition and false, contingent, necessary, and
impossible, and of the three documents of arts.
THe proposition is either true or false. It is true when the consequent is
truly joined with the antecedent, or truly separated from the same: as here it
is truly joined: all man are sinners: and here truly separated: no man is just.
The proposition is called contingent, when the consequent be truly said of the
antecede^t, so that sometime it may be false: as fortune helpethe hardye men,
for granting it to be true to day, it may be false to morrow: So that the
verity of this sort of prositions is only certain in things present, or
past, and not in things to come. The proposition is necessary when the
co^sequent may at all times truly be said of the antecedent: as, all men are
mortal. And contrarywyse, the proposition impossible, is when the consequent
may at no time be said of the antecedent: as, A man is a horse. The necessary
is either of one kind, or of a diverse kind. The necessary of one kind is
when the parts are coessentiall among them selves, as when the general is
said of the special: as, A man is a living thing, or the difference of the
form, as, a man is reasonable, or the adioincte of his proper subject, as, A
man may laughe. And this sort of proposition is sometime reciprocate, when
the consequent, not only may be said always of the antecedent, and of all
things contained under the antecedent, but of it self also, so that the
antecedent contrariewyse may be said of the consequent, on the same manner: as
Man is a reasonable living thing. number is equal or unequal. The proposition
of diverse kind, is when the parts are not coessential: as, A man is black
or white. And here we have three general documentes to be observed in all
arts and sciences. The first is that all the precepts and rules should be
general and of necessity true: and this is called a documente of verity. The
second that every art be contained within his own bounds, and withholde
nothing appartaining to other arts, and is named a documente of justice. The
third, that every thing be taught according to his nature, that is: general
things, generally: and particular, particulerly: and this is called a
documente of wisdom.

CAP. III. Of the simple proposition.
THe proposition is either simple or compounde. The simple with the which a
simple sayng is declared: and therefore it contaynethe a simple consequent:
which if it do affirm, makethe the whole to affirm, and contrarywyse, if it
denyethe, the whole denyethe: as, fire burnethe, fire is hot, fire is not
water. Here, burnethe, hot, and water, are the simple consequentes: upon the
affirmation or negation of the which dependethe the affirmation or negation of
the whole. And this is the first disposition of things invented, when the
cause is joined with the effect, as in the first example. Or the subject with
the adioynte as in the second: Or the disagreable with the disagreable, as in
the third. After the which manner all sorts of arguments may be pronounced
(except full comparisons and distributions) the agreeable by affirmyng, and the
disagreable by denying.

The simple proposition is either general or special. General, when it
speakethe generally. And here the one part of the contradiction is not always
true, and the other false. For in things contingent they may be both false:
as, All man are learned: No man is learned. And in things also which be not
contingent: as, All living things are reasonable. No living thing is
reasonable. The proposition is special, when it speakethe specially and of a
part. And here the one part of the contradiction is true, and the other
false. The special is either indefinite, or proper: Indefinite when it
speakethe of no certain thing: as, Some man is learned, whose general
contradiction is, No man is learned. Proper when the consequent is said of
some proper name: as, Fabella is fair, whose contradiction is, fabella is not
fair.

CAP. IIII. Of the proposition compounde,
THe proposition compounde is when more sayings then one are joined together
by some conjunction. And therefore upon the affirmation or negation of the
conjunction, dependethe the affirmation of the whole proposition: and here the
one part of the contradiction is true, and the other is false. The compounde
proposition is either congregatiue or segregatiue: The proposition is
congregatiue, when the conjunction gatherethe, and is either copulative or
connexiue. Copulative, when the conjunction is copulative, as. Both Eurus and
Africus rusht forth. Whose negation and contradiction is, not both Eurus and
Africus rusht forth. And here is to be noted, that the verity of the
proposition copulative dependethe upon the verity of both parts: for if one
part be false, the whole is said to be false, as in this example. Both man
and beast are reasonable, the whole proposition is false, because the last
part is false. Hereto may be referred the proposition containing the relation
of qualities, in the which the relation standethe in place of the conjunction:
as.

Such thing as sleep, and rest on grass
To wearye men appear:
The same to me, of thy sweet verse
The melodye so clear.
As though he would say, Sleep is sweet to wearye me^, so is thy verse to
me. Whose negation is, Not that which sleep, and rest on grass,
To wearye men appear:
The same to me of thy sweet verse,
The melody so clear.


CAP. V. Of the proposition connexiue.
THe proposition is connexiue, whose conjunction is connexiue: as, if thou have
faith, thou must have charity: Whose negation is, not althyoughe thou have
faith, it folowthe that thou must have charity. Cicero de fratre. Neither if
a proposition be true or false, by and by it followethe that causes are
immutable. The affirmation signifiethe that if the antecedent be, the
consequent must be also. The negation or contradiction signifiethe, that
although the antecedent be, the consequent must not be therefore. Whereby we
must understand, that whenever this sort of proposition is true, it must be
necessary also. The necessity is known by the necessary connextion of the
parts, and not by the verity of the same: for both the parts may be false,
and the connection necessary, as this: if a man be an horse, he has four
feet, is a necessary connextion. But if the connextio^ be contingent, and only
for his probability supposed to be, there arysethe no necessary judgment,
but only opinion: as, Terence in andria. If thou do that (Pamphile) this is the
last day that ever thou shall see me. The proposition containing the relation
of time is hitherto referred: as, when Justice is mayntayned, then shall peace
be in the Realm.

CAP. VI. Of the proposition segregatiue.
THe proposition segregatiue is, whose conjunction does segregate: and
therefore it speakethe only of disagreable arguments. It is parted into
discerning propositions and vnioynyng. The discernyng is, whose conjunction
does discern. Cicero in Tusc. 5. Although that by the sense of the body,
they be Judged, yet they are to be referred to the spirit: whose negation and
contradictio^ is, Not although that by the sense of the body they be judged,
they are therefore to be referred to the spirit. This sort of proposition is
true, when both the parts is true and discerned also. Otherwise it is false
and ridiculous.

CAP. VII. Of the proposition vnioynyng.
THe proposition vnioynyng, is a proposition segregated, whose conjunction
does vnioyne: as, either it is night or day: all living things, are either
man or beast: whose negations are, It is not either day or night: all living
thingeh are not either man or beast: Here the negatio^ declarethe, that the one
part or the other is not true of necessity. For if the disjunction be
absolutely true, it is also necessary, and the parts opponed imediatlie one
to another. Yet although the true disjunction be necessary also, it is not
required that the parts separated be necessary: as, This is a necessary
disionctio^: A man is either good or not good: and yet this, (A man is good) is
not necessary: Nor this, (a man is not good:) But the necessity of the
disjunction dependethe upon the necessary opposition and disjunction of the
parts, and not of their necessary verity. The disjunction is somtymes with a
condition, as if one should ask, whether is Cleon, or Socrates come? because
it was so promised that the one should only come. And therefore if the
disjunction be contingent, it is not absolutely true, but only opynable, such
as oftentimes we use in commen speaking: as, Ouide in Leanders epistle.

Either happy courage shall save me,
Or death of careful life the end shall.
CAP. VIII. Of the Sillogisme.
A Sillogisme is a disposition in the which the question being disponed with
the argume^te is necessarily infered in the conclusion. For if the proposition
be doubtful, it is made a question: And to prove the question, we take an
argument, and dispone it with the question. The Sillogisme has two parts:
one which goethe before, another that followethe, and may be called, the
antecedent and the consequent. The antecedent which prouethe or disprouethe the
question, and has two parts: the proposition and assumption, otherwise
called the Mayor and the Minor. The proposition is the first part of the
antecede^t, in the which the whole question or the co^seque^t of the question
is disponed with the argument. The assumption is the 2. part of the
antecedent, which is assumed under the proposition. The consequent is the last
part of the Sillogisme, which containethe the parts of the question, and
concludethe the same, and therefore it is called the Conclusion: if any of those
parts be absent, it is called a mutilet Sillogisme, or Entymema) if any thing
be more then those three parts, it is called a Prosillogisme. Sometime also the
order is confounded: therefore if any doubt shall rise through any of these
things, it is good to putto that to which is absent, and pull away that which
abounds, and last to put every thing in his own place.

CAP. IX. Of the first form.
A Sillogisme is either simple or compounde. Simple when the parts of the
question are disponed with the argume^te, so that the consequent be in the
proposition and the antecedent in the assumption. The Sillogisme is affirmant,
when the proposition and assumption affirmethe: And negant, when either the one
or the other is negant. General, when they are both general: Special, when
there is but one general: Proper, when they are both proper. The simple
sillogisme is either mutilate or whole. Mutilate, when the conclusion is
brought in after on proposition or on assumption: as, All men be sinners Ergo
Socrates.
And Socrates is a man, Ergo hi is a sinner.
The simple sillogisme is of two sorts: first the argumentt only goethe
before, or followethe only. The first sort then of this kind is, when the
argument going before in the proposition sometime affirmatively and sometime
negatiuely, and in the assumption only affirmatively inferethe a special
conclusion: as, in the examples followyng.

Affirmant general, as.
Constancy is a virtue: But Constancy is Confidence: Therefore some Confidence
is virtue.
Negant general, as:
Folyshehardines is no virtue: But folyshehardines is Confidence: Some
Confidence therefore is no virtue.
Affirmant special, as,
A wyseman is to be praised: But some wyseman is a poor man: Therefore some
poor man is to be praised.
Negant special, as:
A fool is not always happy: But some fool is fortunate: Therefore some
fortunate is not always happy.
Affirmant proper: as,
Socrates is a Philosopher: But Soceates is a man: Therefore some man is a
Philosopher.
Negant proper, as.
Thersites is no Philosopher: But Thersites is a man, Some man therefore is no
Philosopher.
But here, in common speaking to the end we may judge the more easly, we use
to dispone thus: Some Confidence is a virtue, as Constancy: Some is not, as,
folyshehardines.


CAP. X. Of the second form.
THe second form is, when the argument being consequent affirmatively in the
proposition or assumption, in the proposition definitelie: the conclusion is
brought in like to the antecedent: as,

General. 1.
The troubled man reasonethe not well The wyseman reasonethe well: The wyseman
therefore is not troubled.
And Cicero in 3. Tuscul. As the eye (sayethe he) being troubled, is not able
to satisfy his office very well: and the rest of the parts, yea the whole
body being moved out of his good state, is not able to perform his office:
eue^ so the spirit being troubled is not well disposed to execute his dewtie
well and wyselie, and the dewtie of the spirit is, to use reason: but the wise
man his spirit is always so disposed that it may most perfectly use reason,
and therefore he is never troubled.

General 2. as.
Mortal things are compounde, The spirit or soul is not compounde: The
soul therefore is not mortal.
As Cicero Tuscul. 1. prouethe the immortality of the soul by this sillogisme.

In the knowledge (says he) of man's soul we may not doubt (without we be
most dull and ignorant in natural things) But there is nothing admixt with
the soul, nothing compacte or made of elements, nothing compounde or dowble:
Which, if it be so, suerly it may neither be put a sunder nor divided, nor
torn, nor pluckte in pieces. For death is nothing else but the departing,
separating and division of those parts, which before death were coupled
together by some copulation.

Special 1. as.
The enuyous is not valyante, Maximius is valyante: Maximius therefore is not
enuyous.
As Ouide in Elegia 3. does conclude, Ill will and spyte full slothful vices
be,
And never does to gentle manners tend,
And as the lurkyng vyperfull lowly,
Does always crepe out through the lowest ground
But (maxim) thy spirit is valyant
And does above thy lynage reche I win,
But yet although thy name be great I grant
It does no way excel thy swyfte engeynne
Therefore let others overthrow the innocent,
And let them wyshe that all men should them fear,
Eke let them bear their darts about the point,
Well dyed with bytyng venym shyning clear:
But (MAXIM) thy house and family,
Is well accustomed all prostrate for to mende,
Among the which I pray the haretefully,
To number me, and so I make an end.


Special. 2. as,
A daunser is Ryotous: Murena is not Ryotous: Murena therefore is no daunser.
Which Cicero for Murena, has under this form. Almost no sober man without
he be mad does leap either when he is alone, or yet among a moderate and
honest company: for immoderate daunsing is the companion and follower of
inordinate ba^ketting, pleasante and delectable places, and shortly of all
delytes, and pleasant pha^tasies. But thou captiously take that which most
neadethe be the extreme of all vice: and yet unawares leauest those things,
without the which that vice is not to be fownde, for thou show no filthy
bankettyng, no inopportunate love, no feasting: no love of body: neither any
extraordinary expenses. And seeing those things be not to be fownde, what may
these words, voluptuousnes or sensuality signyfie and those things which be
vices? Beleuest thou to find the vmber and shade of ryotousnes in that in the
which thou caest not find ryotousnes it self.

Proper. 1. as,
Agesilaus is not painted of Apelles: Alexander is painted of Apelles:
Alexander therefore is not Agesilaus.
Proper. 2. as,
Caesar oppressethe his natyue countreye: Tullius oppressethe not his natyue
countreye: Tullius therefore is not Caesat.
CAP, XI. Of the second kind of Sillogisme.
WE have hitherto expounded the two sorts of the first kind of the simple
Sillogisme: Now folowethe the second. The simple sillogisme of the second
kind is, when the argument definitely going before in the proposition, and
followyng affirmatively in the assumption, the conclusion is brought in like to
the antecedent.

Affirmant general.
That which is just, is profitable, But that which is honest, is just, Therefore
that which is honest is profitable:
Which Cicero 2. Offic. concludethe thus. The Philosophers of greatest
authority, yea very sharply and honestly have by cogitation distingued these
three, which be confused. For whatsoever is just, that also they esteem to be
profitable: and that which is honest, the same to be just: Of the which it is
concluded, that whatsoever thing is honest, the same to be profitable.

Negant general.
That thing which is void of all Counsel, can not be governed by Counsel:
But love is void of all Counsel: Love therefore cannot be governed by any
Counsel.
As Tere^ce sayethe in his Eunuche almost under the same form.

Affirmant special.

These Co^sulls which for their virtue are chosen, ought diligently to defend
the common wealth: Cicero is chosen Consul for his virtue: Cicero therefore
ought diligently to defend the Common wealth. So the Orator 2. Agrar.
concludethe his own diligence and care: For seeing all Consulls ought to have a
great care and diligence in keeping of the common wealth: Those ought most
chieffly so to do, who not from their youth, but in open place are chosen
consulls. My predecessors made no suertie to the people Roman for me: They
believed my self: It is your duty to ask of me that thing which mine office
requyrethe, and to call mine own self into judgment. For as when I sued for
this office, none of my predecessors commended me unto you: Even so if I
offend in any thing, there is no shyfte that may deliver me from you:
wherefore, if God prolo^ge my days (although I am the man who is able to
defend the same from their mischeuous and subtille conspiraties) this I
promise unto you Quirites, that ye have given the charge of your common wealth
unto a vigilant man, and no fearful fellow: To a diligent man, and no Coward
or feyntharted.

Negant special.
He that deceyueth a loving maid is not to be praised: Demophon is a deceauer
of a loving maid, as Phillidis: Demophon therefore is not to be praised.
Phillis thus inferethe in Ouide.

For to deceive a maid of tender age,
Which trustethe in thee, it is no vassalage,
Nor crafty gloire: For her symplicitie,
Had rather have the constant love of thee.
I Phillis both a lover and a maid,
Am by thy words (false Demophon) deceived:
God grant therefore which dwells in heue^s hye,
For thy deceipte, that thou rewarded be.
Affirmant proper.
Octauius was Caesar's heir: I am Octauius: I am therefore Caesar's heir.
Negant proper.
Anthonius is not Caesar's son: Thou art Anthonius: Thou art not therefore
Caesar's son.
CAP. XII. Of the compounde Sillogisme.
AS yet we have entreated of the simple Sillogisme: Now followethe the
compounde: The compounde Sillogisme is, when the whole question is the one
part of the proposition affirmant and compounde, and the argument the other
part. But the argument is sometime consequent to the antecedent of the
question, and sometime it is the other whole part of the proposition: and than
it is only assumed in the assumption. The compounde sillogisme is either joined
or disioyned. The sillogisme joined is a cumpounde sillogisme, whose
proposition is joined with this coniunctio^, if, and such others, and is of
two sorts: The first affirmethe the antecedent, and concludethe the
consequent, as Cicero concludethe. 2. Diuinat.

If there be Godds, there is a divination: But there are Godds: Ergo there is a
deuination.
Cicer. 3. offic. Suerlye if nature prescribe that man should wyshe the
commodity and furtherance of man, whatsoever he be for that he is man, of
necessity it is required according to the self same nature, that the utility
and profitt of all be common: Which if it be so, we are contained all under one
law of nature: And if this be also, truly we are forbidden by the law of
nature, that one should misuse another. But the first is true, therefore the
last is true. Here often times the same is not assumed, but some thing greater.
1. Catal. If thy pare^tes should fear thee and hate thee, so that thou
could by no means appease the^, I believe that thou would get thee some
way out of their sight. Now thy natyue country, which is the mother of us
all, both hatethe and fearethe thee, and knowethe that thou thynkest nothing
but her destruction and ruin: Shall thou neither fear her authority, neither
shall thou follow her Judgment, neither shall thou be afraid of her mighty
power? The same sort of concluding is, when the proposition contaynethe a
relation of time, as Oenone concludethe her error of folyshenes. When Paris
may withowt Oenone be,
Then Xanthus shall run backward up the vale:
Turn Xanthus, turn, run fluddes backwardly,
For Paris does withowt Oenone dwell.


The second sort of joined Sillogisme pullethe away the consequent, that it
may pull away the antecedent also.

If a man were immortal, he would be a simple substance, without composition
of elements: But he is never without the mixture of elements. He is never
therefore immortal.
Alexander the great asking one of his wise men by what means a man might be
God: If (said the wyseman) he shall do those things which a man is not able to
do. Of the which answer I make this sillogis. If a man would be God, he must
do that which is impossible for man to do: But the consequent can not be: Nor
yet the antecedent therefore.


CAP. XIII. Of the disioined sillogisme.
THe disioined sillogisme is a compounde sillogisme, whose proposition is
disioined: And is of two sorts: The first takethe away the one, and
concludethe the other: as, It is either night or day: But it is not day: It
is night therefore.
Cicero for Cluentio. But when this choice was offered to him that either he
should justly and godly accuse, or dye cruelly and unworthily: he chosethe
rather to accuse how soever he might, then to have dyed after that sort: as he
would say.

Eather he must accuse or dye: He will not dye: He will accuse therefore.
The second sort of disioined sillogisme takethe one in the proposition for
the most part affirmant, and pullethe away the rest: as, It is either night or
day: It is day: It is not night therefore.
And sometime the proposition negant, after this form, It is not both night
and day: But it is day: It is not night therefore.


CAP. XIIII. Of the method.
THe method is a disposition by the which among many propositions of one
sort, and by their disposition known, that thing which is absolutely most
clear is first placed, and secondly that which is next: and therefore it
contynually procedethe from the most general to the special and singular. By
this method we proceade from the antecedent more absolutely known to prove
the consequent, which is not so manifestly known: and this is the only method
which Aristotle did observe.

CAP. XV. Of the illustration of the method by examples of arts.
THe chief examples of the method are found in arts and sciences: in the
which although the rules be all general, yet they are distinct by there
degres: for every thing as it is more general is first placed. The most
general therefore shall be first placed: the^ next shall follow these which be
immediately contained under the general, every one orderly unto the most
special which shall be last disponed. The definition therefore as most general,
shall be first placed: next follows the distribution, which if it be manifold,
and of diverse sorts shall be first divided into his integrall parts, next into
his forms and kinds. And every part and form shall be placed and described in
the same order and place which he had in his division. It shall be expedient also
if the prolixt declaration part them far a sonder, to gather them by a short
transition, for that does recreate and refresh the auditor. But that the matter
may be the more easily understood we must use some familiar example. If thou will ask (having all the definitiones, diuisiones, and rules of Grammar
written in diverse tables, and mixed out of all order) what part of dialectick
teachethe thee to dispone orderly these rules so confunded: first thou have no
need of the places of inue^tion, seeing they be all ready found out: neither
have thou need of the first disposition of propositions, seeing they are
disponed already: neither of the second disposition, which is the judgment of
the sillogisme, seeing all things which might fall into controversy is proved
and concluded: only the method does remain. The Logitian therefore by the
light of this artificial method, shall take a part out of this confused mass
the definition (for it is most general) and place it first of all: As, Grammar
is an art which teathech to speak well and co^grusly. Then shall he seek out
of the said mass the division of grammar, and shall dispone the same in the
second place: Grammar is parted into two parts, Etymology, and syntax. And
thereafter he shall find out the definition of Etymology, to the which he
shall give the third place. Then he shall seek out the parts of the
Etymology, and first the most general as letters: next syllabs and words.
Having the parts, he must seek the forms: as words having number, and
without number. And last he shall knyt and ioyoe together with short and apt
transitiones the end of every declaration with the beginning of the next. And
so having defined, divided and knyt to geather the parts of the Etymology, he
shall make every thing more manifest and plain with most fit and special
examples. And after the same order he shall entreat the syntax. This is a
general method observed in all arts.

CAP. XVI. Of the illustration of the method by examples, of Poets, Orators,
and Historiographers.
WE do not only use this method in the declaration of arts and sciences, but
in the expounding of all things which we would plainly set forth. And
therefore the poets, orators and all sort of writers how often soever they
purpose to teach there auditor, do always follow this order of method,
although they do not every where insist therein. Virg. in his Georgicks parted
his matter as we have said into four parts: and in the first book he
entreats of common and general things, as of Astrology, and things
engendered in the air, and of corns and there manuring, which is the first
part of his work: then he uses a little transition in the beginning of the
second book: This much is spoke of sterres and husbanding:
Now will I thee Bacche begin to sing.
Next he writes generally of trees, then specially of vines: the second
translation is put in the third part, but more imperfect and without the
conclusion of the third book, of oxen, horse, sheep and dogs: Eke thee
great Pales the gods of pasture:
And thee Apollo of sheep the governor,
At Amphysus with praises I will sing.
And last the third tra^sitio^ of the fowrth part is put in the begnining of
the fowrth book: Now by and by with song I will you show
Thuplandish gifts of honey made of dew.
Here therefore we may see that the poet has studied to place the most
general in the first place, and the next general in the midest, and the most
special last of all. So does Ouide in his fastes first propone the sum of
his work, and shortly after part the same: and last having declared the
parts, knytteth them together with short tra^sitions: the Orators also in
there proemes, narrationes, confirmationes, and perorationes labor to observe
this order which they call the method artificial and natural. Here Cicero
first proponeth the matter and next parts it. Thou have been this fowerten
years questor (says he) Cn. Papyrius being co^sul: and I accuse thee of all
things which thou have done from that day to this day: there shall not be
one hour found void of thy theft, malicious doing, cruelty, and mischief.
Here is the sum: now follweth the general partition. All the years (says
he) are spent either in the office of the questure: in the ambassade made in
Asia: in the office of the preture pertaining to the town: or in the office of
the preture, among the Siciliens. And therefore into these four parts my
whole accusation shall be parted. Of the which four parts, and the least member
of every part he entreats afterward, every on in his own order and place.
And in the third oration knytteth together the first three parts with
transitiones. Now (says he) seeing I have shown his office of questure and
first dignity to be full of theft and mishieuous doing, I pray you give ear
to the rest. Then after he had shown the faults of the Ambassade, follows
the transitio^ to the office of the preture. But now let us come (says he) to
that worthy preturie and to those faults, which be more manifest to those
that be here present, the^ to me although I have studied and prepared my self
to declare the same. This transition is more imperfect lacking an epiloge. And
last in the begi^ning of the fowerth oration he makes such a tra^sition to the
fowerth, part which is of the preturie among the Sicilie^s. There is many
things (honorable Judges) which of necessity I most pretermit, to the^de I
may speak a little of these things committed to my charge. For I have taken
upon me the cause of Sicilia, that charge has pulled me to this business. So
Liuius in the beginning comprehends the some of seventy years, and
thereafter deuideth the same by decades.

CAP. XVII. Of the crafty and secret method.
THis method then in diverse enuntiatio^s of one kind, being known eather by
there own disposition, or the disposition of the sillogisme shall be observed
how often soever the matter is clearly to be understood: But when with
delectation or some other motion thy chief purpose is to deceive the auditor,
then thou shall put some thing away which does appartaine to thy matter, as
definitions, divisions and transitions: and set in there places things
appartaining nothing to the matter: as digressiones from the purpose, and long
tarying upon the matter: but most chiefly see that in the begi^ning thou
inuerte thy order, and place some antecedentes after there consequentes. And
surely this more imperfect form of method in respect of the exact rule
observed in the other, is not only mutilate by reason of the taking away of
some of the matter: and redoundeth by the eking to of things extraordinary:
but having some degrees of the order inuerted, is preposterous and out of all
good fashion and order.

FINIS.
FAVLTES ESCAPED.
Page 8 line 2 Read argument or. page 17 lin. 21 declares. page 24 lin. 11
again without interrogation. page 30 lin. 21 ignoranter. page 45 lin. 26
Seeing the, etc. his example ought to be put to the next Chap. 19. page 49 lin.
20 Marcus Varro vvoulde they. page 72 lin. 1 of

