BOVTTES EN AVAUNT

MILITARY DISCIPLINE COMPOSED BY CAPTAIN GERAT BARRY. Dedicated To the right
honorable David BARRI EARIE of Barri Moar, Viconte of Buteuant, Baron of
Ibaune, Lord of barri Court, and Castelliones. 1634.
BRVXELLIS TIPIS IOHANIS MOMMARTY.



A DISCOURSE OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE, DIVIDED INTO THREE BOOCKES, DECLARINGE The
parts and sufficiency ordained in a private Soldier, and in each Officer;
Servinge in the Infantery, till the election and office of the Captain
general; AND THE LAST BOOK TREATINGE OF Fire ^ourckes of rare executiones by
sea and land, as also of firtifasions.

Composed by Captain GERAT BARRY Irish.

AT BRUXELLS, By the Widow of Jhon Mommart. M. DC. XXXIV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE DAVID BARRY. EARL OF BARRY-MOOR, VICONTE OF BUTEVANTE,
BARON OF IBAUNE, LORD OF BARRYCOURTE AND CASTELLIONES, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
Havinge tried my fortune in foraigne nationes, thies thirty three years in
this my present profession of arms, in his Catholic Majesty's service a
monghste the Spaniard, Italian, and Irish, meaning the first four years in
the Real Army of the ocean sea, and the other 29. years in the vvarres, and
brave exploites of the low countries, and Germany, as a Souldior, Princioner,
Aventajado, Alferis, Ajuda^te, and Captain. Now being moved by certain
friends, as also by the great affection i always had to this my present
profession of arms; Havinge intered so far into the blouddy bounds of mars.
Duringe which time i have employed my self in gatheringe, notinge, and
learning out of many brave Auctors, as also vvhate i have seen my self and
otheres practiced in war, in many brave exploytes and rare incounters; all
which it ought fit to set down in vvrithinge to inlighten my beloved
countrymen. Such as are not skillful in vvarres, and are desirouse to inter
into the noble profession of Arms; so that thereby they may gather some
instructiones, and with greater auctority and estimation acomplishe their
obligationes, (wherefore I make boulde to dedicate the same un to your
honor,) which I vvoulde it were handled by a more perfect Soldier then my
self; so that it may by the more agreeable to your incorrupted virtues, and
noble inclination, acordinge to the obligation and love, whereunto iam bound,
as a true and natural servante of your honors, and specially for being
decended from your house, as also for the general utility of your honor and
those of my nation, which are inclined to this honorable exercise; I have
taken the pains to write this volume entitled Military Discipline, in which
is contained the observationes and obligationes of each one servinge in the
Infantery; biginenge with a private Soldier to a Captain general.

Hopinge your honor will accept this my vvillinge endeavor under your
honors protection, with as vvillinge a mind as i offer the same. Beseechinge
the Almighty to bless yove withdraw long life, and increase of virtue, that
yove may follow the true steps, and undeniable prudence, hapines, brave
conduction and cesar-like determinationes of your predecessores, in being no
inferior to them, but rather revive their honor and parpetuall fame, as
required and hoped of your honorable birth and Nobility, according the
great exspectationes of your friends, and well vvisheres, to increase the
honor of your house.

In leavinge a perpetual memory to all posterity of your honors happy
proceedinges, as i your homble servante, and many more of your friends
wishes both to see and here.

Dated at the Court of Bruxells the first of May. 1634. YOUR HONORS Most
homble servante CAPT. GERAT BARRY.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, be diligente in a plienge your self in the noble profession
of arms, that your proceedinges may the better prosper, and command with
prudence and auctority, and i will in devour to inlighten yove with more
particularities of this art; So that yove may the sooner conceive the
difficulties and obscurity of many deep secrets of this noble profession: And
consider that there is nothing so difficill but that continual use and
exercice facilitateth the same. It is true that many who have spente the most
part of their time in the profession of arms; Not with standinge they are
ingnorante, and unable in accomplishinge with their obligationes with
prudence and auctority, and that is resultinge of their idle life, and little
desire in well employenge there time, and for to hide their rude ingnorance,
and little skill in war they are wont to floute, and mock at those of
approved parts and sufficiency.

Such fellows most commonly in occasiones and incounteres with the enemy,
(are puseled and amassed) and all most out of their wits, and that
resultinge of their rude ingnorance, and little perfection in war. Not so
with the prudente and experimented Soldier, who in time of most need with a
settled mind makes notoriouse his resolute determinationes and perfection.
Such brave conductores of virtues and prudente cariadge are to by imitated,
for that to all posterity they leave a memory of their renoumed acts; So
this fruit of my labor and long practice in war, together with the desire
and affection i always had to inlighten my belooved contrimen, and others who
are inclined to this art.

I do protecte under the defense of those of renoumed acts, prudente cariadge
and perfection in war. And not to those inclined to murmur, and full of
burninge flames of Diabolical malice; sheowinge a mild and amiable
countenance, and in their deeds infected with pestrificall, ambition, and
emulation. The heavens are grived, and hell rejoyseth for their wicked
poisoned rancor. They leave to all posterity a memory of their bad and
odiouse iuclinationes, they are hated by those of verteouse life, good
applicationes, and prudente cariadge, and most commonly they finish their
lives with a tormented and miserable end.

Qualis vita, finis ita.
THE FIRST BOOK TREATINGE OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE Composed by Capt. GERAT
BARRY IRISH.
THE FIRST CHAP. Declaringe the parts and sufficiency required in aprivat
Souldior.
HE which intereth into the noble profession of arms first and principally
ought to by agoode Christian, fearful of God and devoute, that thereby his
proceedinges may the better prevail, and finish with ahappy end. Secondly to
build his valerouse determinationes with a constante and uncorrupted zeal in
servinge his prince with geeat love and punctuality. Also to by obediente to
his Officeres from the loweste to the higheste in degree. If otherwise he by
inclined he erreth much, yea and harelly all the good part^s in him can
prosper. Little or no a peerance can by of his furtherance or good success,
hardly any body can trust in him, or hope of any good proceedinges of his,
he is to by little esteemed in referinge to his chardge any office or comaunde;
No man of quality and good parts can trust in him, or keep him Company.

He which intered into this noble profession of arms ought to shun eschew
and forsake all baseness imagined and thought of manes mind. And he ought
diligently to applee him self to learn the art of war, from whence
proceeds all nobility, and whereby, many men of low degrees and base linadge
have attained into high degrees dingnitie and fame, as CAIUS MARIUS decended of
poor and vile parents in a Viladge of the Arpines, came to by a Roman
Emperor; and trough his virtue. VALINCIAN a po^^e man is son of Cibaly in
Hongari came into the lick dingnitie, and also MAXIMINO borne in a pour
Castle in Thrasia, Nicolas Pichino a boucheres son by his virtue and valor,
came to by Captain general of Philipp Viconte Ducke of Milan is army and of
all the Potentates of Italy.

The Senoria of Venecia was governed by Francisco Carmanola a pour man is son,
and that trough his prudence and valor. Many more borne of lo degree, and base
linadge, came into the lick and semblable dingnity, and creditt, and raised
unto honorable degrees and reputation, of perpetual memory. So let none by
ingnorante, that virtue valeur prudente and brave conduction is the true. Way
of proceedinge in the noble profession of Arms.

Let him always with a pure and senseare heart above all things by Careful
to serve God, for although all professions are thereunto bound, yet none more
deeply then the brave Souldior, whose actiones are day and night in danger of
death, (more then anny other) and douptles he that so does a complish,
fights with a more resolute determination, and such men most commonly are a
fisted by the divine power: fighting in a just cause, and with a clear
conscience; Where of there have been to many examples, which i have read in
antcie^te Auctores, and noted my self the same in many incounteres.

He is always bound to by careful, and vigilante in acomplishing his
obligationes, and principally to by obediente. For mishinge this point, the
other good parts which in him do ocurr are of little or not estimation. Above
all things let him always live in the fear of God, and let him by no
blasphemer, for in this world it is most o diouse, and can not escape
without severe punishmente of his Divine majesty. Whereof their have been
many examples and we see that such blasphemers in the wars are shot in the
mouth, or receive other impedimentes in the same, and commonly dee a most
miserable death, for their wicked a customed inclination to that diabolical
vice.

Let him by careful to choose to his comarades and fellows oulde Soldiers if
posible, and men well acquainted, and of good condition, and to by yerie
careful that they be no factioners nor mutineres, whose Company are more
dangerouse then the devil, he is to by quiet and frindly, and rather seveare
then licentiouse in spiches, for such like persons most commonly do loose
there estimation together with their own quietness, and are wont to have many
un happiecrosses in this world, and to be little reputed, and hardly can
prosper as we daily see.

In his diet let him not by to couriouse nor inclined to delicate meats,
rather to distribute, well his means and content him self with such
provitiones, as the camp or place shall affourde, for those that are given to
there belly, and to the unsatiable vice of drunknes are apt for nothing, and
most comonlie are subject to many disgraces, whereof their are many examples.
Prisco Captain of Maurish, Emperor of Constantinopla, a prehended and defeated
the King of Mosaquio de Salabia, and his army, who being blind drunk with
drinking to much wine in the Selebratinge of a certain sacrifice don for the
soul of a brouther of Mosaquio. Which bienge killed the eveninge before in a
certain skirmish, and the victorious Soulders havinge ended their, figt they
fell to eatinge and drinkinge, and for that vice, and there little care, and
beeinge found unprovided and forgetful in a complishinge there obligation were
defeated, as many more unsatiable drunkardes and gluttons have been. There
contraries supposinge afterward to find their enemy in the like trap, with
the like forgetfulness wherein they were found. Thinkinge and consideringe that
they were a small distance of. They determined to turn, and fall upon them,
and revenge them selfs, and release their king or die in his recoveringe,
which they agried upon with a resolute determination: so that Prisco nor none
of his should escape, and had itt not been for a Captain of horse named
Gencono who beeinge hoth prudente and experiment in war. Commanded that those
under his chardge should in no manner take anny liberty in not acomplishinge,
with their military obligationes. Whereof he and his officers took a spetiall
care; so that at the arivinge of his enemy, and determined to fall on with
great fury, he fell on them with great couradge, and constrained them to
retire, and turn their backs. And with the like or semblable fortune Tomires
queen of the Scithians did overcom king Ciro, and his three hondereth
thousand Persians in their Slugish, and beastely drunknes, who came to
revenge the death of Sargapiso her son, who beeinge before slain by Ciro, and
the self same succes happened Achab king of Iraell against king Benado of
Ciria, so that trough the inclination which some have to this vice causes
great disorders, destruction of the co^on wealth, and rebelliones, whereof
their are many examples, Not contentinge them selves with the ability of
their poor host, where by great scandles do offten times arise, causinge
towns cities, and provences to revolte from their prinses, by resultinge of
thies unsatiable drunckardes, which un ruly disorderes and filthy examples are
to by well looked unto, and severely punished; the Tirantinos for this vice
drived a way the Romans, and their Captain Cajo Lucio, and rendered them to
Haniball his enemy. Abidio Casio did so seaverely punish his Souldieres for
their disorders and insolences, that in five days space he cocomaunded to
hang al most the one hause of his army, for their robberies, and unruly
factes comited a gainste the contry people: Which severitie caused the enemy
towns to yealed unto him, and with willinge minds provided his army with
vituales, and all other necessaries Pesenio niger for taking a cock per force
from their hosste condemned to death a whole comarade of Souldieres, Marquis
de Pescaro commanded to cut of the ears of a Soldier of his for leavinge his
order in marchinge, and for his intent to make spoil in a villadge, (where
he was aprehe^ded) the Soldier repleeinge to the Marquis that he vvoulde
rather suffer death then receive such an offronte, to which the Marquis
condecended presently, and commanded to hang him in the first tree; Great
Tamberlan punished so severlie one of his Souldieres for the like or semblable
offense, that the rigor thereof did so corecte and fear his whole army, that
where his camp did continue three days to gither, a tree full loaded with
fruit at there departeture remained whole and untouched (a mervayllouse
example to all Souldiores to imitate this virtue) and abstain from all
disordered apetites, and patiently with great couradge to endure hunger and
misery, when extreme necessity, so requires, as did the army of Caesar in
the seedge of Abarico in France, who seeinge the Emperor, taking great
grief and compassion of their hunger, for which cause he was determined to
retire his camp; whereunto they vvoulde by no means condecend, re pleeinge
that first they should finish their lives by chance of cruel fortune or
hunger, rather then give overtheyre interprice. And with the like constancy
valerouse and noble determination they took in Duraco, eatinge earbes and
roots: In the honorable regaininge of Breda by Spinola many examples may by
given of the necessity of their Souldiores, and great constancy, where
ihave seen many brave Souldiores compelled to extreme and intolerable
necessity, and neverthelesh vvoed that they should rather die in that
honorable act then spott their honor by runninge a way in such a famous
ocation of perpetual memory.

Marquis de Pescora with his own hands kiled two Souldieres findinge them
forceinge a gentle vvooman decended of noble linadge in the sack or tacking of
Genoua. Let him be careful to by well armed if posible being both honorable
and profitable, and that besides it licketh much his superiores; Also let him
be careful in well a parelinge him self, a cordinge to his a bilitie and
pay, and in no case let him hy not overloaden with much b^gadge which is
agreate empedimente in o cationes of marchinge, and specially in time of
service. For we daily see that trough to much bagadge the whole army is often
times troubled, and of the same resulteth many disgraces, and sometimes is wholly
lost. It imports much an honorable Soldier to go as light as may be
posible, without anny impedimente that should cause him to be absente from
his coulors. Much bagadge in o cationes of march causes much trouble and care,
and specially when it is lost as often times happened.

He is to be careful and vigilante in keepinge his culores or watch with
great puntualitie, and beeinge employed in centery or round let him by very
wary in a complishinge his obligaciones, and specially not to fall a sleep
for beeinge so found it lies in the disgression of the Officer to use him a
cordinge his desert, as did Phirates in Corinto going in the round of that
City, and findinge a Soldier a ^leepe killed him, when other wise the least
affronte he could have, was to be in public punished, and that for example
to the rest, that are not wourdie to carry arms for there carelesh minds and
little honor.

Let him look well not to refuse his Officieres being commanded in o cationes
of his Majesty's service, and be no means let him not by absente from his
guard being on the watch without license of his officer, though he thinks
the place to be peasable, and of no suspicion. If he thincketh to go
forward, or to be prefered in this art he profesheth, he is to a complish
with great care and punctualitie his obligationes, that be his care and
diligence he may daily hope of better prefermente. Let him consider that our
predecessores were not Captains nor Master de camps, nor that they were borne
with thies offices but rather with good parts, dilgence and good service
optained the same honorably.

Let him not marry if he hops to a complish well his obligationes, or to be
prefered, for in o cationes of march if she go a long with him hardly can
he well a complish with his obligationes, if his means be little and being
chardged with many children, consider vvhate and how many crosses shall
happen, and he must of force neglecte in a complishinge the obligationes of an
honorable Souldior in the right performance of the kings service, or forgo
his wife and children, for he has enough in a complishinge well with the
one, and give over the other.

In the corpse de guard he is to behave him self sober and honest, and look
well that he fall not unto any quareles, for their he gives bad example, as
also sheoweth little respect to his Majesty's service, and seems that he
neither fears nor respected his Officeres. Wherefore the Officer is to punish
him, for such as are given to quareles in such places are most commonly
accounted for couardes, for it is known that such places is not for quareles,
nor fightinge, nor by no means can be permited, and so such as are given to
quareles in such or semblabel places, are a compted for couardes, and for men
of little expectation of theyer valor before their enemy, and ought not to
escape without severe punishmente.

He is to be earneste to imitate the good parts, and verteuse cariadge of
those which raise unto degrees by their prudente govermente, and to mark
those that are daily declininge ttough their bad and unruly factes; little
fearinge God or man. Of such persons little expectation can be of their
furtherance, or happy success, but rather hated and envied by God and the
world; so let him always imitate te best.

In all places in towns, Cities, or Villadges where he is lodged, let him by
kind and amiable with his host, and let him demand for no delicate meats
nor regalose, as some are incliued unto, but rather conform him self with his
host: For all things don with amity in thies ocationes is far better, and
more laudable then rigor, and disorderes. Whereof often times resulteth great
scandeles, disgraces, and revoltes. If it should chance, as some times happened
that his patr^o^ or host should be aman of unreasonable conditiones, let the
Soldier then repair to his Officer that he might by changed into another
place, or else see his cause remedied better. If it be his chance to happen in
the expuungnation of any City town or forte, let him not be avaritions but
rather follow and Pursue the victory until such time as his contrary be
wholly yealded, and license granted to the spoil and sack. Wherein he shall
sheowe him self neither covetouse nor cruel, (as many gacelesh Souldiores
do) who without fear or respect of God or man do spare no kind of
cruelty uncomitted) with bestiall ravismente both of maids and vvoomen,
wholy givin to their bruthis inclination without concience, reason, or
consideration: like wicked and blind men, robbinge, of ch^nges and
monasteries built for divine sacrifice. Wholly given to their disordered filthy
a petites, and murtheringe of poor people, and inoo^tes yealded, which rather
to the contrary they should sheowe them selves fearful of God, and
merciful to the homble vanquised, and ra^^er defend them then offe^de them,
and in particular the honce^ of woomen, as did Don Pedro Conde de Feria in the
expanguation of Du^^, brought all the woomen to the church of that town, and
defended them from the fury of the Emperores people, who at that time
reresolved to put all to the sowrde.

If in batteries, assaults, or in counteres be shall happen to overcome his
enemy. Let him be of a generouse determination and set all his care in
executinge the victory, and in no wife to attend the spoil, nor leave his
order as do many now adays, like (...) and base factioneres to the great
dishonor of the action and losh of ^^ly^^lives, and of little regard of their
own honor and reputation.

He is to serve and fight in his prince his cause and de^gnes with afection
and constancy, and he is not to (...) whether the ^po^e by just or unjuste,
so that it by not against Gods true Religion. But in such o cation he is to
look well to his conscience, and to be well advised, for Gods cause is to be
loocked unto above all things.

In all ocationes that shall happen or fall out in the courses of war, and
specially in travailes and adversities, he is peri^h^ly to endure and suffer
them. That thereby his virtue may (...), and (...) known the uncorrupted
affection he bears to his prince, in acomplishinge his obligationes, with a
generouse mind and (...) constancy, not murmuringe of his sloe paymente (...)
^e compelled to stand in great need thereof. And specially let him be most
careful not to yealde, or by any means give ear to Mutenies or Rebelliones,
which sometimes resulte of such cases, and whose end most commonly is
Sheamefull death, vvher of there have been toe many examples.

He which intereth in to this noble profession of war ought sense the day
of his asentasion to serve his prince with great love and loyalty, and obey
his Officeres and willingly fight for a just cause, for such virtues seem
to be a similitude of a generouse mind, and true religion. As Platon says
that love and obedience are signs of a high; and generouse mind, and he that
wanted the virtue of obedience is un wourdie of this name, for cause that
trough disobedience resulteth the greatheste disgrace than can happen to an
Army.

Let him be careful bin not murmuringe nor speaking ill of any Officer of his
nor of any that serves his prince, for it seems a bad custom; resultinge of
little prudence and respect, to speak ill of him whom he is bound to
defend, and by whom he is to by governed, and comounded, but rather honor and
respect him: though his virtue and good parts are not agreeable to his
obligationes, neverthelesh for being a minister to his prince he is thereunto
bound.

Let him by no means trough his comarades wife, nor for any thing that
should give him lawful occation of discontentemente, because that of such
like inconveniences and disordered apetites resulteth many quareles and
scandeles amonghste Souldieres, and oftener kill one another trough the same;
then for any other o cation. Neither is he to receive the boy of another
without license, so that thereby he may the better acomplish his Masteres
service.

In all ocationes of marchinge, skirmish incounteres, or assaults with the
enemy by force of arms, all Officieres are to by obeyed and respected for it
belongs to them or any of them to see all things well ordered; and specially
where their devitiones fall. Not only those of his Company, or Regimente,
but whosoever of the army, (being so comodiouse for the Kings service.) In
such semblable occationes let him not stand upon terms, not disputes as some
do, in saying do not know you for my Officer* Let him not by ingnorante
therein, because that the Officer may lawfully punish him, for if otherwise it
falls out, and that the Officer does complain of him to the higher
Superiores, he shall by reprehended for his ingnorance, for because that at all
times and occationes his own Officieres can not be present, wherefore he is to
obey all Officeres.

Let him exercise him self in all sort of Weapones, and of them let him
choose the arms whereunto he is most a fected, and finds more fit for his
purpose, the pike and coselett a mongste foot men is of most estimation, for
being the most firmeste to defend and mantaine a place being well ordered
and set; and specially against the fury of horse. Of manual fiery weapons
the Musket is of greateste execution, next to the same the caliver, both which
are to in viron, and line the Pikes in their due devitiones, a cordinge as
time place and occation shall require.

Let him practice him self in each sort of Weapon, to imitate as near as
posible the Ianisaros Turcos, who were most expert in arms trough their
continual exercice; And let him frequente the sword and target, and specially
i would vvish our Irish to frequente the same for being more inclined to
this sort of weapon more then a ny other Nation, and besides that of all
Nationes none are more fit for the same, nor more resolute. This vveapon is of
great importance in many occationes, and specially when men close together, or
to vive or recnoledge a ny narowe or straighte pasadge or place as trenches,
fortes, batteries, assaults, encamisada, and for other purposes in war; and
specially a boute the cullores or to defend or offend in a ny narow place.

Let him always a plie him self with affection to warlike exercices,
because that virtue exeleth fortune, and it avayleth him, much to read
histories, and to be expert in Aritmeticke, for it does both revive and
perfectionate manes wit. There be shall he understande the cariadge,
prudence, and valor of brave men, and base inclination of bad persons, the
alteration or decayinge of Kingdoms, and common wealths, the brave and
prudente conduction and stratagemes of battelles, both vvon and lost, the
virtue and valcor of the renoomed, the shame and infamy of the vile, the manner
and use of ancient and modern vvarres with the stratagemes used both for the
one and the other.

If he happen to be at the siedge or taking of any strong place or fortress,
he is diligently to vive, the situation the orderes and industry used for
the defense thereof; and the stratagemes used for the vvininge of the same;
consideringe thiese aforesaid and many more used in vvarres, and that which
touches every Officer in particular, even from a Corporal to a Captain
general, to the end he may be perfect in the art he profeseth, that by his
virtue he may be advaunced into greater dingnitie; since that this art he
profesheth is the moother and true fundation of nobility. Therefore reason it
is that it be perfectly understoode of the Professores and followeres thereof,
saying that the practice of mecanicall arts do follow the same order and
course to come to the cunninge of their craft. And that besides that no man
can reduce into perfection those things whereof he is ingnorante, and knows
not the art, without much practice, and specially in this so noble and
couriouse art, who for the executiones thereof, with prudence and authority
is required both long and diligent practice and theorike. It imports him
much to be a good swimer which is one of the four qualities required in a
Soldier, to be rebuste or strong of boddy, nemble and skillfull in arms, and
obediente, thies are the four qualities a foresaid required in a Soldier.
Thus yove see who manny good and honorable parts are wished to be in a
perfect Soldier, not learned be heersay nor gained with ease and vain
glory, but rather in a plienge him self well with affection, care,
diligence, valor, and practice, and specially perfected with learning and
long exercice in war.

THE SECOND CHAP. Treatinge of the election and office of a Corporal in a
Company of Infanterie.
THE office of a Corporal is very antciente for in times paste in the
electiones made of Captains of Infanterie in their real patentes, no
Officeres were elected with them but Corporales, and afterward were elected
the offices of Alferifes, and Sardgentes; in the election of the a foresaied
Officeres the Captain ought to do it with great consideracion, and to choose
those of greatest virtue and experience, to the end he might be the more
beloved and respeed: geevinge them good examples, and instructiones, procuring
to pacify their quarelles, that they may still live in unity and love lick
bretherin.

He is to procure that his squadron be divided into comarades and live together
in their lodginges and all other places withdraw great conformity and love: and
if a ny contraversies should happen or a rise betwext them, he is to be very
earneste to see it pacified without delay, and if in case a ny disorderes
should fall out that he can not remedy: Let him without delay repair to
his Sardgent, Alferis, or Captain which of them first he can find, so that
the quarrel may be a comotaded in due time.

Let him be careful to see that their armor be neat and servisable,
without a ny empediment or let, that he may be ready with the same all
times and occationes. Let him not trust only to the roll of his squadron,
but rather learn every Souldieres name in memory, and where each one
lodgedh. Let him teach and instruct the bisones and raw men who to handle
their arms, and by expert in the same to a compilsh with their King, and
also for their one honor, utilitie, and defense. He is also to by careful
to know the quality and condition of each one of his squadron, for being
employed in convoy or a ny other separated service, vvherof he is to give a
compte. If in his squadron their be a ny disordered fellows; and it is also
necessary that he knows such as are so inclined to prevente remedy a
ganiste their unruly disordered apetites.

A Corporal or cavo de esquadra being employed with his squadron in convoyes
or a ny separated vvatch let none be ingnorante that he is to oversee and
correct all disorderes committed, being in o cationes of his Majesty's
service; or for any other kind of disorder committed, for he is the person
that must yealde account to his Superior of all that is refered to his
chardge: Wherefore he is to comaunde resolutely such as are committed to his care
and chardge, whom they are to obey and observe his orderes in all that he
comaundeth touching his Majeties service, and whosoever should not obey his
directiones as a foresaied of those under his chardge, if be fair means he
does not a complish. Let him severelie punish him with the sword, but in no
case maine the Soldier as some raish and unconsiderate Officeres does: But
let him always see who he commanded, and a complished the contents of the
order given him a cordinge as discression time and the occation shall require
(and not otherwise. Trouh much liberty we daily see resulte many disorderes,
wherefore obedience must be observed, and seaveritie minstred, but that with
great concideration and equity, rather then with raishnes and little
prudence. For some times some Officeres trough their authority blind and
sinister, understandinge do commit faults, but the Soldier always is bound
in obedience to his Superiores, but nothing the further in optaininge Justice.

All vituales and amunitiones that shall be delivered by the Sardgentor furiell
to the Corporal, he shall with equality devide and distribute the same
betwexte the Souldieres of his squadron, without any fraud or parcialitie,
and procure that they a comodate them selves in all places with amity like
true companiones, and let him self in vvourde and deed be careful and
lovinge toward them, so shall he by the better reputed both by his Superiores
and Inferiores.

Those that are bisones or raw men, he is to be careful in instructinge them,
in handelinge their arms, and who to serve whith the same because he is to
instruct him to stand in his centerie, and who to a complishe his
obligationes, to have his piece ready chardged and primmed, and to cock his
burninge match, and so to present his piece and who: And being a pickemam
to terciar or chardge his pick. When the round comes let him demand for the
wourde* and with so low a voice in receivinge or givenge the same, that they
may understande one a another and no higher.

THE THIRD CHAP. Treatinge of the Office of Asardgente of a Company of
Infanterie.
IN the election of a Sardgente it is very requisite for his Majesty's service
that the Captain choose one of good parts, and approoved suficiencie,
consistinge in him the most part of the observationes of Military
discipline. For it is his Office to execute the orderes given be his
Superiores; Wherefore it imports he be not chosen, by favor nor affection, hut
rather trough his valor and long experience in war: Being so chosen it is a
great repose to his Captain and Alferis, and all other executiones shall have
the better success.

It imports much that he do read and write for many respects, otherwise
hardly can he well perform his office: it imports also that he be
skillful in martial matteres, yea and of so great importance, that more
tolerable it were that all the other Officieres of the company were it the
Captain him self to be raw men, and of little experiencie, but the Sardgente
not so, who of necessity ought to be of approved parts great care and
punctualitie in executinge the orderes given hy his Superiores, consistinge in
the suficiencie and care in him required.

It belongs to him the devitiones of the squadrones of his Company, and see
that each Soldier do serve with his complet arms assented on him in the
Kings list, he is to oversee whith care and diligence all disorderes committed
in his Company, and reprehende factioneres, and not dismeasure him self in the
same: but rather with moderation to redresh and a comodate all disorderes, and
eavell ocationes which shall occurr. In ranckinge and orderinge each sort of
weapon, there are sundry manner of, ways for their devitiones, but always
let him put each sort of weapon by it self. Touching their devitiones, and
who they shall be ordered, (shall by at lardge declared in the office of the
Sardgent Mayor.) Let him be always careful in the devition of his pickes, in
puttinge or plasinge in the vangarde, retegarde, and two flanks their best
armed corseletes, and the ensign or culores in the center. But in offeringe of
occation, of framinge of a squadron he shall observe the order given be the
Sardgent Mayor: Sheowinge him self with great diligence, and care in a
complishinge whate is refered to his chardge, in so doenge he merit the honor
and reputation, and doing the contrary, dishonor and shame, whereof resulteth
disorderes and loosinge of much time, and cause of great discontentemente for
not acomplishinge and observinge the orderes given. When ocacation offers he
is to fight as well as the rest, choysinge a convenient place that he may
return to his office, for it is very necessary that he accomplish the
obligation, of a prudente careful, and vigilant Soldier. He shall go
galantlie with a fair millan hedpeece, and an extraordinary good collet, and
a halbart or geneton. But be reason of his overmuch travel and pains his
arms by no means ought to by heavy, for if they be so, hardlye can he well
execute his office.

With care and diligence he shall execute in due time the orderes given by his
Superiores, not missinge any point therein, and if at one time two or three
several Officeres give him order, let him follow the order given be the
higher Officer, if it be not recauled; or that he seethe the occation to be of
importance to his Majesty's service. He is to have always about him a list
of all the Souldieres of his Company squadron by squadron, also he is to be
careful to know where every one lodges, and whate comarades are together in
each lodginge, and that for many respects.

He shall and ought diligently to reprehende and procure to drive out of the
Company all factioneres if they do not a mindd, as thieves, dronkardes,
quarleres, and revolteres for they are most discomodiouse for his Majesty's
service; besides they do noe good, butt are rather dangerouse. For they are
means to learn others their office, and most odious kind of life; and draw
them to imitate there base factes. He is to be very careful in all ocationes
of marchinge and imbattellinge, to instruct his Souldieres to punctually keep
their ranckes observe distance and file, to handell well and serve with their
arms, and to be very vary to instruct such as are ingnorante: Which for
the most part resulteth of the little sufficiency and care of some Sardgentes
chosen be favor or affection. For we see that some Souldieres of long time
have served, and knovved not who to handell their arms, nor serve with the
same in time of need, which resulte of the little regard such persons have
of their honor, and little hope to by advaunced troughe their good parts:
But in thies occationes and in many more the Sardgente being one that knowethe
who to complie well with his duty and office, can redress thies great
faults. Butt oherwise he being unable, yove shall find under his chardge
some Souldieres that in cominge before there enemy, when occation offer; they
neither know how to handell their arms, nor serve with the same as before
spoken. To prevente thies and many more faults, the Captain being vigilante
and prudente, ought to by in formed of every thing in particular, of his
inferior Officeres, and he being careful he can prevente each particular,
and see them redreste in due time. So shall he be the more respected and
beloved be the honorable Souldieres of his Company, and shall with the more
resolution fall on his enemy when occation is offered, and also shall
manifest his care and affection in his Majesty's service.

If he shall of his own motive a prehende any Soldier and acquaintinge his
Captanie there with, or any other Superior; Let him in no case, put him at
liberty, but afterward it apertaineth to him to procure his liberty, by
fair means.

Let him by no means displace any Soldier from his lodginge to put an o there
in his place, for it lies not in his power without license of his Captain
for he has no authority to drive one out, and to accommodate an other in his
place, besides it is an ocation of great discontentemente, except he put him
out for disorderes comited betwexte him, and his host or comarades; for that
lodginge is given him by the Prince, and if he be driven out for an unjuste
cause and making his complainte to the Master de camp or Colonel he shall
give him license to change his place into an o there Company for the wrong don
unto him, and his Captain may by justely reprehended for not ministringe
justice. He shall permit noe Soldier to put of his arms enteringe into the
watch till the Alferis first be disarmed. In garrison the wourde is not to be
given, till the gates be shutt, nor in campana til the hour appointed be the
Sardgent mayor to set the sinteries, and that to be very late. Till this
hour all ought to be in arms. In givinge the wourde in all places of
importance. It is most required that itt be given with great silence for many
respects. In receivinge the wourde from his superior Officere^* let him be
careful not to forget the same, besides that it is discom^diouse for his
Majesty's service, and it shall by toughte that such a ^aulte shall resulte of
the little care in him.

Interinge into a city town or place where he shall inter with his Company,
he ought to visit and know where the ^inte^ies shall be placed, and the
course of the roundes, as shall be a pointed and or dayned be the Sardgent
mayor, also he shall with great punctualitie and care procure to a complish
and execute in due time all the orderes given be the Sardgent mayor, that
thereby he may by the more honored and affected, besides that it is his
obligation.

Let him beware not to be cruel nor inviouse to his Souldieres which is a
token of a bad inclination and nature, and of Officeres of little virtue. If by
chance he should by angry with any Soldier of his, (in turninge his back he
is to forget that fury) and afterward sheowe him self amiable and lovinge,
and so they cominge to the knoledge of his homoures, they shall have the more
ear not to anger him; and if other wise he sheowe him self rigorouse, and
inclined to be revenged, tbey will run away, and he shall fall into disgrace,
and shall be hated by his Captain.

Let him be no means presume to slashe or cut Souldieres with his swourde,
exepte upon just occationes in his Majesty's service, and specially in
disputes of plea, or any other particular quarrel of his own. In such and
semblable ocationes let him look well to him self, for the Soldier in such a
particular owes him but little respect or none at all being thereunto
constrained, for a Soldier is to defend his life and honor for which none
can blame him being of force thereunto constrained.

THE FOURTH CHAP. Treatinge of the election and Office of an Alferish of a
Company of Infanterie.
THE chardge and office of an Alferis or Ansign bearer of a Company of
Infanterie is to be reputed as a Captains leftenant in whose choysinge, his
Captain is to have many and great considerationes. For not only such a one
ought to by agoo de Soldier, and of boulde and valerouse determinationes, but
to by his equal if it may be; both in virtue and discresion) because that
oftentimes in his absence the govermente of the Company does belong to this
Officer; And for as much as the ansigne is the true fundation of the Company,
and that in the same consists the honor both of his and of his Souldieres
reputasion. It is necessary that he, unto whom this office is committed have
in him the a proved parts wissed in a brave Soldier. For the great trust in
him reputed, and that in his Captains absence he rules, and governs the
Company, and from him the Sardgente and Corporales are to receive the orderes;
as they do from their Captain but the Alferis is not to set at liberty any
prisoner without consent or license of his Captain, or other superior
Officeres, neither is he to give license to any Soldier to leave the Company.
It is necessary to whom this so honorable a chardge is recomended never to a
banden it as many brave fellows have don to their perpetual fame and glory.

He ought to go galante and well armed for many respects, as in day of
battle, or in giveng an assault, or in marchinge before his King or C^ptaine
general. In ocationes of fightinge with his enemy, he is to sheow him self
dreadful and terrible, with his sowrde in the right hand, and his culores in
the left, bravely displaying the same; sheowinge him self valiante, and
givenge good examples to the Souldieres, and animatinge them, he is to live
and die in defense of the same, with a resolute mind and brave determination,
as did the Alferis of Oloa in the battle given be Conde Don Gomes, and Don
Pedro de Lara, for the queen Uraca of Castilla against Don Alonso King of
Aragon her husband, in which they were overcome, and the Conde slain cutinge
of the two hands of this Gentleman to quite him of his culores until which
time he never yealded, after which cruel wounds he embrased his culores
betwext his arms, and as did an Alferis Tudesco in the encounter which King
Don Fernando de Napoles had with the Frence and Dutch, with his right hand
cut of, and the leifte sore wounded; and findinge that he could do no more,
greepte the culores with his teeth, and toucke houlde at the same till he was
slain. In garrison the day that he is to enter unto the watch with his Company;
that morninge he is to putt or displaye his culores in his window, that it
might be seen by the Souldieres of his Company, for a true token that that
night he shall inter the watch, and in settinge the watch he ought not to
disarme him self till the gates be shutt, nor in Campan^a till the wourde be
given, and all things provided. His Souldieres ought to imitate him being
thereunto bound, he givinge them always good examples and instructiones.

He ought to honor and respect his Captain, and a complish his orderes with
love and punctualitie, being thereunto bound, for the honor don unto him,
which his father being Captain could do no more, for no greater honor
could he give then referinge to his chardge the Kings culores. Wherefore the
Alferis is to forbear with his Captain in many disputes which happen, rather
then sheowe him self ungrateful, as some unconsiderate fellows do. The
very same would he wish to him self if he came to that dingnitie and chardge,
he is to make much of the drummeres, and fifes because he may by sure to find
them when ocation is offered, and that he and the Captain shall see them
contented for fear they run a way, concideringe the great need he has of
them.

He is to guard his culores well in all places, and tacke a special care of
the same. Let it be before their eyes that they may see itt, for the watch is
not a pointed for his person, but for the security of his culores* hardly can
they give a compte of the same exepte they see itt, neither does the Soldier
well a complish his obligation except itt be so. It is necessary that he by
a man of good parts, verteuse, of good govermente and examples; for thies
are required in him, for in the absence of the Captain the govermente of the
Company a pertains to him. For he is to give the orderes, and directiones to
the Sardgent, Corporalles, and Souldieres of his Company; for one to dishardge
well this office it ca^ be with the greater facility and authority, havinge
exercised himself in the manadgeinge, practice, and executinge of other
offices and degrees; and douptles it does further and help him in his
executiones, that he finds greater ease in reducinge unto perfection
whatesoever shall be recome^ded to his chardge; though he can not sometimes but
file the smarte of his overmuche travail, care, and punctualitie. Yett is he
well pleased and contented, seeinge that his chardge is well governed and a
complished.

The office of an Alferis or Ansigne bearer is an honorable chardge, and in the
muster he is not to empatch him self in the same nor sit, neither take,
chardge of listinge or writing, except urgente necessity constrain him
thereunto. For itt a pertains to the furiell, he is still to be armed with
his vanable in hand duringe the time his Company passes muster; always
lookinge to his colors, and ordain to guard the same with the first
Souldieres of his Company, that shall pass muster, and so succescivelie shall
be releeved by those that follow one after an other, and the Sardgent is to
procure that the Company pass in order, and with speed as they are called by
the Comessary, for being thereunto bound; and each one shall attend in a
complishinge his obligation, that things may be the better ordered and duly
finished as it is required.

It is necessary knows the houses where his Company, does lodge, and the
comarades of each lodginge, and now and then to visit them, and inform who
they live; that thereby he may the better know the quality good and badd
conditiones of each; that thereby each one might be honored and prefered a
cordinge as he deserves. He is also bound to qualify be fair means some
disputes which happen betwexte them, and the Sardgente; for which disputes
sometimes when it comes to the Captains ears, he is also offended with
them. To preve^te the one and the other the Alferis ought to visit them and
to by a mediator to pascify all; and specially to satisfy and content the
Souldieres, so that they may have no ocation to run a way. For if every
Officer fall upon them and none take their part they must of force by
grived; and perhapes run a way. Wherefore it is necessary and until that the
Alferis be careful as a mediator to a peace thies contraversies. It is very
necessary he be a Co^panied still with good comarades, men chosen of good
behavioure valerouse, and of brave and resolute determinationes, for none is
more bound to have such comarades then he; for in offeringe of ocationes of
inconuteres a saultes or battle with the enemy they are to assiste and keep
him with a more willenge mind, in the assault or winninge of a any town or
forte of emportance, he is not to putt his colors in any place till the fury
of the enemy be wholly vanquised* orderly and prudentlie a comodated and
prevented, and when all the fury is paste and duly prevented, he shall putt
in his colors into his lodginge, and display the same in the window next
unto the street, that the Captain, Officereres, and Souldieres may note, and
marcke where the colors are; to repair unto with speed when o catio^
offers. And always let him be very careful to ordain a good guard for the
same, and that he him self shall look well thereunto. Let him take a special
care that covetousenes nor disordered a petites do ouerkome or master him.
When all is settled and pasified quarteres shall be divided and a pointed for
each Regimente which shall be sent in due time be the Sardgent mayor, or his
a judante.

In o cation of framinge of squadrones incounteres or assaults with the enemy,
he is to carry his colors displayed, and passinge be the Captain general, he
is to advance it bowinge the point some whate down wards, but if he pass by
the King or Prince he is to bow almost to the ground one of his knees a
difference from the general, and in passinge by the blessed Sacrament he is
to kneel on be the his knees, and with the colors to the ground sheowinge
great reverence unto the same, and all his Company in like manner, and their
arms laid on the ground till the blessed Sacrament pass, without stirenge
till they see their Alferis rise upp, and that when the Sacrament is wholy
paste, duringe which time they are to keep silence.

THE FIFTH CHAP. Treatinge of the election and office of a Captain of a
Company of Infanterie.
THE electione of Captains of Infanterie in Spainie is made be the Counsel of
State, and war, when their is any leavie or raisinge of men, and when
these places are void either in camp or garrison, other Captains are elected
in their place be the Captain generalles or Visroyes in their govermentes.
The electiones made by such personadges should by all lickhood seem to be
good and sure; notwithstanding it faulethe out offten times that boath
Generales and Viseroyes, and also counseleres have missed in the consideration
thereof, bestowenge those honorable chardges upon their own followeres,
friends* or upon, great courtieres, and favorites; vvherby often times many
scandeles and domadges do resulte to the prince, and to the action. For by the
means, of thies inconciderate electiones, many valiante, brave, and skillful
Souldieres do remain without chardge, little concideringe upon those of long
service, prudente and brave cariadge, yea and who have shed their blood with
great valeor, sheowinge them selves in many brave incounteres a gainste the
enemy. O cruel unhappie, and sinister electiones of small expectaciones, when
the verteouse, prudente, and valerouse Soldier is not thought upon* trough
whose means many scandeles do a rise, and many brave o cationes are lost,
withdraw great dishonor and discomoditie to the prince. And the prudente and
brave Soldier remains almost out of all hope, and almost os no desire to
atemppte a ny hanorable enterprice, seeinge that they are neither honored nor
rewarded, and seeinge that Bisones and men of little skill are prefered before
them.

To prevente many sinister electiones which often times happenethe, and are
more necessary to be remedied. I would wish that in all electiones of those
who should pretend to be prefered by means of favor, or afection as many
are, it were necessary they should be commanded to serve; as oftentimes i
have seen be prudente and brave Comaunderes, yea and their sons and neereste
friends for example to otheres, and for the ob servation of true discipline. To
prevente thies sinister electiones, vvherof resulteth great shame and loshe
both to the prince and contrie. The King of Sprine ^acketh a good cource
when o cation is presented to raise a ny neowe levies, he sendes to his
Viseroyes and Generalles of several States and Provinces, that they should
choice and send relation of the ancienteste Alferises and best a proved
Souldieres in the vvarres, both in virtue, valeor, and suficiencie, that such
persons be elected for Captains, and that also a relation should by sent
of the ancie^teste reformed Sardgentes to be elected for Alferises, and of
Corporalles, Sardgentes, and of brave Souidieres Corporalles. The Visroyes and
Generalles of right should look well to see thies orderes yustly a
complished, concideringe the emportance thereof to his Majesty's service, so
shall the brave Soldier of long service prudente and resolute determinationes
be prefered, and advaunsed; and otheres imitate their a prooved virtue and
good a plicationes, that there by each one may with diligence, care,
practi^e, and learn this noble art of war; seeinge that each one is
prefered, by their virtue deserts and good parts, but o there wise when
thies electiones are made by favor and affection to bisones of little
sufficiency causes great dispe^ationes, and unwillinge minds to attempt
honorable enterprises, and brave incounteres, seeinge be experience that they
are neither honored nor prefered for the same. Which causes Military
discipline daily to fall into great decay; whereof resulteth many disgraces and
the losh of many brave ocationes, ruin of the common wealth, and of the happy
success of Military discipline. He which of right should be chosen for this
office should by a good Cristian, prudente, and of vertuse cariadge, to live
with great temperance and measure in his affairs, and to by perfect in
Military discipline, that thereby he may with the greater authority comaunde,
and be the more respected and feared. Hardly can a ny coddy reduce unto
perfection this honorable chardge, exepte he be learned and perfect in the same.

It emporteth much for the prudente govermente, brave conduction and executions
of his Majesty's service, as also for ministringe justice, and redressinge
many disorderes, that he know and take a special care in the electinge of his
Officeres: that therebe his prudence and valeor may by the better understoode;
electinge them as near equal to him self as may be possible, rather then
sellinge the same after choysinge his Officeres as a foresaied, before he
marches withdraw the same, he is first to cause, the culores, to be bleste, and
afterward deliver the same to the Alferis, giving him to understande the
honor recomended to his chardge, and that he is always to take a special
care of the same, and to die in defense thereof as before declared. Then he is
to devide them into squadrones, electinge and naminge one squadron for him
self of those of best qualities and conditiones, for being so necessary and
of emportance. For of them most commonly he is to choice his Officeres, and
consulte with them. In o cationes of fight and enconteres with the enemy most
comonlie they are next his own person, respectinge and honoringe them as his
own person, and sometimes they are employed for cavose or Comaunderes of some
brave exploytes. It emporteth also that in the o there squadrones there by some
particular Souildieres and a ventajados. He is to procure that all by good
Cristianes, and of a good and verteuse life, to here mass and often confess
for being the true fundasion of happiness; he is to a comodate all disorderes,
quarelles, and disputes, that shall happen amongste them, and reprehende those
of bad examples, and dishoneste behavior, and if by fair means they do not a
mind to drive them a way. For factioneres and infamouse fellows are not to
be permitted to a Company the Kings culores, nor to equal them selves with
the observeres of the noble art of war. In o cationes of marchinge with his
Company let him procure not to be troubled with much bagadge, and specially to
use such moderation in not permitenge that his Souldieres be overloaden with
lugadge, or traishes (as some times happened) butt rather to go as light as
may by possible, with only their armor and o there little inescusall
necessaries, that thereby they may with the lesser empedimente manadge their
arms, and fight with the more resolution in offering o cation.

In each Company of Infantery it were necessary their should be a feowe
horses permited to some Officeres and particular persons, but not many. Thies
horses do serve for many purposes, and specially to recnoledge passadges, and
places where the enemy may be suspected to be in ambuscado; which for such o
cationes are very requisite, as also to send vvarninge of sudden o cationes
of importance. He is not to a tempte o cationes of little a peera^ee, faringe it
should fall out unhappilie, except he be constrained thereunto of necessity,
for such as do not prevente and forecaste their successes in time, are wont
when the o cation offers to by much troubled, yea and some times out of
their vvittes, he is to by careful in a complishinge and observinge the
orderes give^ him by the Officers mayores, when manifest o cation, does not
offer that the a complishinge of such orderes should be hurtefull.

It is very necessary he knows each soldier of his Company by his name,
and in o cationes of marchinge that he procure and see that they still observe
their order and ranks, and not to permit them to stragle hire and there for
being very necessary for many o cationes, because that great sca^deles do
arise trough the over much liberty of stragleres in spoiling gardines,
orchardes, and the houses of the inhabita^ce or contrye where they march;
whereof resulte great discord and discontentmente to the inhabitants for the
loshes they receive of some unrulie campaniones. In the redresinge vvherof the
Captain is to be very careful, and not to permit them to by rigerouse with
their host for their meals, butt rather content them with vvhate he can
give; and see those that do not observe thies orderes severelie punished. For
being the obligation of a good Cristian, and vertuese Soldier.

If o there wise he do, hardly can he escape scandales and bad reputasion, and
besides if it come to the General is ears. He and his Officeres are in danger
of reprehension, yea and often times see their Soldiers hanged before their
faces, for their spoils don upon the poor innocente people. Wherefore their
have been many punishments executed for such and semblable disorderes.

Julius Caesar passinge from Cicilia to Africa against Cipio and King Juda de
Numidia havinge left in that Island the minthe and tenth legion, and
afterward when he sent for them, being informed of the Captains and o there
Officeres in permitinge their Souldieres to spoil the contry without
ministringe any good discipline, commanded that they should by brought in
presence of the whole army reprehended their bad government, presently
commanded them to by banished out of the army, and yvithoute any delay to
embarck out of all Africa. The lick punishments did Ducke de Alva in the
vvarres of Portugal, reforminge so many Captains for theyres and their
Soldiers disorderes: They were banished for example to the rest of the
Captains, and Officers of the army; and so many Souldieres were executed to
death for robberies and stelth that in their reconinge was found, that more
Soldiers were executed to death by justice for their disorderes then killed
or dead o there wise in that war.

Disorderly shall he govern in war vviche never was practiced in the art;
Wherefore it were very necessary that men chosen for this office should
wourdily pass trough all the degries before spoken of, or at least part of
them, to the end he may the better know how to govern and comaunde, and
particularly that he be alwais mindful to fear God, and to be verteouse and
experimented in martial affairs, in many can thies good parts be had, and
many more, and in such as they cannot be wholly found, let their choice be
made of those of whom the most are to by found, because that itt imports
much the Kings service, for all observation of military discipline.

If he be commanded with his Company and o there troops joined to them as
often times do happen to the guard or defense, of a ny place. Let him with
great care, vigilance, and valeor animate his Souldieres, and consulthe with
his Officeres, and best experimented Souldieres, and being resolved let him
with all care and speed fortify and intrince him self, as many brave and
valiante Captains have don, sheowinge them selves with prudence, valeor, and
brave conduction, presentinge them selves in all actiones of the first, with a
brave and resolute determination, but let him by very vary that he a tempte
nothing inconsiderate, and raish as often times happened to ingnorant men of
little experience to their own and Companies confusion. To a void such
enconveniences and hasardes let him be very careful to a complish and observe
the orderes and instructiones given by the higher Comaunderes. If o cation do
not offer whereof greater domadge may ensue, or a good o cation to by lost,
in which Captains are some times of force to prudently prevente the best.
Let him never deney a ny honorable interprice being commanded thereunto be the
General or Governor, though he find it a jorney of great danger. But he is
to present his reasones if he find o cation necessary, and so fall on with
a valerouse determination.

He shall with a generouse mind and good vvourkes procure to vvin the good
will of his Souldieres, a continge them as his sons, and children and that by
such fair means, in not sheowing him self over coveteouse, and greedy, but
rather liberal; still secoringe his Souldieres to his ability in their
necessities and wants, and not to basely wrong them in robbinge or
deceivinge them of their pays, as some Captains are wont to do; with little
honesty or fear of God; making a common practice thereof, trough which they
win bad fame, and toughte and reputed by their higher Comaunderes unwourdie of
the name of a Captain, and often times are severely punished for the same, and
deprived of their Companies with a just sentence.

He is to be very careful to visit the centeries and corpse de Guard under
his chardge, sheowinge great diligence, care, and punctualitie in his own
person, that the Officeres and Souldieres do imitate him, and precisely a
complish with their obligationes, a cordinge the orderes given by the high
Superiores, and be him.

Let him be careful that his Souldieres be not given to vice and to much
liberty trough there own negligence, and bad a plicationes, all fin fallinge
into bad customs, for in permittenge thies unruly factes without necessary
redress, he offends God and his King, for they being under his chardge as
his family, he is to cause every one of them to confess at least once in
ayeare, and specially in all times and o cationes of danger of death as
befiteth a good Cristian to do.

It is very necessary to have a good furiell a ble in Aritmeticke, as also
in readinge and writing, and to be one of trust and well acquainted, for
the lift and reconinges of the Company most commonly is refered to his
chardge, as well to pass muster of his Company, as in distributing munitiones,
arms, and a parell which are given be the King to the Souldieres; of which
he is to yealde a compte when it is sought for by the Prince is ministeres, to
whose chardge the same a pertayneth, to thies furielles or clearkes does a
pertain to receive the orderes for the making of quarteres, in towns
Viladges and campana from the furiell mayor as shall be ordained and a pointed
by him, and most commonly the distributinge and devidinge of the quarteres are
refered to the chardge of the Sardgente. It hape^eth some times that the
furiell does march with his Company a lone, from one place to a another, may be
of reasonable distance, carienge with him his patente or order for the same,
goinge for the most part before the Company to cause the quarter to be made
at their a rivenge. In such o cationes the Captain is to be very careful,
that thies persons do not commit great faults, as some times happen trough
the covetousenes of such persons, resultinge often times troubles to his
Captain, for robbinge and stealinge not only in the way butt also in the
Villadge where they do lodge, spoylinge the same and givinge o cation to the
inbitanes to run away. Which disorderes so committed do often times come to
the high Comaunderes ears, and chardinge all upon the Captain is honeor and
reputasion, and the factioneres run away for fear of punishmente, and
sometimes thies furielles or Clearckes in meetinge a good fellow do fall a
drinckinge and making good cheer, and his chardge not finised, nor findinge
him, nor known where to be found, yea and often times for a piece of money
leaves the Company, trustinge to small comoditie, and it may by in o cationes
of most necessity; being weary and vvett to the skin, thinckinge to stopp
their mouths with envented fables and lies, for which disorders the Captain
as a father of his Souldieres is to see him severely punished, being thereunto
bound for the dischardge of his conicience and reputation.

It is very necessary for the Captain and Company to have a good Chapleyn
reasonable learned, and specially verteouse, and of good life and examples;
But not a friar except it be with license of his Superiores. Above all o there
prpfessiones the art of war is of most danger, so the Soldier is to be
very earneste to be devote, and of clear conscience, for he is more nearer
dangeres of death then any o there sort of men; and it is necessary that he
always have a priest not far of, for the souls health: To whom he may
co^fess at all times and o cationes, a cordinge as time and necessity shall
require. In the choisinge and keepinge of thies priests the Captains in
conscience are bound to procure that they be verteouse and of good life, if o
therwise, itt were far better not to have any at all.

He is of necessity to have a barber in his Company, and if it be possible of
good skill in this art, for being a very necessary instrume^te in war;
for when a Soldier is hurt the greateste comfort he can have is a good
barber, that shall cure him well, and with speed, for if he depend to be
cured by another which at all times is not to be had, except he send for him
may by a far of; hardly can he be well cured; and besides he is in danger of
death. If the wound or hurt be dangerouse, he is both in danger and trouble:
This being such a necessary instrumente in war and because that Souldieres
are men of liberty they fall often times into many disgraces, except their
Officeres have a special care to prevente the necessary remedies. For which
and for many more dangeres they incurr, it is uerie necessary they have a
good barber as before spoken. And if his pay be not able to intertaine him
with instruments and o there necessaries, the Officeres and Souldieres are to
further and asiste him, that he may the better, and with a more willinge mind
serve them, and a complish with the more punctualitie his obligationes.

In o cationes of marchinge with his Company, the Captain, and other Officeres
are to by very earneste that their Souldieres do not dismaunde out of their
order, and ranks, (as many unruly factioneres do) little regardinge their
Captains honeor nor their own reputation, as before declared; and at his
departinge out of any town or viladge where he shall lodge (though it were
but for one night.) He is to see all disorderes committed redressed, not
opresinge nor a beedinge injuries don to the poor innocente inhabitants, but
rather stay after the Company till they be clear out of the town or
Villadge, givinge order to the Alferis to march to the a pointed place or
distance where he is a pointed to make alto or stand, and also givinge order
to the Sardgente to chardge the bagadge with speed; havinge so don he him
self is to visit over the quarter and see if there be any complaints, and
to see them remedied before the Company do depart. Havinge finised well with
his obligation, and desire herein.

It is necessary he carry with him in writing from the Comaunderes of that
town or Villadge that they are satisfied with the good govermente ministered
be the Captain in not permitinge injuries nor disorderes without redress and
satisfaction: Havinge acomplished with thies he is to repair to his Company,
calling the Corporalles that he may know, and be well a sured if any boddy
wantes or no, and then he gives order that the bagadge do march in their due
place, as time and o cation shall require, and the same still acompanied with a
guard.

If the country be peaceable and of no fear of the enemy, he may well
comaunde the bagadge to march in the vangarde, and if o therwise let them
march in the rergarde or battle, acordinge as he shall suspecte of fear both
in the vangarde and reregarde, commandinge the Alferis to lead the Company,
and the Captain to stay in the reregarde, and the Sardgent to and froe all a
longste the flank of the Company, so shall they orderly march, keepinge
their ranckes and doing little spoil and disorderes.

Let him cause that they march still in good order, givinge wareninge to the
Sardgente to be very vary, and vigilante in (...) the same, so shall he
instruct and persuade his Souldieres to be apt, and ready to good actiones,
and dissaude from unrulie and bad factiones, reprehende faults and disorderes,
and commend valor, virtue, and obedience, that therbey they may be ready and
apt to all incounteres and o cationes, which shall or may happen, and endure
them by fair means. To endure patiently all toils, discomodities, and
wantes, so that they arise not into mutenies trough there impatience bad
inclination and govermente which some times happen for want of good
govermente, and little care of some Captains, in givinge good instructiones
and examples.

Let him be careful that no Soldier of his Company play nor pane his arms
nor aparell, for he which is give^ to such vice seemed to be of little shame and
of less honor. Wherefore such unrulie fellows ought to be severely punished
for there villeny and bad examples. Some times it hapened a Captain with his
Company to be employed in secrett services of importance, or may by with part
of his Company; And some Souildieres that are given to learn hire and their
of neowes, do burste with desire to know where he should go. In such o
cationes the Captain ought to by severe, and not to permit any Soldier to
treat or demand where he is bound. For it is a dangerouse wourde resultinge
of litel prudence, and besides he offends much, for in thies and semblable
exploictes there are great mysteries; wherefore the Captain is to sheow him
self rigorouse to whosoever shall presume to intermiddell in any such fulish
and dangerouse demaundes, and pardon none that shall intermiddell in the same,
for example to the rest: Happy are those that are considerate scilente and
obediente, and do not intermiddell in things out of sense, and not
apertaining to them; for comonlie of such Souldieres are great expectationes
in time of need, hopinge all good corespondance of their good life examples
and cariadge. Wherefore such are still first prefered, and of most
estimation, which by all reason ought so to by: If a Captain be careful
that his Officeres do well acomplis- their duty and obligationes, he is to
procure that they be persons that can read and write for being most
necessary, for o there wise they being unable, he can hardely trust to write
to them, and specially any thing of emportance, touching his Majesty's
service, for of force such o cationes must pass trough the hands and
understandinge of o there is, where hardly he can trust unto, noe sort of men
or professiones are more bound or more in need in knowinge to read and
write then the Officeres and Comaunderes of the Souldieres; for often times
matteres of great quality secrett and importance to their King are
recomended to there care and chardge, who requires more secrecy, then
advertissementes or affairs ot marchantes, or any other tradesmen
vvhatesoeuer; so that this Officer may be reputeth unable to fully acomplish
his obligationes, and he may well say that he owes butt little to his father
for not instructinge or learning him, being so great a fault, and
specially in this profession.

THE SIXTHE CHAP. Treatinge of the election and office of a Sardgent mayor
enteringe with his Regimente to Garrison.
THE election of the Sardgente mayor of a Regimente is to be choysen and
elected of such as the Master de camp, or Coronel do name or putt in election
to the General, in this election great consideration ought to be taken, and
be no means the General is to give way or intrance to favor nor affection;
but rather to virtue, valor, and sufficie^cie; for cause that this office is of
such emportance to his Majesty's service, and being a General minister of a
whole Regimente of many Companies, and Superientendente of all the Sardgentes
of the same be whose prudence and industry, the Master de camp or Coronel
does give convenient orderes for the due govermente of his Regimente, in o
cationes of marchinge, fightinge or imbattelinge, and in o there matteres
concerning the same, whereby may be gathered the aproved parts, valor,
experience, care, and diligence wished in such a person.

Who being chosen to this degree and office of such importance; we read that
in times paste the generales of the Romans, and of o there nationes trusted
the execution of this office to none, but the Generalles them selves
administered the same, concideringe that in day of battle the beauty and force
thereof consists in the well orderinge and framinge of the same (be which the
victory most comonlie is vvon) for undeniable it is that those that are best
ordered and exercised in war are masteres of the victory, though they be
lesser in number: Where of their have been to many examples of anciente and
brave Auctores, and all a firminge the same, as did a peer in the last and
famous jorney in which Haniball Carthagenense was overkome by Scipio
Africano. Not with standinge Haniball havinge to his judgment prevented and
ordered all things as necessary and fit; neverthe less the sagacitie and
prudence of Scipio was at that day so great, that it was enough to putt
them all to flighte, with his singular and extraordinary military prudence.
Amongste the Frence and Dutche this office is more estimed then in o there
places, wherefore it should be always commended to the chardge of the more
prudente experimented Captain that can be had in the Regimente, and together
with this office they have Companies; so that they have the name of a Captain
and Sardgente mayor, and profitt together, and in absence of their Coroneles
or Master de camps to them by right belongs the govermente of the Regimente.

This election of all reason and justice should be provided in one as before
spoken, and the counsel of State and war should always have a special
care to see thies electiones so prefered, and specially the General, rather
then chosen by favor, frindsihip, and affection, as some times it falls out,
recomended to unable bisones, of little service, and less sufficiency, Whereof
resulteth to many inconveniences, and because that in them does not o curr the
aproved and prudente parts and authority required for executinge well this
office, Captains of the Regimente do give them some times but little respect
or creditt: For this election be all equity and justice, and for many
considerationes of importance, ought to be earnestly sought a Soldier of the
best o pinion and sufficiency, that amongste the whole Regimente can be had,
and that he be very perfect in Arithmetic, for being the most necessary
point for the executiones of this office, after havinge exercised much in the
war. And not elected be no means by favor, for being an office who
requires much ability.

Very many can be found who have spente their time in the wars who are not
fit for this chardge, rather by trial and examination made of his a proved
sufficiency, as with Doctores in winenge their chair of dingnitie be trial
of their a proved parts and sufficiency. And he who in his examine
represents him with authority, in givinge the best reasones, is first
prefered.

For by thies means douptless Souldieres should be the more willinge to study
to by perfect for the optaininge of this so honorable a chardge by trial of
their vvoordie deserte. But we se it daily given to persons who a plied
them selves but little, neither in the Theorick or Practice of this art, and
who have seen very feowe o cationes of importance, that by their good and
diligente aplicationes they may be the sooner preferred and honored.

This office being o there wise given, the King and o cation is offended; for
some to dischardge them selves in this office do trust to the dialoge of
valdese or to the table or numerato of catanae novarae of the State of Venecia,
who made a table from 100. to 2000. men to form squadrones which table they
were wont to carry in their poketes, and if the numerato or table be lost,
he remains in darcknes; that besides it does not serve in yerie many o
cationes nor for many sorts of squadrones. So none is to trust to itt, but
rather leaarne diligently to shifer and thereinto to exercice him self, which
is the true way for being once perfect it can not be lost, and he shall
with the greater authority and respect acomplish his obligationes.

He is to acomplish with the orderes of his Master de camp as a Superior head
Governor and Conductor, and justice of his Regimente, but the executiones a
pertains to the Sardgent mayor, for being the principal minister of the
same in all ocationes, as well in campan^a, as in garrison, so that in the
profession of war, it may of all right by reputed fot an honorable office,
and of great preminiences and trust, and of right he ought to by of
extraordinary care at all times.

When o casion offers he is to by freely permiited to come to speak to his
general, yea and to the very King being in the o cation, noe door or
intrie ought to hinder or let him from freely comenge and goinge at all
times, for it is so required for the execution of his office, as well in
receivinge orderes from the General, as in deliveringe tha same unto his
Master de camp or Coronell, and also in a complishinge and executinge his
office. This office is of right wourthie honeor, and reputation, but til the
year 1500. amongste the Spanardes they had but small pays, meaning twenty
five crowns a month, buth in the same year his Majesty increased their pay
with fifeine crowns, which in all is forthy, and together with patentes of
Captains and Sardgente mayores, so that they were equal in means with
Captains, and afterward they were augmented with 25. crowns more which in
all is 65. crowns wholy paid, so that they pass Captains in means and
degree at this present; and the o cation of murmuringe and equality betwexte
them and the Captains is set a side: Which of right ought so to by; and by
them the order of the General and Master de camp is given to the Captains,
and there executipnes acordingly acomplished.

For to a complish well with the extraordinary care and travail of this
office, it were very necessary that he be provided with two or three good
nages strong and well proportioned, and that can endure great travail, and
it is very necessary that they go with a fair pace for his more ease:
Sometimes oceasiones do offer that he wears out three or four horses a day
for the well acomplishinge of his office. For the well executinge of this
office it is very necessary to have two ajudantes which are to be chosen of
men of long exercice in war, and of a prooved parts and sufficiency,
presentinge them selves with authority, prudencie, and brave cariadge, and
specially to be very expert in Arithmeticke, many good parts are required
in thies persons; for some times it hapeneth that the Sardgent mayor is hurt
or sick. In the mean time his a judante may execute his office; It is very
necessary they have good means to intertaine them selves, and their horses;
for it faleth out most commonly that he traveleth and takes greater pains
then the Sardgent mayor. Wherefore and o curinge in him thies befitinge parts,
he is to by much esteemed and furthered by the superior Officeres.

To acomplish well with his office he must be most vigilante and careful,
he ought to know in memory the names of all the Officeres of his Regimente,
yea and besides of many Souldieres, and to know all the Ensigns by their
colors. He is also to know the Officeres reformed and particular persons;
As the Sardgente mayor is the principal minister in executinge the Master de
camp is orderes, so is he to by resolved in executinge the orderes given him
by the Sardgente mayor, and that with moderation and love, he is to be very
careful to acomplish in due time the orderes given by the Master de camp, or
Sardgente mayor; And by the entercession of none to omit any fault without
reprehension or necessary redress.

It is the Sardgente mayor is part to diligently procure and solicit with
the Prince and General, and other superior Officeres for the providinge of
armor munitiones, and all o there necessaries for the Companies of his
Regimente, as powder, led, match, vituales, etc.

The which he shall cause to be well distributed betwexte the Sardgentes, and
by them to be delivered to the Corporalles who are to distribute the same
betwexte the Souldieres without any fraud. He is also to be an universal
procurer of all things fit and necessary for the Souldieres souls health,
in severelie punishinge and banishinge public and uglie crimes out of the
Companies of his Regiment as thieves, disordered persons of no fear nor
shame, as dronckardes and all such as live enfamously, out of hope of a
mendemente; and specially blasphemeres, who like base and blind factioneres
without fear and conscience, do highly offend his Divine Majesty.

Such as have a special care to see thies haynouse faults and disorderes
redressed, and justly punished, ought and are most comonlie to be reputed,
favored, and highly recommended, and specially by his Divine Majesty for
their affection and care in acomplishinge his will.

He is to be earneste that the Master de camp do choice the drom mayor of his
Regiment of one that he knows to by able in well executinge his office, and
that he by noe means by elected by favor, but rather for one who knows to
instruct all the dromeres of his Regimente, for being one chosen for that
effect: He can assiste in many occasiones in carienge and bringenge of
orderes, as shall by more at lardge declared in his election and office. When
he shall inter into any town or place of defense, he is to use great
consideration in the devition of the gardes, and watch thereof, and specially if
it be a frontier, or place where the enemy is to be much feared. He shall in
no case devide unto every Company the part or place of the wall where they
ordinarily shall assiste or keep, for by cause towns and places of
importance have often times been betrayed, and taken by treason.

The principal cause vvherof has been that the Officer and Soldier which
sells that place knows the part and quarter where; ordinarily he is to
watch. Wherefore the Sardgent mayor is to prudently prevente thies heinous
plottes and that no boddy may know where he is to guard or vvatch: Some do
cause them to cast the deece otheres to draw lottes or billettes, and otheres
do ordain thies devitiones out of their own heads. And to observe such
discipline and order that no Company may fore know their quarter nor any o
there boddy either little or great may know the part of the wall which shall a
pertain unto him, until the very time that the watch by set or a little
before. When occasion shall offer that he shall inter with his Regiment to
lodge in any town, he or his a judante is to revewe the place or market, to
know where he may find a comodiouse and fit place to frame a squadron of
his Regimente, and presently after this, he is to revewe all the rampar and
circuide of the town, carienge a long with him one of his ajudantes, and
also he is to revewe the gates and corpse de gardes, and a point the
convenient place for the posts and roundes, and see that within and without
the circuide of the town that he prevente in due time all things necessary.

He is also to revewe the Master de camp is lodginge, the store houses or
magasenes and prison, and to a point the necessary gardes. After all he is to
relate unto his Master de camp of all the difficulties he finds in; as well
on the rampar, gardes, and circuide of the same, and without delay to
prevente and redress each particular with speed, and to consulte with his
Master de camp to see who many Companies shall by required or necessary to
inter the vvatch each night, and then make his devitiones, and deliver the
orderes to his a judante, that he may deliver them to the Sardgentes, and
sheovve them the places a pointed for the centeries, and the corpse de guard,
and at vvhate hour they are to set the cinteries.

He is also to a point the places conveniente, and fit for the colors, and
give the Alferises necessary instructiones. After that he causes the Drum
mayor to join all the Dromes, and proclaim the orderes delivered by the
Sardgente mayor, then naminge the Companies that are to be that night on the
watch, and so shall he break the squdron, leavinge the colors that are on
the vvatch, givinge order to the rest to retire to their quarteres; Then
shall the a judante direct each Company to their a pointed place, and shall
make the divitiones of the gardes as ordained by the Sardgent mayor,
deliveringe them the orderes they shall observe, he shall a point and provide
the guard of the Master de camp, and of the magasenes, or store houses, and
also the place of arms where all the Companies and colors shall repair
unto when a larme or occasion shall be offered.

Havinge made the devitiones of the vvatch, and gardes as before spoken, he is
to revewe all the circuide on the outewarde part, and see if their by any
fit place for ambuscadose for the enemy, of hedges vvoodes or gardines, and
prevent itt with all diligence, and all necessary endustrie, so that the
enemy may not prevail in taking any advantadge, as often times itt faleth
out in the morninge at the openinge of the gates. To prevente this he is at
the openinge of the gates to comaund four or five light arcabuseros to revewe
the camp without the gates for the better security, and the reaste of the
guard in the mean time with their arms in their hands, and not to wholy
open the gates till thies return, givinge them order to visit and revewe well
all the circuid on the outerwarde side, some 300. paces more or less till he
see that their is no suspicion. And if they speethe enemy they are all to
shoot, and the cinterie above the gates shall presently advertice the guard
or vvatch, and when otherwise he sees that they do not spee the enemy the
gates may by opened by order of the Officer, that their comaundes, and then
shall he cause the centeries to be set on the gates and bridged as ocasion may
be suspected, not failinge to be very vary, and careful in previntinge whate
might ensue or mishappen, and specially to be careful that the Souldieres do
not absent them selves from their vvatch, and for fear of stratagemes of
treason, it is very necessary that in each port or gate where any suspicion
may be feared, that their by two long sharp yrones like spittes, which
shall serve to pass trough from side to side vvagones of hay and straw, for
fear that any men may by secretly hiden in them. And to let no men armed
pass into the town, without order, and specially if it by a frontier or
place to by feared much of the enemy. At the shutinge of the gates the Officer
and Souldieres there a pointed to guard, shall by all in arms till the same be
shutt, and the Officer of the vvatch shall look well that the gates be well
shutt: All being so acomplished, the Officer shall send the Souldieres he
thinks fit to convoy the keayes to the Governor or chief Comaunderes
lodginge.

The bagadge of the whole Regimente, interinge to garrison is to march in the
rergarde with a Company of Souldieres guardinge the same, and the Sardgent
mayor and a judante are to go still a horsebake till all things by well
ordered and provided, until such time they see that all by lodged. For in the
bigine^ge of such partisiones most comonlie are many questiones and disputes
which ought with all care and haste to by redreste: In which occasiones the
Sardgent mayor is to comaunde with resolute authority, in ordaininge all
thingss to by pacified and redreste, ministringe justice and equity, not
admitenge any disorder without due redress; causinge his orderes without
repleee to be executed with obedience.

If otherwise it by not acomplished as he first ordained, his executiones can
not well prosper, but let him before hand look that his orderes by prudently
given, so that with this resolution he shall well a complish all: And shall be
reputed and respected for a man who knows who to govern and comaunde with
prudence and authority, and shall be both respected and feared by the
Souldieres: When any vando or proclamation is to be given he is to procure with
the Master de camp that it be put in vvritenge upon the corpe de guard that
the orderes may be observed and the better understoode be all.

After the proclamation is made, and that none may by ingnorante in
understandinge the penalties in the same mentioned, and the executiones
acordinglie made, (for if otherwise not executed) it were far better not to
set it fourth, but in thies executiones consideration is to by used acordinge
as the occasion shall require, after true informacion by taken of the case.

All Officeres in war are brought into good perfection with prudence,
care, and templance, rather then sheowinge him self rigourouse and licenciouse
in speeches with a furiouse contenance, being not thereunto constrained, for
the Soldier feels no punismente almost so grivouse as this, which seems
to him to resulte trough ingnorance and envy, and of all the rest of the
Officeres this bad custom is more odiouse in the Sardgent mayor, being the
master of whom they should by right learn good examples and instructiones,
and in whom by reason the befittinge parts thereunto necessary should acurr;
being a minister to see faults redreste.

Such Officeres as do sheowe them selves, with a furiouse and odiouse
contenance do opress their condition, which does not resulte of a generouse
mind, and most comonlie they are hated. But such as sheowe them selves with
a prudent cariadge and amiable behaveure are much esteemed, obeyed, honored,
and respected, by the Souldieres, and do bind them in obligatione and repose
of mind: But for one contrary another contrary, that if in case the Soldier
do not acomplish his obligationes, as he is bound to do. And in doing the
contrary in comitinge disorderes it is necessary to punish him severely, yea
and so far that it may sticken into his heart if by fair means he does not
a mind.

Some Officeres of prudente cariadge, and amiable behavior do only with a
groomely contenance and good reasones cause their Souldieres to tremble, and
fear them without any o there rigor, and the Souldieres knowinge of there
Officers good inclination, do both obey love and fear them, findinge by
experience that he lovethe them and assisteth in time of most necessity and
need, sheowinge the^ good examples, and giuinge them good instructiones, and
knowinge that he has noe rancor, envy, nor revenge in his heart, but rather to
couradge them in all necessities, and equallinge him self with the^ in all
dangeres and travailes, and to be inclined to redress their wantes; in this
case they both love and fear him, and endure all dangeres and necessities with
him, and do follow him in all perilles with a vvillinge mind; so that
nothing does more content an honorable Soldier then a lovinge Officer,
havinge in him the parts and qualities before declared.

The Sardgente mayor is to give order that if the round do here any rumor or
stir in the town or any other place, that he with speed advertice the next
a dioyninge guard, and that he by no means give over his round, but
continually with care and vigilance visit till his time by expired; And the
corpe de guard or watch to whom he gave intelligence are bound with great
speed to repair to a comodate the occasion, as also to give intelligence to
the superior Officeres if the occasion be of such importance.

He is also to give order to the Officeres of his Regimente, that they have a
special care, that their Souldieres do not lend arms one to a another for
to inter the guard, for it is a bad custom, of which resulte noe good, for
often times a Musquetier lends his musket to one that should carry a pike
and if in that night do offer ocasion of an a larme both are discomodiouselie
provided. And besides when the Musketier is restored of his musket, and
interinge with the same into the watch, not remembringe that he lent it,
shoots it freely thinckinge that their is no bullet, (as he chardged the
same) and the other to whom it was lent leaves a bullet in it, he shoots
thinckinge no ill and kills one of those before him (which often time
hapened) yea and sometimes being on the watch, often times the one caries the
muskett or caliver of his fellow, and puteth a bullet into the same, the other
thinckinge of noe such matter frily shoots, and also kills another.

This bad sinister and dangerouse custom ought to by prevented, and to
severelie punish the Soldier that did lend his arms, for a remedy of thies
ingnorante careless and inconsiderate faults: All prudente and skillful
Souldieres ought to be very vary to prevente and dischardge thies da^gerouse
chardges before they inter into the watch: Some base companiones and covardes
days of feasts do chardge their pieces with bullet and kills with envy
and revenge who pleases them; Wherefore a straighte order ought to by given
to all, that they should be very vary and in pain of death no Soldier
should be found in such an act. Most necessary it is for a Sardgent mayor
to be careful to exercice his Souldieres in manadginge of their arms, and in
knowinge how to serve with the same, as also how to observe their order in
march and squadron, and fall without confusion into their just place in
battle a ray. All which the Sardgente mayor is bound to instruct, for
being the master who is to learn and lead them; for it belongs to his
chardge and office, and besides it imports him much that they be well
instructed and exercised in martial affairs, for so with great facility
shall he execute his affairs, as did the Thesarios to whose chardge be the
Romanies was recomended this office, as well in filde as in garrison.

They instructed their Souldieres in the scoole they, exercised the Tirones
which were the Bisones, or new Souldieres two times a day, and the Veteranos
which was their oulde Soldiers once a day: So they were very expert as
well in knovvinge how to manadge their arms, as to serve with the same, as
also in punctualy knowinge to observe order in march and squadron, as also
induringe great travailes.

They also were exercised in runinge, leapinge, shevvminge, and all other
exercicee and virtues necessary and fitenge for war: They were constrained to
march with their complet armor both foot, and those that went a horssbake
two dais in a month carienge also with them on their backs al necessary
food for that jurney, fightinge as it were with the enemy, givenge and
receivinge the chardge as if it were in a bloody war, for the space of ten
thousand pases in their whole yurney, cominge and goinge, and with this as
customed exercice they were apt and nemble whenever occasion of service or
employmente did offer; So that with two thousand of these, greater exploytes
and executiones were made, then with thirty thousand bisones or raw me^,
for which cause they were victoriouse councoringe with great renoome till
they were wholy given to vice idelnes and regalitie.

Trough which means they begone to fall into decay; and of their long repose
and idel life, did resulte a bad and sorrowful end, for being wholy given
to woomen, delicate meats, sleeepe, and ease, and of no care to exercice them
selves in arms. They became to forget all virtue, to by covardes and fall into
decay: Now see a plain example which happened to one of the most famouseste
Captains of the world which was Anibal Cartagenes son to Amilcar being
nine years oulde was brought to the vvarres and was caused to swear to be
enemy to the Romans duringe life, and cominge to the adge to govern an army
he marched from Spain trough France into Italy, where in passinge the river
Rodane. The Romans a tendinge him, where he had a most sore encounter in
pasinge the river; But Aniball with prudence and great valeure with tables
tember and great tries made a bridge trough with dificultie and great
hasarde, that at le^ghte he paste his army over the river by force of arms,
and with no lesh endustrie did he pass the hugie montaines of the Alps,
breakinge down great rokes and making them plain, where he made a way that
his army could pass; which contained 120000. of foot and horse, and their
bagadge on Elefantes and brute beasts, and pased to piamonte vvher he rejoysed
of his safe a rival trough such a trouble some and dangerouse way,
comfortinge and givinge his to understande that they were out of danger and
trouble, and arived into a fertile country abondante of all necessaries
befittinge.

There havinge reposed his army he touke his jurney toward the river of Trevia
in Plasintin, and met with the Romans where he optained the victory, and
from thence he touke his jurney, and paste by Perusa til he came to Trasimeno
where he gave an other overtrow to the Romans, and kilth of them three and
twenty thousand. And after this he paste with his army to Pulla in Canas which
now is Barleta, where he also fought with the Romans, and had the
victory of them with the slaughter of forty thousand of them, as Plinius
and Francisco Petrarca Tuscano declares. So that he had the bridell with
Italy sixtime years; poseste with that brave and prudente conductor skillful
and valerouse army: After this he came to Capua a pleasante country of vveomen,
and other commodities, and their gave him self and his army to repose in
garisones a long time, where he and they became idel and forgetful of all
military exercice, as though they never had managed arms. Which was cause of
the ruin and perdition of all his army, as they say that Capua was a greater
perdition to Anibal then to the Romans the losh of Canas, and after being
constrained to pass unto Africa to soucour Cartago his country, being
informed that Cipio (that famous Captain) went thiter with his Roman
army be whom Aniball was overcome; so that his vice long repose and
neglectinge of arms was cause of his destruction, as also hapened to many
other brave vvarrieres. But this of Aniball is a sufficient example for those
that follow the profession of arms, to always houlde and keep their
Souldieres in exercice of arms, and that with great care, for fear of
destruction. So this is a good and sufficient example for a Sardgent mayor,
to always keep his Souldieres in the exercice of arms, and to imitate still
the Romans in their continual practice; And in case that the most part of
the Companies of his Regimente are not together where he is residente.

Let him advertice their Captains that they be careful to exercice their
Souldieres, and it were not amiss that he in the end of every three or four
montes should visit them all over, and with care exercice them in the
ocasiones of marchinge and imbatelinge; Whereby he shall find them apt and
ready to his will not needinge overmuch pains nor disputes as always must by
with raw men little exerciced in arms.

In nothing is he to be more curiouse then in learning and instructinge them
who to observe orderes of marchinge, and in framing with them all sorts of
squadrones, and to cause them skirmish sundry manner of ways, and cause them
to toss the pike, and to by apt in handelinge the same, being queen of arms
and most noble of all the rest. This office of a Sardgent mayor was in times
paste cauled thesariouse or Master who is to instruct military discipline, he
which is apt and skillful in well a complishinge the aproved parts ordained
for the execution of this office, is fit for any other office in war, to the
very office of a Master de camp general, which of all the rest requires
greatesth care and sufficiency.

Wheresoever the Sardgente mayor shall happen to by with his Regimente or with
part of the same, (either in campana or garrison) when the Companies of the
same shall inter the watch he is to by present and take care that the
Captains be well armed with fair and complet corseletes, and all pieces
thereunto a pertaininge, and with a fair peeke of sixtine or seventine foot
long, the Musquetier with a complet good muskett, and that by no means it by
permitted to cut any piece of the barell, (as some do) to lighten it, and
such as are found gilthie in this so great a fault ought to by severlie
punished.

They are to be provided with good flaskes, and flaskillos* with fair and
strong cords, and hurquillos of six foot with their yrones on both ends
as behooveth, and the Arcabuseros are to be provided with good caliveres of a
strong and sure barrel fit to receive a bullet of an once or very little
less, and a fair frask fraskillo and cordones, the measure of the powder ^all
by at least a haulfe once or rather more, he is never to want a bagg of
leader with twenty five bullettes, and an iron to strike fire at all times
when occasion shall require, for oftentimes being in centery and other places
his match is quite gone out, and then if he can get no fire his powder is to no
purpose at that instante if occasion often: Some are wont to carry head
pieces which in many occasiones are good, but that they are to much trouble
some in long marchinges.

Both the Musketieres and Arcabuseres should know how to make match, for
sometimes it hapeneth that their is no munition, and then is it very
necessary that the Soldier knows to make match, for hardly can he ever
fail to get flax, but otherwise the Soldier being un expert, and knowinge
not to shifte, and also failenge ammunition they incurr great dangers; so
that the Soldier ought always to procure with great care to by couriouse
and expert in all things that apartaineth to his obligation, for it may well
fall out that he should march in a country ingnorante in vvarres, where no
match nor ammunition is made; Wherefore the brave and careful Soldier is to
think always before hand to prevente whate might in sue after: So shall
he be not fluted at, but rather much recomended for knowinge who with care and
prudence to acomplish his obligation; which shall give great contentmente to
his Captain and rest Officceres.

Fiery weapons without their full necessaries are of no service, wherefore
the prudent, careful, and honorable Soldier ought to prevente in due time
whate he is bound unto, in as much as may by possible) so shall he be highly
esteemed by his Captain and Officeres. If the King or Prince would feign
take a veowe of the whole army Regimente be Regimente, and also the Standartes
of horse one after an other to pass before him, as did the Spanish army before
King Philip the II. and the queen Don^a Anna in the plain of Cantillana
near to badajoes where the whole army did pass before them, and so near that
they plainly vived the visadge of every one of them as they paste by, as
well of the horse which did first pass, and afterward the Infanterie.

The first that did pass was the Regiment of Lombardie, which Don Pedro de
Sotemayor did lead, a rivenge right against the place where his Majesty
stood did with grace and speed arbolare his pike turninge his face right ^o
his Majesty, and made great reverence as to such a place of so ^^gh dingnitie
a pertains, and having acomplished his duty and obligation without stiringe
did shoulder his pike, and marched in his jurney, in the very same place the
first rank of pikes that did arive observed the self same order, and in the
self same manner did all the other ranks of pikes pass. With him at this time
was Duke de Alva present, and the prior Don Fernando.

Necessary it is for a Sardgent mayor to carry still about him a table book
or book of memories, for hardly can be conceive and houlde all thinhes in
memory, and vvhate he vvritheth is sure, of o nely the Captain general
Master de camp general is he to receive the vvourde of Governores and other
persons the ajudantes are wont to receive the watch wourde, and other
orderes, or the Sardgente that is on the watch in absence of the ajudantes,
which at all times they can not be presenre, and specially in garrison.

The Sardgente mayor as a general procurer of his Regimente, ought to solicit
and procure that the corpse de guard Garites or centerie houses be well
provided, and the corpse de guard with a place made of tables or plankes
whereon the Souldieres may sleep, and this to be a foot and haulfe above
ground, and to see that their by a conveniente place where the fyrie arms be
set, and also for the pikes. He is to procure with the towns men that they
acomodate the way of the round, and that the Garitas be well acomodated that
the Soldier may keep him self and arms dry: That be no means he be gridy
inconsiderate or covetouse, neither permit^ or give care to any but that the
gardes by well provided of fire and light, for some Provinces are
extraordinary and excessive could, vvher we see many Souldieres not well a
parreled that after acomplishinge their duty, and standinge their post some
three or four hours (more or lesh) they come bake frissd full of snow, and
when their is no fire to comfort them they die. In conclusion there
Officeres, and specially the Sardgente mayor is to by werie earneste in
solicitenge this particular for in wantinge this comoditie of fire and of
capotes which some times the Prince, and some times their Captains do
provide them, if ohterwise, it is impossible for the Soldier to escape to
frise, for we see those well a parelled perish for could: This and many more
occasiones of importance can prudente and brave Captains remedy to their
great renoome, and that besides they sheowe their affection to his Majesty's
service; if their procuremente can not prosper in this, nor their ability
reach in remedienge the same they discharde their conscience and honor, when
they in devor with care and diligence to pity their Souldieres in earnestly
procuringe for them, whereunto they are bound.

If in garrison occasion require as most commonly it does, to provide a round
to visit all over, (if posible it were necessary) that an Officer or person of
respect by appointed for cavo of the same, and that Officer or cavo only do
carry the watch wourde, for being necessary if accasion should by offered that
they should be constrained to come to the wall to learn what the occasion
was, or to pass trough the posts that is betwext them and the walls, or to
pass by the posts of the corpse de guard, if occasion should present: It is
necessary that the outeward centeries which are not under defense nor sure
security that the vvatch vvourde be not given them, and if by change such
posts should be ingnorance or negligence permit to pass in wards any man;
Let him not come to the court de guard without an Officer first to receive
him, and inform of his cause.

Thies roundes are to go very silente and secrett, without any rumor, and
that they enter in no conversation nor other place, butt rather with great
care and vigilance acomplish their order, and still go forward in visite^ge
the magasenes or store houses, churches, and church yardes, empty great
houses, or any other place where suspicion might be feared (of joyninges and
mutenies.) And he heeringe or understandinge of any rumor or joining, and
being thereof well informed and assured, he is to aquainte with great speed
the Sardgent mayor, with one or two as the Officer cavo shall think fit, and
he shall continue in that place till the Sardgent mayor send him order, or
come him self in person in the mean time the round is to by very vigilante
and silente. Thies roundes most commonly have one third part of Musketes and
Arcabuseros, and if their be any suspicion they are rather to go strong then
vveake to prevente the empetue of the enemy.

In vvarrlike affairs and exercices, all Comaunderes ought continually to be
vigilante, vary, careful, and fearful in not trustinge to manny, for we
see that in many places that towns and cities do revolte, when lesh
suspicion is of them; So that often times in trust is treason. Therefore the
Professores of the noble art of war are bound in all places to be vary and
vigilante, and continually fear of sudden improvided disgraces. Continual
exercice and practice in war is of great importance, wherefore the Sardgent
mayor being in garrison or else where is never to permit the Companies under
his chardge betwexte vvatch and vvatch to sleep at home above three nights,
for so the Souldieres shall by the more apt to endure when occasion shall
present, for douptles continual use and exercise helps much to compass, and
ease difficulte matteres. Whosoever shall be inclined to comitt disorderes, and
give bad examples in the corpse de gardes ought to by severelie punished, for
such places are to be respected for real houses, and he who without honor,
discipline, and shame does commit disorderes in a place of such great respect,
ought not to escape without due punishmente.

The Sardgent mayor is to advertice the Captains of his Regimente not to give
license to anny of their Souldieres to pass unto an other Regimente, nor out
of the country by no means, because that it does not lie in his auctority,
neither to give him leave without being firmed of the Master de camp, or
Governor that shall comaunde. Who shall apointe the days fit to a complishe
his jurney, and affairs, and in the Vedoria general noe Souldieres place
ought to be changed unto another Company, without license of his Captain,
or Master de camp, for some unrulie factioneres are desirouse to have liberty
to run the contry to comitt disorderes, and neglecte their duty and
obligationes; Spoylinge the country, deceavinge the King, and dishonoringe
their nation, and daily provookinge otheres to that base kind of life, of no
honor fear nor shame. Whosoever shall a sent his place amonghste the
Infanterie, and who enters in rank with the observeres of true discipline,
ought not to be tolerated to lay hand in anny mecanicall trade, for it is
not fit that such a one should equal him self with honorable Souldieres of
noble and vertuese life.

Days of solme feasts kermishes or fayeres, the Sardgent mayor is to reforce
the gardes or watches, for in such time great congregation of people of
other places are wont to join; And at such times may happen tumoltes and
revoltes; findinge the men of arms unwarie and unvigilante their enemies may
fall upon them and optaine their desire, vvherof both notable disgrace and
loss may resulte, as by experience has been tried in diverses Provinces and
places of importance.

When the Sardgent mayor seteth the watch he or one of his a judantes are to
ride a horsbake* and visit all the gardes and rampar, to see if each guard be
provided with the men appointed, for some times trough the little care or
forgethfulnes of some Sardgentes, and Corporales they err in the orderes.
Wherefore in such occasiones by right they should by severelie reprehende,
that they may be the more careful and vigilante, being refered to their care
and trust the repose, and safety of all the rest.

If need require he is to advertice the Captains of his Regimente, that in
such places where they are with the Master de camp they can give no order to
sound the Drom, except it by for extreme necessity, or in time of the watch
without order of the Master de camp: When occasion shall offer that arms, or
any sort of amunitiones shall be received from the King it apertaines the
Furiell mayor to receive the same, and to yealde a compte to the Kings
ministeres (when it shall besought for) thies amunitiones are to be divided
betwext the Companies by the Sardgent mayor, causinge to deliver each
Sardgente whate belongs to his Company, as he shall think conveniente, and
fit for his Majesty's service. He is earnestelie to procure to see severelie
punished such as are inclined to vices and bad examples, and also to advertice
the Captains of his Regimente, that they a siste in whate touches their
Companies, touching this particular for being thereunto bound; So that all
factioneres of base life, as thieves quarleres, mutineres, dronkardes, and
such as are wholy given to vice may by driven a way, so that those of good
life may live at rest; Being in garrison with his Regimente, or with part
thereof he is to apointe, and ordain where shall each Company repair when
occation of alarm does represente to frame his squadron, and he is also to
apointe each Company of those on the vvatch whate place of the rampar they are
to defend, and also he is to give chardge to his ajudante, where they shall
asiste that they may acomplish with care, diligence, and perfection, vvhate is
refered to their chardge, and those orderes being once given each one with
great speed and care shall repair to acomplish his obligation; so that
duringe the time he is framinge his squadron the rest do repair to their
appointed places, that of a sudden all things may be prevented in due time,
advertisinge that he is to choice the most convenientest and fiteste place for
the framinge of his squadron, and of less empedimentes of casteles, towers, or
offencive places next adjoyninge.

The Company or Companies that are of the vvatch he is not to permit them to
depart the same till first other Companies do relive them, and take
possession of the place, but stand in array till the other Companies do
inter, and take posession, and then they are to march toward their quarter,
in this manner shall he perceive those that intred the guard, and those that
do depart from it.

He is not to give the wourde till the gates are shutt, he is to be careful to
see all things well ordered and acomplished, and see that the Corporalles them
selves in person do acompany the Souldieres till he leave them in their
centeries, where he is to give them the vvourde, bringinge back along with
him those that were relived to the corpe de guard, where he is to keep them
that night for respect of the watch wourde, sometimes it happens that
Corporales of little discipline and honor, do give the vvourde to those that
goes to relive the posts, which resulte of pure ingnorance, and for their
own ease, not thincking of the sore reprehension they may have of their
superior Officeres for that badd and sinister custom: Thies disorderes in no
case are to by permitted, for being very dangerouse. In this particular the
high dutch is to be commended (for at night they cause the Drom to by beaten
against every relife,) and the Corporalles do a company the Souldieres til
they leave them in their posts, and bring those that are relived a long
with them to the corpe de guard; but in garrison and other places now a days
they use it diferente without the sound of Drom, not failenge in the rest,
and the Corporal yealdeth good a compte of all that a pertains to his
chardge, and trusts the care thereof to none but to him self, to by the more
asured.

Great and special care ought to by taken days of the watch that no Soldier
of the same do absente him self except it by to eat, and the Officer therein
ought to take a good course in licencinge them orderly by comarades, one
after another, givinge the^ straighte comaunde to return with all speed. And
if they be found long absent either, drinckinge, pleainge, or pasinge a way
the time idell, to severelie see them punished, and to repeehende the Sardgente
or Corporal that shall license them being in separated gardes, and specially
days of great feasts and fayres.

Let no Soldier absente him self from his vvatch, you if it were but to
change a shurte or band, being bound such days to o cupie him self in
nothing but in a tendinge his vvatch: Some times gamesteres who being
thereunto much inclined not findinge pleainge in their own guard do go unto
other watches to play, who ought to by severely punished, for the redresinge
of thies faults, and many more, the a judantes ought now and then to visitt
the court de gardes, rampares, and centeries, to see many faults redresed.

When occasion is offered in pasinge of muster it hapeneth, that some times the
Veedor general, or Contador is sent to see that muster by order of the
General, In which occasiones the Sardgent mayor is to asiste, in sheowinge and
instructinge the more convenienteste places for the same. As also of all other
necessaries thereunto apertaininge, and he is to repair and comunicate with his
Master de camp, and receive the necessary orderes for the same, and at the
faulinge of the night to camaunde the Drom mayor, and all the Dromeres to
join in the place or principal corpe de guard, givinge order to the Drom
mayor to beat a vando of the muster, not advertisinge the a pointed place for
the same, for sertaine respects, but rather pasinge the same in several
places that none may know where till the very instant they march, givinge
order to the Drom mayor that he proclaim thatt all Companies be readdy, at the
break of the day to pass muster, and to be careful to observe the
instructiones of the Veedor general touching the muster, for duringe that
time he hase full auctority for ministringe well his office, or whosoever is
appointed by him for that purpose, givinge first order to the Company of the
Master de camp to march and after the same if their be Companies of
Arcabuseros, and after those which he thinks best, and in pasenge muster
they are to be cauled in the self fame manner, one after another as they did
formerly enter, advertisinge that the Company or Companies that are on the
watch shall march last to muster, and the first that shall pass muster.

The ajudante at this time shall cause the gates of the town to be shutt; And
presently after at least one of the Companies of the watch shall pass
muster, and then the Company of the Master de camp, and after the rest
Companies that are ^^inter the watch, and the rest shall pass muster as they
have intered, the muster being paste, and the listes confronted, the Sardgent
mayor is to get a relation of the number of Souldieres that shall be contained
in each Company, and bring the same to the Master de camp to know the full
number of the muster of the Companies of his Regimente. Whereof the Sardgent
mayor is to have a copy for many respects: A Sardgente mayor who would with
prudence and authority have his office well executed, it is very necessary
that he knows the qualities and conditiones of each Captain of his
Regimente, that he may employ each one with discretion, as time and occasion
shall require, consideringe the parts and suficiencie of each one, that
thereby he may employ each one acordinge to the parts that in him does o curr:
When his Captain general, or Master de camp general, or ordinary Master de
camp gives order for any execution of emportance. Some are good for all
executiones which are esteemed for perfect Souldieres, some to fight with a
valerouse determination, others though valiante of unhappie proceedinges, and
that resultinge for the most part of their little prudence, some otheres do o
bey and carefully acomplish with whate they are commanded by their Superiores;
of which often times happy proceedinges do resulte; otheres with prudence,
valor, authority, and brave conduction.

It is most necessary that the Sardgente mayor do know the one, and the
other that he may with the more security employ each one acordinge as the
emportance requires of each execution; he is also to know the quality and
condition of the inferior Officeres, who are to assiste and who are to by
employed acordinge to the parts and sufficiency in them: He is to present
him self with authority and brave resolution, reprehendiges faults and
disorderes with discretion, which shall oblidge them to obey and acomplish
their obligationes with love, he is to instruct them and sheowe them good
examples, as well in the exercice of their arms, as in acomplishinge their
obligationes with punctualitie, he is to comaunde withdraw prudence and great
resolution for being so most required for the executiones of his office, but
with prudente consideration, for which it is required that he be of a sober
and gentle mind for o therwise hardely can he bring to pass his obligation in
this, and specially in vvinenge the love of the Soldiers. The Sardgente mayor
is to visit now and then the posts or centeries, instructinge them who to
handel their arms and comaundinge them to let none pass by night time, nor
permit none come nere him, without first givinge the wourde, though it were
his Captain or Master de camp, and the Soldier that otherwise permitethe any
to pass is to be reprehended, for ocation may be invented at night of great
emportance, and so it is very necessary that none be permitted to come near
the centerie, without first givinge the vvourde, and that for many respects.
Yea and if it were his Officer presuminge that he knovveth him, and entreating
and repleeinge to let him pass, he is to answer, with aresolute
determination, and say i know none but he that gives the vvourde for so
does he well acomplish his obligation. In garrison he shall comaunde the manner
and who the roundes shall be distributed, which is the most and sureste
security of the place, and when he him self shall round by night time to
discover redress and reprehende the faults and negligences of the roundes and
cinteries; he is to hid him self and aproache very secretly to perceive the
care and punctualitie of the round, and if otherwise he find him still, or
with rumor in their jurney not attendinge the outewarde as the inward side
of the wall, he is to severely reprehe^de them. For the more security of a
place depends on the care and prudence of the round: Also if he finds the
centeries negligente and careless in not acomplishinge their obligation, let him
see them severelie punished, that thereby it may be an exemple both for them and
otheres to complish with great vigilance and care their obligationes: Some
Sardgent mayores for their better security do carry at night a target,
because that often times unruly factioneres do pass at night and comittt many
disgraces; So it is not amiss he goes well provided to prevente their
unruly tached inclinasiones, he is to use great discressio^, and moderation
with the cinteries in goenge the round. The ajudante is to round also now
and then to second the Sardgente mayor in differente nights as ordained by
the Sardgent mayor, imitatenge the steps and order of his Master, and he is
to inform of the cinteries if they heard any rumor or ocation either
without or within, givinge the cinteries good instructiones, as also in
the corrpes de guard or watches, and sheowe him self amiable to the
Souldieres, and reprehindinge their faults with prudente reasones. So shall
he by both feared and beloved.

The Officeres of the watches are also to asiste in visitenge the cinteries
as ordained by the Sardgent mayor, and that with scilence and Vigilance
demaundinge the cinteries if they have heard any thing, so that remedy
might be prevented in due time if ocation require.

And specially the Corporal, in givinge each Soldier to understa^de who he
shall handel or manadge his arms, and who he is to take the wourde, and to be
alerto, let him not be given nor much credible to uncertayne shadows, as many
bisones and raw men do, givenge many alarmes without o cation; And when the
round a procheth the cintery is to terciar his pike and demand quin Viene alla
and if he houldeth his peace, let him turn again in demaundinge with much
severitie with an angry and furiouse contenance, if he answer amigo which is
to say afrende, then let him demand the watch vvourde, preparinge and
making ready him self for that purpose; And if it were so that he Should
suspecte of the round that it were an enemy, though they give the vvourde let
them not pass, aleadginge that they have not the right vvourde: but otherwise
knowinge the round and givinge the vvourde he is to let them freely pass.

The cinteries are alvvayes to by most careful and Vigilante, for some times
it may happen that the enemy should steal the wourde, and fall of a sudden
on the cinterie and kill him, wherefore he is alvvayes to by alerto and very
vary, and if he suspecte the round to be an enemy as before spoken let him be
no means come near to Master his arms, and specially if they replee let him
cause them to retire, if not, presently he is to caul alarm with great fury
and high voice that he may by well heard, and if need require let him by a
little and little retire, defendinge him self the best he may being thereunto
constrained but not otherwise, wheresoever the Sardgent mayor shall asiste
with his Regimente or part thereof he shall comaunde the common table ordained
for gamesteres to be putt on the principal court de guard, and the barata of
thies gamesteres he shall a point one to oversee the same, which barata
shall be to sheovve his horses. He is not to permit to putt this table in
other places nor permit any joyinge of gamesteres out of that a pointed
place, for many respects, and specially to avoyde quareles disputes joyninges
and rumores of some that are given to thies vicees, but rather in the corpe de
guard as a place of respect and where each one shall not presume so much to
comitt disorderes, for knovvinge of the severe punishmente for such as commit
errores, and loose respect to a place of so great privilege.

THE SEAVENTE CHAP. Treatinge of the election and office of a Sardgente mayor,
marchinge in campaina.
THE election of the Sardgent mayor most comonlie is made by the General of
such as the Coronelles or Masteres de camp do name or give in relation, his
office is to by a general minister of a whole Regimente of sundry Companies;
And a Superintendente of all the Sardgentes of the same. By vvhouse, prudence,
and brave conduction the Coronell or Master de camp does give him the orderes
necessary for the due govermente of his Regimente, in marchinge, orderinge,
and embattellinge of the same, and of such materes hereu^to a pertayninge, be
whose a proved good parts may be gathered the brave conduction, valor, and
prudence, required in a perfect Soldier, being chosen as a man who has the
be fittinge parts required for this office of such great emporta^ce. Which
in time of the Greeks and Romans was trusted to none, but the Generalles
executed the same in there one persons for many rare respects of importance.
The first thing that he is to do before he begines to march, is to consulte
with his Master de camp of all necessary things for his jurney, and see
such things befitinge prevented, and provided in due time; advertisinge all
the Captains of his Regimente to put them selves in order to march, with as
little bagadge as may be possible, and within so many days to have all things
in areadines, and givenge order to the Captain de campana to prepare him
self, and his sutleres, as also to the Auditor, Furiell mayor, Surdgent
mayor, Drom mayor, and that he be careful that Dromes and Phifes by well
provided in each Company.

The office of a Sardgent mayor is of higher degree then any ordinary
Captain, for the Captains do receive the orderes from him, and follow this
directiones, and the Sardgente mayor, from the Coronel, Master de camp, or
General, or from the King or Emperor him self if he be in the field, for he
is barred no entry gate nor other place but freely sufered to pass into the
King or Emperor is chamber, for being a person of great respect and
fidelity: Wherefore their ought great concideration and regard to be taken
in the election of this Officer. Which otherwise being chosen by favor,
frindship, or affection of one of little sufficiency, resulteth many
enconveniences: It also faleth out often times that such persons so chosen,
vvantinge the prudence, authority, perfection, and brave conduction in him
required, loses often times his due respect, and reverence of the Captains
and other Officeres: Wherefore it were far better for him to remain a
Captain rather then intermiddell in a matter which requires such great
capacity and perfect experience in war.

In occasiones of marchinge he is to consider the qualities and conditiones of
the country, if fertile or scante, if hilly or plain, and not to permit to
mount a horseback but as feowe as can possible; Also to consider the
quantity of bagadge, and provision, you are to carry, and that to by as little
as may be possible as before spoken, rather only so much as need shall
require, and that the wantes thereof can not be excused.

After that all things necessary for your march are treated and consulteth
of (and put in order) yove shall comaunde that all the Companies of your
Regimente shall join where voure Master de camp shall ordain, and think
most fit: Then bigen to make your devitiones to march as your Superior
shall comaunde. But if only one Regimente do march by it self, the Sardgent
mayor is to consulte with his Master de camp, never failenge if they march in
any place or country where yove should chance, or fear to encounter your
enemy to provide your self with sertaine barreles of powder, match, and
bullettes, that always yove carry of thies rather more then lesh; some pikes
fearinge to want, a quantity of shoules bills, hatchetes, which is necessary
if need or occasion require to make a way with trees boughs, and earth, in
places where with difficulty the Infantery, and bagadge may pass, or to cut
tries to shutt up a pasadge of o sudden, or to make even places when otherwise
but with great difficulty you can pass them, thies are necessary pertrechos,
for not knowinge when occasion may offer to have need of them, and specially
pasinge troughe a foraine country.

In occasiones of marchinge the Sardgente mayor is to make the devitiones, and
ordain where each Captain shall lead, and in such manner that each Captain
shall take his turn, meaning that the Captain or Captains that did lead
this day the Musketteria shall to morrow lead the Arcabuseros, that did
follow and another day the pikes, and another day the Arcabuseros of the
rergarde, and so fall a neowe and be his turn take possession of the
vantegarde and reregarde as his turn shall fall: And it is inogh to ordain
this once, and let each one unconfusedlie be his turn take place of the
vangard, rergard, and battle.

Pasinge trough any city or place where any danger might by suspected* In
the devitiones of the shot and pikes great industry and consideration is to
by used, your shot are to march in good order, and not confusedly, and be
noe means to let none miss his rank, givinge order to all the shot to
light their matches, and to by ready of a sudden if need require, and
otherwise where their is nothing suspected, one or two matches in every rank
may serve, it were not amiss to have no more bagadge then need should
require, and not to permit the Souldieres to putt their musketes in vvagones
as often times they do, and in ofringe occasion to serve with them, it hapened
that trough this bad custom many are of no service with the barreles, and
lokes of their musketes brocken, so that in time of most need they want.

It is most necessary that the Sardgente mayor and Captains by curiouse to
see many faults redresed, and that the Souldieres be well provided of all
necessaries, in as much as can by posible and specially the shot to by well
furnished with bulletes, at least twenti five, and in no case to fail in this:
The Captains and Alferises, are to go bravely armed with complet corseletes,
and let no Captain not Alferis monte a horseback till all the devitiones of
shot and pikes are well ordered, and when all the bagadge is ready, and that
the Master de camp do pass to the Vangarde.

Then havinge all things in order; in amile distance from the quarter the
Sardgente mayor shall step into the vangarde, and give order to the Captains
to go a horsebake and not before, as also the Alferises and other particular
persons, the Alferises recomendinge their culoures to their a vanderadose,
and the Captain or Captains that are of the vangarde shall permit noe
Souldieres to pass but such as have order in writing for the same from the
General or Master de camp general or ordinary Master de camp, and the
Captain that goes in the rerergarde shall take a special care to permit
none to tarry behende, but rather cause them to stepe forward to their
ranks. That also no boys nor sutleres by permitted to stay behind for some
of purpose do stay to no good entende, but to steal robb and spoil the
pour enhabitantes goods, which is a thing not to by permitted: And such
sutleres and other unrulie factioneres as are given to this base and odiouse
act, are to be severelie punished in public. Whereof special care ought to
be taken for many respects.

Before you march the Captain de campana and all the sutleres and ammunition
vagones are all to by drawn out of the quarter, ordayninge those that shall
guard them. And then consideration is to be taken of the manner who to march
with the ammunition and bagadge which is, that if it by known that the enemy
is to by feared in the vangarde, on the way where yove are to pass, let the
bagadge by placed in the rerewarde, and if contratie yove have intelligence to
fear the enemy in the rerewarde yove are to pass the bagadge to the vangarde.
And if on the right side, to conducte it to the leefte, and if on the leifte
side transporte it to the right; And in this manner the army being small or
great it shall be a wall and defense to the a munition and bagadge. And this
don by always provided and ordered in due time, for otherwise it were a
great miss if sudden occasion should represente, and that the enemy of a
sudden should fall upon, and chardge on yove; Douptless it were a great
let and danger if yove were not provided and well ordered: To prevente the
sudaine incursiones and stratagemes of the enemy their ought to by sent
certain light horse to scoute, and revewe before a certain distance: so
being advertised before the enemy a proache, all things necessary may by
prevented in due time.

The Furiell mayor or Quartermaster with the rest Furielles are to march all
at once and not otherwise, for to make the quarter in due time. For If
otherwise they go they may use fraud and villainy in spoylinge the Villadges
and pour enhabitantes, to whom all equity, justice, and good examples are
to be ministered, for many good respects. Some Souldieres of little honor and
reputation some times in their march to ease them selves do break their
pikes or leave the same behind, of such base fellows the Sardgent mayor is
to take a special care to see them severelie punished in public, except it
be one that is sick or hurt, of which persons he is presently to give
enteligence to their Captains, and see that order be tacken to save them.

In ocasiones of marchinge, the Sardgent mayor is to order, and make his
devitiones when he thincketh that all the Souldieres of his Regimente are
gathered; and comenge to a conveniente place to frame a squadron of them, of
whate form he thincketh best. And when he comes within a mile to the quarter
where he is to lodge with his Regimente, he is to step forward to see which
is the fiteste place to frame a battle; As also to revewe the sallies and
entries of the quarter.

The Quartermaster is to receive him, and sheowe how and where the Regimente
shall be lodged, As also the fiteste place for the embattellinge of his
Regimente, and after the squadron is framed, he is to a point the Companies
that shall be on the watch that night, if on the general a munitiones, or
Master de camp, or elsh where, let him see that there by no empedimente in the
place where he choiseth to be more fit for the framinge of his squadron; Also
he is to be very careful and diligent in ordaininge the necessary places for
the watches, and he shall a point gardes a good distance from the quarter;
So that the enemy of a sudden do not fall upon him, of which for many
respects great consideration ought to by taken and prudenrly prevented.

He is to procure with the Master de camp to cause avando or proclamation to
by beaten for the observationes in passinge the wourde in march, battle, or
eilsh where, and such as do not observe this vando to see them severelie
punished for this being amatter of great emportance, and whereof great
disorderes and inconvenienses do resulte often times for not observinge the
same: The wourde is to by given be four persons, that is the Master de camp,
Sardgent mayor, and from the Captain that leads the Vangarde, and from him
that leads the rergarde: And great speed ought to by tacken from whence it
came and the cause.

For it may be that the enemy should of a sudden chance to fall on the
rergarde, or that some other ocation of emportance may offer; for which
respects and many more considerationes this order is to be inviollabbly
observed: And let itt with great speed pass from rank to rank in your
march or order.

It is most necessary now and then to make some altos, or stands to ease
the Souldiores, and refresh them with such sort of vituales as they carry a
long with them, and specially where their is comoditie of water, and take a
special care that some unruly fellows by not permitted to go out of the
order, and fall aspoylinge the contry, neither there boys.

The Sardgent mayor is to oversee and inform of all things that paseth in his
Regimente and give order to the Captain de campan^a or borachell to see that
his sutleres by well provided with vituales and other necessaries thereunto a
pertaininge, and to take a special care that noe wrong by don unto them. But
rather to see severelie punished such as vvoulde presume to do them wrong.
That there by they may withdraw amore willinge mind a complish their
obligationes in furnishinge them selves with vituales and other commodities, and
also the Sardgente mayor is to see that they be well paid for otherwise
being ill paid and seeinge that there is no justice minestred they will run
away and give a bad report, so that noe other sutleres shall dare to come,
and so provicion will be vvantinge to the great discomoditie of the Officeres
and Souldiores.

The Captain de campan^a is to use discression and concience in seeinge that
the sutleres do fell there vituales with such concideration that they may
gain and not overpress the pour Souldior troughe coveteousnes and griddie
deceit, as often times they do. In thies and many more ocationes if the
Sardgente mayor be courious and careful in a complisinge with his
obligationes, hardly can any thing pass without discovery and redress in
due time, for he is aprincipall minister to oversee redresh and remedy many
faults, disorderes and frauds, and he is in conscience bound to procure the
good of the pour Souldior, that noe fraud be permitted in deceivinge him of
his pour means.

If the Sardgente mayor be in the filde with his Regimente alitle before the
fallinge of the night he is to relive the watches so that the enemy may not
discover them cominge nor goinge: but in garrison the watches is to be sooner
set. In campan^a aspecial care ought to be taken that the enemy for cause of
our negligence little care and prudence do not of asodain fall on us being un
provided, for to prevente such soddaine ocationes it is necessary that a corpe
de guard volante be ordained acertaine distance toward the enemy where yove
most suspecte their cominge, which is a great security for that quarter of
the camp, but this must be set at the fallinge of the night, and their can
hardly any fire be made that the enemy may not discover yove, they ought to
be very ready vary and vigilante with there arms at hand to fall on the
enemy if of asoddaine they be thereunto constrained, and see if they can find
any conveniente shadowoe to shelter them; And if perhapes the enemies spies do
know or discover who our watches are set, and not knovvinge of this vvatch
set so late and so secrett, it may fall out that the enemy may fall into
their hands, for not being advertised by there spies of the prevention
taken; And fall of a sudden on them, and give the a larme to the whole camp,
so that they may be ready in due time to prevente the enemy his incursiones,
and purpose, and at lenghte cause them to retire, in executinge nothing of
their design or desire. For this purpose must by chosen a Captain who is
well known to by prudente, vigilante, and valerouse, and of a brave and
resolute determination: And findinge the enemy brocken, let him in no c^se
follow them any great distance, for they may prevente him with a secrett
ambuscado, and findinge them pass the ambuscado fall on them on both sides,
before and behind, and defeat him: Often times it happened that ravve
Souldieres and men of little consideration do give a larme without any
occasion, wherefore they are to by advertised not to give any such till they by
informed, and well assured that it is the enemy, for such as otherwise do,
they are estimed of little consideration and of a vveake spirit findinge them
selves presently a mased, trustinge to their inconsiderate imagination of noe
firm ground nor reason figuringe in their imagination to have seen this,
and that, and of no purpose nor firmenes; Advertisinge that if an alarm be
given where occasion does present, it is not to pass all the camp in
soundinge dromes and trumpetes, but rather very secretly, and without any
rumor nor voice and with great silence, join, and speedily put them selves
in order; Which orderes the Master de camp, General, or the person that
comaundeth shall comaunde to be observed all over: So that all things by
preventeth with better order, and with amore settled mind; and if otherwise the
a larme be given every where it is hard to know in due time, where the
occasion is.

The centerie ought to by very firm, and seeinge one come let him not stir,
but rather prepare him self till he be well informed, and knowinge that it is
an enemy then in a prochinge near and assured, to shoot at him, and to be
assured in as much as may possible not to miss; And being a pikeman he is to
let him com under the puiesh of the pike, and then give the a larme, sheowinge
him self with a valerouse determination, and kill the enemy, or take him, and
to learn the design of the enemy, and to whate purpose he was employed, and
then to retire to the next adjoyninge cinterie, and from thence to the
second, and so from hand to hand till he be sent to the first guard, and
from thence presently to advertice the Sardgent mayor, advertisenge that
every cintery shall remain in his a pointed place, and to be very vary and
vigilante fearinge that otheres should follow, and inter of a soddaine
findinge conveniente opportunity for their purpose: Another thing is to be
considered that some times it does happen that a spy favorable to us does come
from the enemies camp to give us inteligence of whate occurreth, which spies
are to be received and causinge him to stand or make alto till the Officer of
the guard by advertised, who is to receive him and presently carry him to the
Sardgent mayor, who shall advertice his Master de camp, and without delay
conducte him to the Superior to inform and sheow him the cause of his cominge.

If be chance the enemy should fall on the pikeman standinge in cinterie, and
seeinge that they are of such force, that he can not resist, let him retire to
the next cintery shot that he may shoot at them, and give the alarm, and so
by little and litell retire, and the pikeman shall with all speed go to the
first watch and give inteligence of the occasion, that they may be readdie in
time.

And this order ought the Sardgente mayor to give that all things may be don
in order and in due time, givinge also order to the watches and culoures,
where they shall 'oyne, and whate they shall do; so that without delay they
shall be found to be putt in order to fight as the situation of the place and
occasion shall require.

In all places on the frontier of the enemy where great suspicion may be
feared of soddaine exploites and embuscados of the enemy. In such places, and
occasiones, the Sardgente mayor is to give order in the morninge, that noe
cintery do retire till all places of suspicion by visited; and then the
cinterie perdue shall retire a little further inwardes: And he is to by examined
to see if he did a complish the vigilance, care, and trust referred to the
exspectationes of his fidelity; And findinge his reasones and proofs good in
a complishinge his obligationes, he is wourdie of thanks, and if the contrie
be found, and he being found hiden in some sure place of no danger, nor
service to reward him a cordinge his merit with a public reprehension, for
not a complishinge his obligation in a place of such importance; and so shall
he be rewarded and imputed be all brave Souldiores which do hire of his
doings, and pusilanimitie. When inteligence is had that the enemy are readdie
to fall on you, or that any suspicion or a peerance may by of the same, eaverie
one ought to be readdie with their arms in hand with a settled mind and
brave determination, so that with the first alarm they may have no kind of
let, but presently follow their leader without beatinge Drom or phife or
making any kind of rumor, but rather with great scilence fall in to their
order.

And concideringe that this is not only for the obligationes they owe unto
their king or Prince but also for the safeguard honor and security of their
own persons,

For thies and such ocationes all honorable Souldiores ought to by well
prepared and specially the shot with their pieces all in areadines with as
much powder as their flaskes can houlde, and twenty five bulletes, so that
in offereinge ocation he shall not caul for powder and led as some careless and
covardlie fellows are wont to do, not being well provided before hand;
little regardinge the kings service and their own reputasion; to prevente
thies, and such faults their Officeres ought always to see all things
prevented in due time. So that their be no escuse.

And such as would not a complish the same in preparinge all necessaries
befitinge as ordained for that purpose, to see them reprehended, and in case
the soldier hase not wherewith to buy thies and other inescusable wantes the
Captain is to help him thereunto, for being conveniente for his Majesty's
service, that the soulderes always be well provided and such as do not obey
thies inescusable wantes to give them public afronte like, covardlie and
disobediente fellows; such Souldieres as are of prude^te cariadge and have a
special care in acomplishinge with punctualitie their obigationes, and in
givinge good examples to otheres to imitate them, unwourdie is the Captain
and Officeres that will not honor futher and assiste the^.

For in thies ocationes we see many brave and honorable Souldiores which, are
wont ordinarily to carri apice of extraordinary good match in there pocketes
with the two ends of the same in areadines, and rubbed in powder, that
without delay it may kindel fire, and also with a fleaskillo in his pocket
with fine and dry powder for touch powder, which if it were wett and
afterward dried in aqua vite or in gineper oil or in both together it were
very good, which being well dried, can not miss; And such Souldieres as are
known to be curiouse, and punctual in this and many more occasiones.

Their Captains and Officers ought to have a special care to honor, and
prefer them a cordinge to the trial of there valor, care, punctualitie, and
prudence, in givinge good examples, and sheowinge them selves in all
occasiones, and incounteres, with a brave and resolute determination, which
is a vvonderfull comfort to their Captain, and puteth him in great hope of
the victory, and good success, unhappie is the Captain, and unwourdie of the
name that will not make known to his brave Souldieres his inclined affection
towatdes them, and specially in time of most need.

In ordaininge the conveniente places for the cinteries both in the field and
garrison. The Sardgente mayor is to use great discrestion, in oversienge all
the circuide and entries of most importance and danger, (and after viwenge
all) he is to a point a conveniente place where each cintery shall by placed
a luenge twenty five or forty paces betwexte every cintery, some times more,
and some times less, as occasion shall require: But in the field is there to
be a pointed a cinterie perdue, or rather call it the contrary (the security
of the camp) this Cintinel is to be put doble meaning a pike and a caliver,
in a distance of, some o honderth paces little more or less toward the enemy,
and without all the other cinteries, in the place or places where there is
most suspision of the enemy to come. Some houlde an opinion, that this
cinterie is not to get the wourde (not so (for if they see or hire any rumor,
or a peerance of the enemy cominge, the pikeman shall repair with speed and
tell the next cintery vvhate he has either seen or heard, and if he have not
the wourde or contrasena he shall not let him come near, and this cinterie
with speed is to let this pass to the next, and so from hand to hand very
secret and scilent till it come to the next adioyninge watch or guard, that
they may be prevented in time.

Thies cinteries of right is to be caulled the security, of the camp rather
then centerie perdue: They are to by chosen of valerouse and settled Souldieres,
of good judgment and brave determinationes; And when the advice comes with
good security to the watch, that the enemy are in arms, or approchinge
near, presently the Master de camp, and Sardgente mayor is to be advertised.
And they are with speed to advertise the Master de camp general, in findinge
as before true relation of the occasion to by suspected of any emportance.
Thies outewarde cinteries are never to retire, but when urgente and assured
accasion do constrain them thereunto, in seeinge the enemy a prochinge, (and
not before) and until they reviwe if it be foot or horse. Or if they come in
order of squadron or marchinge in single file: After well reviwenge them, let
them retire to the next cintery, and let the wourde pass very secretly from
hand to hand til it come to the next watch, or let the pikeman go forward
with neowes and the other stay with the first cintinell til they be
constrained to retire to the next, and so retire be little and a little,
observinge still the enemy, and with whate order they do march, and so fall
into their own people, and inform of all of whate they have both seen and
heard: And seeinge them come disordered, thinckinge to fall upon ours of
asoddaine being a sleep or in provided. Then ours to turn upon them with
full resolution with the short Dromes and Phises which douptlesse if as before
they come, they shall find them selves pusseled and amassed: Thies exploites
require prudence, valeor, silence, and brave resolution.

It is necessary that the Sardgent mayor give order that upon pain of death
none do presume to give a false alarm without occasion, except it be with
order of the Superior. And in occasiones of encounteres, skirmises, or
assaults with the enemy let the Sardgent mayor give order that none call for
powder but very silente; for it is a thing most odiouse and of little
discretion, that the enemy should know of our wants in such occasiones: If
need require the pikes and raperes will serve in good steed, if the
Souldiores withdraw brave resolution and determination do a complish their
obligationes, for which extremities is required a prudent and brave conductor
of a valerouse and resolute determination.

In all occasiones in the filde where the enemy, is to be feared and suspected,
the Sardgent mayor is to give order that the outewarde cinteries of ours next
unto the enemy do take a special care that none do pass unto the enemy from
our camp; Which is rather to be suspected then if one of the enemy came into
ours, for such as run unto the enemy they may be suspected, that they go with
some advise or secrett intelligence, if such persons can not be killed or
tacken, let their warninge by presently given to his Captain, and then
presently to the Sardgent mayor who at that instant shall comaund that noe
Soldier of the watches who has the wourde shall be permitted to leave the
same that night wiche orderes he shall deliver the Sardgentes to deliver their
Captains to see the same executed; And in such occasiones the watch wourde is
to by changed, and if any boddy by found absente, of those of the watch let
their warninge, prese^tlie be given to the Captain, for it may be a villain
of a base mind, and that he did go with some advise to the enemy, and within
four or five days after come into our camp, and give faluse excuses,
hopinge to be pardoned, and comitt more villainy: In thies occasiones good
heed ought to be taken.

A very necessary thing it is in a Sardgent mayor to by careful in seeinge
that all the Souldieres of his Regimente be well armed, and that there may be
noe escuse in a complishinge their obligationes, in escusinge that their arms
are brocken or a mindinge. All thies and many more may their Captains, and
Officeres prevente in time, without troublinge the Sardgente mayor
theyrwithall, for he has to many other employmentes of greater momente, and
as isay thies may be well prevented be their Officeres, being coriouse and
careful.

When occasion shall require that the Sardgent mayor would have out of
certain Companies of his Regimente a quantity of Souldieres to be employed,
this he is to demand of the Capitaines, who is to apointe and ordain the
number demanded, and not to intermidle in taking them otherwise, for the
Captain is he which is to give a compte and reason of the Souldieres of his
Company, and the Sardgentr mayor in noe case is to intermidel in taking them
but those which the Captain shall apointe, for the Sardgente mayor has no
authority to take them otherwise; Except they be on the watch, and that
urgente occasion should be offered which requires great speed. And in such
occasiones the Officer being not present he may take them; and such
Souldieres as the Sardgente mayor shall demand the Captain is to make no
acceptiones, of all such occasiones as are necessary for his Majesty's
service: But he is not to intermidle in taking from any Officer any privilege
a pertaininge to the executiones of his office, which if otherwise he should
presume itt is a sinister and odiouse thing in war.

Some times it hapened that Pincioneres Gentelmen of the Artillery, and other
particular persons are employed be the Master deca^pe general, and by the
General of the Artillery, and be otheres, which are to be permited to pass
to deliver their mesadge in due time, and none ought to trouble or moleste them
in there voyadge, except they be suspected.

The Sardgent mayor is to take care that if his Regime^te in occasiones which
might happen they break upon the enemy, and follow on the victory, let
none in pain of death fall a robbinge the hurtemen, nor none of the slaughter,
which if any Officer find them in that base act in such occasiones, may
execute this sentence, being most base and odiouse, but rather pursue the
victory, and keep his order as behooveth an honorable Soldier of resolute
and noble mind to do.

In like manner in occasiones to inter per force of arms into any town citti
or strong place, the Sardgent mayor is to by very, vigilante, and careful,
that noe Soldier of whatesoever quality or condition: be permitted to inter
into any house, either to robb or steal till such time as the enemy be wholly
vanquised, that no danger nor execution of theyres might be feared, and that
till all there fury be paste, and that upon pain of death, for otherwise
they incurr great danger, some leavinge their arms hire and their in diverse
places; of which if the enemy take pocession they may easily Master them; Of
such blind ingnorance and covetouse desire of gain, great digrace may
resulte. If the enemy do secretly join in some secret place, and fall
unavare in masteringe their arms and murder them, which may well fall out if
prevencion be not used as before declared, in such sort that the enemy may
not come in possession of the honeor gained with the lives and loss of so
many brave Souldiores.

For the executiones of rare exploites and brave interprises in war is
required prudente and brave conduction, and specially that the Sardgent mayor
be most earneste to exercice the Officeres and Souldiores of his Regimente;
which being so practiced in war, great expectationes might be hoped of
them: Being exersised in well manadgeinge their arms, observinge their order
and not stiringe out of the same when they march, in knowinge who to fall
into squadron, and observe the proclamationes given, and ordained be the
General, nothing so dificill but that contuall use and exercice makes easy.

Whosoever would feign be couriouse in the framinge of many sorts of
batteles, it is necessary that he be exercised both in the theoricke and
pratike of this art, and specially to be able in Aritmetick: So shall he in
time bring his purpose to perfection with great ease. And let him be careful
in knowinge who to give the orderes to each Officer of whate shall be commended
to his chardge, and cause all thingss to be a complished as they were ordained
without reply, he shall not recall any order given, except it be trough
good concideration, neither shall none be discomodated to put another in his
place by favor or affection: Great consideration ought to be taken in
choysinge one of befitinge parts for the well executinge of this office, and
that be no means it be given be favor or affection for many considerationes of
emportance. After those of perfection in this art we loocke daily and find
feowe, but those of imperfection in multitude.

Some houlde an opinion that in orderes of marchinge and framinge of squadrones
the number par, is best, true it is that this number is good, but in the
divitiones to fall out of youvre march into squadron, let none be ingnorante
that they are to march acordinge as the devition fauleth out. And for being
of number par or impar it imports nothing, and for the contrariethere is no
rule, buth rather conform with the divitiones as they shall fall out, (which
is the true way) for we find no other reason to the contrary, neither had
pirho. King of the Epirotes the first enventor of squadrons, neither the
Romans, Greeckes, nor Macedonios nor any other nation:

A Sardgent mayor ought not to by ingnorante in framinge and givinge reasones
of all sorts of squadrones, at least all such as ocatio^ and situation shall
require, of which the Sardgent mayor ought to be curiouse, and not to err in
any thing that belongs to his office, and specially in the devitiones and
framinge of sundry sorts of squadrones, though many do imagine and supose it
needless (more then only the four forms.) They are far deceived, for
occasiones and situtationes shall offer where neither of the four forms will
serve: In framinge of batteles the Sardgent mayor is to sheowe him self with a
settled prudent and brave resolution, and by no means permit any crosinge or
confusion in the orderes be him appointed, nor wrong none to take him out of
his rank for him that came late, so hittinge uppo^ the just devitiones of
his shot and pikes, he shall place an Officer or two as he thincketh best in
the head of each devitio^, and that the Sardgentes do a complish their
obligationes in letinge none to stragel, nor fall out of their ranckes; So
the Sardgent mayor shall with ease and brevitie frame his squadron, and without
any crossinge or confusion being so conveniente.

For each Company of pikes shall take their turn on the watch and so
needs no contraversie nor confusion. The Master de camp as a Superior of his
Regimente is to choice to march where he pleases, and if there by two Companies
of A^cabuse^os the one is to march in the vangarde, and the other in the
rergarde, it is enough that the Sardgente mayor gives once thies orderes that
each one be his turn shall come do optaine his right in occasiones of
marchinge, without troublinge him any more. But if their be more then one
Regimente each of them shall take their torn acordinge as they have the
watch, marchinge first upon the right hand, and so go by turn, and
shall also be lodged first, and the rest of the Companies without any
crossinge or confusion as they come, yea if it were to frame a battle of the
whole exercito.

Many good parts are required in a Sardgent mayor and principally to be
expert in well executinge his office, to observe good order in march, to
prudently finish with expedition his affairs, to reprehende and redress
disorderes in due time, with prudence and authority, so shall he be beloved
and respected, and most comonlie have good successes. In the greatest
dangeres he is ^o^hcowe him self with asetled mind and brave couradge,
animatinge the Souldieres, sheowinge him self with them in all dangeres and
extremities, comfortinge, and givinge them good instructiones and examples,
and in the greateste dangeres that shall happen to presence him self with them
with a brave and valerouse determination; so douptles shall he by beloved,
feared, and respected by the^. Let him by no means be overcomed by disordered
a petites but rather be moderate mylde, and fair condisioned, a^ be^itinge ^o
person of so great comaunde.

Treatinge of several sorts of Squadrones.
BIgininge with the rule who to find out the square root of any number, the
table pitagorique, a table ^^ by put in memory for the framinge of squadrones,
for such as are not expert in Arithmeticke, the table of the proportiones of
unequal numberes, and who to frame several sorts of squadrones, of several
sorts of weapones, and the industry used for their due orderinge and
devidinge in proportion, acordinge as time, occasion, and situation shall
require and permit.

A square root is a digit or number which being multiplied in it self
bringethe fourth a square number, as 2 being multiplied in it self make the 4.
in saying two times two make the 4. and so from the number 1. to the number 9.
yove shall understande in the table Pitagorique, the raise of 1. can not be
but, 1. the rays of 4. is 2. the raise of 9. is 3. the rays of 16. is 4. that
of 25. is 5. and so consequently as in the table folowinge yove may perceive.

To find out the square root of any number be it ^ square or not square,
yove must wourke thus, first havinge set down the number propounded which
at the least must consiste of 3. figures. Set a prick under the first digitt
of the said number on the right hand, that donpricke every other digit or
number thereof toward the leiftehande; Havinge always one void space or
chifer betwext every 2. pricks, as yove see here don in the number folowinge
946. to find out the square root of this propounded number, yove are to
prick the said number ^ as before taught, havinge so don seek out one of
the 3. digites, which being multiplied in it self may take a way the chifer
9. that is on the left hand, or as much thereof as may by, in saying 3.
times 3. makes 9. so that 3. is the rays of 9. first chifer of your
propounded number, and restethe nothing, which yove shall put right a bove
the 9. so that yove have wholly don with the 9. that liethe on the left hand
that don, doble the quotient which is 3. and it makethe 6. and set the same in
the void place right under the figure 4. and seek out a digit or number,
which being multiplied in it self may take a way the 4. and say how many
times 6. can yove find in 4. nullo; so set down 0. in the quotient right
under the 6. that stand the on the right hand, and say that in plasinge nullo
in the quotient yove have don and there restethe 46. that remains, so say
that 30. is the square root of 946. and there remainethe 46. that ^ is not
comprehended in the square root in saying multiply 30. the square root of
946. by 30. and it will make 900. to which 900. a^ 46. that remains, and itt
shall a monte the full some of your propounded number of 946. as by the proof
yove plainly see. In all such numberes to know whether yove have do^ well or
no, multipliy the square root by it self, to the producte of which
multiplication yove are to ad if there by any remainder, and if yove find the
sum thereof to be like to your first propounded number, yove have don well,
and if it be not like yove have errede.

But if such number do consiste of many numberes or figures in worke^ge
whereof yove must doble the quotie^t once, twece, or threece, acordinge as the
number does require, which yove shall more plainly perceive by this example
followinge: Presupose that 37424 is the number whereof yove would know the
square root; to do the which wourke as before taught, first prick the 4.
that ^ standethe on the right hand, then fall to prick the other 4. toward
to left hand, and havinge so don prick the digit 3. that standethe on the
left hand of all, now seek out some digit or number, which being
multiplied in it self, takethe a way the last chifer on the left hand,
which is 3. or the most thereof that can be, which yove shall find to by 1.
and havinge set down the said 1. in the quotie^t say one time one is 1.
which being subtracted out of 3. restethe 2. which is to be placed right
over the 3. and conzeale the said 3. that don, double the quotient 1. and it
makethe 2. which yove are to place right under the 7 of your propounded
numberin the second place toward the left hand, that don say who many
times 2 in 27. yove shall find it to be 9. in saying 9 times 2. is 18. out
of 27 restethe 9. which yove shall place right over, and above the 7. in the
second place on the left hand, and in the quotient right under the prick of
the chifer 4 in the 3 place toward the left hand yove shall place 9.
havinge so don, say 9. times 9. is 81. being subtracted out of 94. restethe
13. now double the 18 in the quotient, and it will be 38. which yove shall
place under the 9. in the quotient toward the right hand, havinge so don
say how many times 38. in 132. that standethe right above it, yove shall find
it to be 3. which yove shall place in the quotient under the first prike on
the right hand under the chifer 4. that don say 3. times 3. makes 9 out of
13. ^ rests 4. then say 3. times 8. makethe 24 out of 42. restethe 18 that
don fall to the 3. in the quotie^t and multiply it in it self and it makethe 9.
which yove shall substracte out of the producte of your last division
which was 184. and there shall remain 175. so that 193. is the square root
of the first number given which was 37424 which square being multiplied in
it self is 37249. and the remainder is 175. which two partitiones being putt
together makethe the first number of 37424. yove are also to understande that
if yove find any number out of which your quotie^t being doubled and can
not be subtracted, yove must set down a chifer in the quotie^t as yove do in
divisio^.

Most necessary it is for a Sardgent mayor, or whosoever does pretend to be
curiouse in the profession of arms, that he be expert in Aritmeticke, and in
knowinge who to find out the square root of any number, that he may with
the more facility order devide, and rank his Souldieres, either of great or
small numberes; yea and of whate soever form a Sardgent mayor, ought not to
be ignorante, for some times occasion and situation offerethe that neither of
the 4. forms of squadrones are to be used; Wherefore i will set down the
rules, first for the framinge of the four forms of squadrones most a
customed and most in use, as also the rules to frame squadrones acordinge to
the situation and disposition of the place, and occasiones to fight, as well
of equalities as of inequalities. The 4. forms of squadrones most acustomed
and most in use, is the square of men the square of ground, bastard square,
and broad square, which the Spaniarde caul quadra de gente; quadra de
tereno, prolongado, y gran frente.

Gentell Reader, understande that the first thing to by understoode in
framinge of squadrones, is that the principal boddies of the^ are to be framed
of pikes, to the which are required a certain quantity of shot, which are to
be divided as time situation and occasion shal-require, touching which
divisiones great consideration and industry is required in many occurantes of
warlike affairs, and it is of great importance for who so ever takethe this
chardge in hand to be perfect in Aritmeticke to facilitate many rare
occurrantes of this art, and specially in the office of a Sardgent mayoyr.

It is to be understoode that the rule which is observed in setinge in order
or array Souldieres, is that from the shoulder of the one to the shoulder of
the other, is required 3. foot or at the most three and haulf, and from rank
to rank 7. foot, meaning from the breaste of the one to the back of the
other. But when occasion shall offer to fight 3. foot or 3. is i noghe from
rank to rank meaning from the breast of the own to the back of the other,
and one for his one statio^, so that he ocupies before and behind, and for
his person 7. foot.

To form a squadron square of men, yove shall wourke, as before taught in
findinge out the square root which shall serve for front and flank, as by
the example folowinge yove shall more plainly understande, Suppose that yove
are to frame a squadron square of men of 464. pikes, to find out the square
root of this number first prick the last chifer 4. toward the right
hand, that don, prick the other 4. toward the left hand, so that the
figure 6. standethe in the midel, now fall to the 4. that standethe on the
left hand, and say the raise of 4. is 2. in saying two times two makethe 4.
which 4 yove are to substracte out of the 4 that standethe on the left hand
then conzeale the 4. and plase azero above it, now fall to 2. that is in the
quotient, and say two times two makethe 4. which yove shall place right under
the 6. which liethe in the mideste of the number given, and say how many times
4 in 6. which can be but one, in saying 4. times 1. makethe 4. out of 6.
restethe but 2. which 2. yove shall place a bove the 6. and ca^zeale the 6.
that don fall to 1. that liethe in the quotient under the chifer 4. on the
right hand, and say one time one is 1. out of 4 that layethe on the right
hand there shall rest 3. which shall be plased right over the 4. towardaes
the right hand, then canzeale the 4. and there shall remain 23. so that 21.
is your front and flank, and 23. remaininge which shall serve to guarnish
the culoures, to se if yove have don well, multiply 21. the square root in it
self, and the producte will by 441. to which producte ad 23. pikes, that did
remain, and the some thereof will be like unto the first number given which was
464. as by the figure folowinge yove may see.

A battle square of men of 464. pikes whose front and flancke is 21.
^



Square root.
1 1 50 2500 2 4 51 2600 3 9 52 2704 4 16 53 2809 5 25 54 2916 6 36 55 3025 7
49 56 3136 8 64 57 3249 9 81 58 3364 59 3481 10 100 60 3600 11 121 61 3721 12
144 62 3844 13 169 63 3969 14 196 64 4096 15 225 65 4225 16 256 66 4356 17 289
67 4489 18 324 68 4628 19 361 69 4761 20 400 70 4900 21 441 71 5041 22 484 72
5184 23 529 73 5329 24 576 74 5476 25 625 75 5625 26 676 76 5776 27 729 77 5929
28 784 78 6084 29 841 79 6241 30 900 80 6400 31 961 81 6561 32 1024 82 6724 33
1089 83 6889 34 1156 84 7056 35 1225 85 7225 36 1296 86 7396 37 1369 87 7569 38
1444 88 7744 39 1521 89 7921 90 8100 40 1600 91 8281 41 1681 92 8464 42 1764 93
8649 43 1849 94 8836 44 1936 95 9025 45 2025 96 9216 46 2116 97 9409 47 2209 98
9604 48 2304 99 9801 49 2401 100 10000

For such as are not expert in Aritmeticke i have set down the a fore said
Table to find the square root of any number to then thousand, which shall
healpe much such as are not able in Aritmetike, but such as are inclined to
be perfect in this noble art of war: i would wish them not to wholly trust
to this rule for the reasones before declared; but rather learn to be perfect
in Arithmetike, which is the sureste way.

A Squadron square of men of 361. Soldiers of the which 144. are pikes, and
217. musketes.
Front of the battle. Square of men.
^

144 Pikes. 48 Musk. 36 Musk. 76 Musk. 57 Musk. 361




Supose that yove are to frame a squadron square of men of 361. Soldiers of
the which 144. are pikes and 217. are musketes and that yove would have the
squadron proportionally lined, every way with the shot. To wourke the which
first take the square root of the 144. pikes which yove shall find to be 12.
and say that 12. is the front and flank of the squadron of pikes, that don
take the whole number of shot and pikes which is 361. out of the which
also take the square root, which yove shall find to be 19. out of this 19
substracte 12. the square root of the pikes, and there shall remain 7. and so
yove find the number that yove demand for the girdlinge shot, now devide
the 7. into two parts and say that yove find 4 in one part and 3. in the
other, and say that by your devision yove find that the first maniple of
musketes is to march with 12. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank, which is
for the linenge shot of the right flank of your squadron. That don say that
also by, your last devision yove find 12. ranks of 3. musketes in each
rank to guarinshe the liefte flank of your squadron, and say that the two
flanks of your squadron are linede, with shot, meaning 4. in each rank
of the linenge of the right flank, and 3. in each rank of the linenge of
the liefte flank; so the two flanks are lined.

That don, say that 12. the front of your pikes adinge thereunto 7. musketes
of the linenges of the two flakes makethe 19 and say that in your last
devision yove find that 19. ranks of 4. musquetes in each rank are to
march for the linenge shot of the vangarde, and also 19. ranks of 3.
musketes are to march in the last devision of shot for the linenge of the
rergarde of your battle, as by the figure before and in the devisiones of the
same yove see plainly declared, and so your squadron of pikes is
proportionally lined every way in as much as the devision and number can
affourde.

A squadron square of men of 576. Soldiers of the which 256. are pikes, and
320. musketes divided proportionally as by the figure folowinge yove see.
Front of the Battle.
^

256 Pikes. 64 Musq. 64 Musq. 96 Musq. 96 Musq. 576.




For the framinge of all such squadrones either of great or small numberes,
which yove would have to be proportionally lined with shot yove shall
wourke in this manner folowinge: First take the number of pikes which is 256.
out of the which take the square root, which is 16. and say that so many
pikes shall the front and flank of your battle contain, and that it is of
equal strenghte every way as well, to offend as to defend, and when yove
would draw them into squadron, for the more breuity yove may devide the
front thereof into two maniples each one contayninge 16. ranks of 8. pikes in
each rank, now to proportionally guarnish the same with the shot take your
full number of pikes, and shot which is 576. out of which number take the
square root which yove shall find to by 24. that don, substracte 16. the
square root of the pikes out of 24. the square of the full number of pikes
and shot, and there shall remain 8. this digit devide into two equal parts,
which is four in each part, and say that the squadron of pikes is to be
lined every way with 4. shot as by the devision of the same yove see,
meaning that your first division of shot is to march with 16. ranks of
4. musketes in each rank, which is to line the right flank of your
squadron of pikes, and so many more ranks shall march to line the left
flank of the squadron of pikes, meaning 16. ranks of 4. musketes in every
rank, so the two flanks of your squadron are lined. That don say that the
front of your squadron is 16. and thereunto ad 8 the linenge shot of the two
flanks, and it will a monte to 24. To line the front of your battle, say
that yove are to march with 24. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank, and so
many more for the linenge of the rerwarde of your battle as the figure and
divisiones shewethe, and so shall yove find your squadron proportionally
lined every way; which by the rule form, and divisiones of the same yove may
plainly understande This rule will serve to frame all such sorts of
squadrones either of great or small numberes, which yove would have to be
proportionally lined with shot, as plainly the figure and divisiones before
sheowethe.

In many countries hardly can you find the one haulf of there pikes armed
with complett corseletes, so that this rule will sheowe yove how to guarnish
the unarmed pikes, with the complett corseletes proportionally every way,
advertisinge that the culoures is to march in the center.

A cross battle of 1416. Souldieres of the which 512. are pikes, and 904.
musketes, which are to be divided into 4 batteles, and lined proportionally on
the two flanks, as by the figure and divisiones followinge are reasoned. To
wourke the which, first take the number of pikes, ^ for each squadron of the
4. required for your cross battle. Now to your purpose take the square
root of 128. pikes of your first squadron, which will be 11. and 7. pikes
remaininge, and say that 11. pikes is the front and flank of your first
battle of pikes, as also of the other 3. batteles, and 7. pikes remaininge in
each battle, which shall serve to guarinsh the culoures; so that 11^ is the
front and flank of each one of your 4. batteles of pikes, and 7. pikes
remayninge for the linenge of the culoures of each battle of the 4.

Now for the division of your propounded number of shot. Double the one
flank of each one of the 4. batteles of pikes, which double will by 88. this
88. the double flank of the 4. batteles of pikes divide by 904. your
propounded number of musketes, and the number in the quotient will by 10. and
24 musketes remayninge, and say that the two flanks of each of your 4.
batteles of pikes are to by lined with 11. ranks of ten musketes in each
rank as by the figure, and deutiones folowenge yove may plainly see, and
with the observation of this rule with any other number either great or
small yove shall with facility know how to proportionably divide yovre shot
for to guarinsh the two flanks of yovre squadron of pikes.

Thiese cross batteles are esteemed to be wonderful strong consideringe well
the framinge thereof. It is also of wonderful safegarde, for the security of
the bagadge amunitiones and hurt men, and if the enemy should chance to
charge the first battle, or any of the other 3. which being a lone are but
of little force. Wherefore consideration ought to be taken of the stratagemes of
the enemy, and with what order they do march, and then yove may double or
tribele yovre front acordinge as occasion shall require and the situation
shall permit. And if the enemy are strong on horse, regard ought to be
taken in due time of the bagadge that it go deposito, or be twexte the two
last batteles, and for their better security in such ocationes, I would cut
two ranks of each of the two last batteles and therwithe guarnishe the
front and regard of the bagadge and also with shot under the shelter of this
guarnison of pikes so that they may be shadowed and defended every way and give
a triple front to the two last batteles.

Cross Battle.
^



Several sorts of arms are manadged in all coutries and in many places
hardly can yove find the one haulf of there pikes armed with complett
corseletes. Wherefore i tought fit to set down the rules for the due orderinge
in proportion of thiese several sorts of arms, for being most necessary in
many occasiones in warrlike affairs: Put in case yove have 1112. souldieres,
of the which 260. are unarmed pikes 316. armed with complett corseletes, 114.
officeres reformed and particular persons who are armed with gilted
corseletes, and for the linenge shot 422. musketes. Of the which number the
camp master general, would have a squadron square of men to be framed,
puttenge the unarmed pikes in the center, proportionally lined every way with
the armed corseltes, and the armed pikes proportionally lined with the gilted
corseletes and officeres reformed, as also that the 4. sides of the full
battle of pikes to be proportionally guarinshed with the 422. musketes.

To wourke the which first take 260. which is the unarmed pikes out of
which take the square root which is 16 and. 4 pikes remayninge, and say that
16 pikes is the front and flank of yovre center of unarmed pikes. That don
take the full number of unarmed and armed pikes which is 576. out of which
also take the square root which will be 24. now deducte of this 24.16 the
raise or square root of the unarmed pikes, and there shall remain 8. this 8.
devide into two parts, and it is 4. in each part, and say that 16. ranks of
4. corseletes in each rank is to guarnish the right flank of yovre center of
unarmed pikes, and so many more for the guarnision of the leifte flank of the
center of the unarmed pikes.

Now to proportionally line the front of the center say that to 16 the front
of the center is to be aded 8 of the 2. lininges which make the 24. so say
that the front is to be guarinshed with 24. ranks of 4. armed pikes in each
rank, and so is the front of yovre center and unarmed pikes lined, and the
rerwarde is to be guarinshed with the self same order, imeane 24. ranks of
armed pikes of 4. pikes in each rank, so the center of the unarmed pikes is
proportionally lined every way with the complet corseletes.

Now to line the armed pikes with the 114. gilted ^ corseletes take the full
number of pikes as well armed as unarmed which is 690. out of which take the
square root which is 26. out of this 26. the last rays deducte 24. the
square root of yovre armed and unarmed pikes and there shall rest 2. this 2.
devide into two parts which will be one, and say that the right flank of
the armed pikes are to be guarinshed with only 24. gilted pikes which just
ocupies place of one in each rank of the fla^ke and just so many more for to
guarinshe the leifte fla^ke of the armed pikes, and say that the two flanks
are guarinshed: Now your front is 26. and just so many gilted pikes are to
guarinsh the outewarde side of the armed corseletes, and just so many for the
linenge of the rerwarde so your squadron is proportionally guarinshed every
way, imeane the center with the armed pikes, and the armed pikes with the
gilted corseletes.

Now to devide your 422. musketes, you are to take the square root of the
propounded and full number of pikes and shot which is 1112. which square
root will. be 33. out of this square deducte 26. the square root that was of
the full number of pikes and there shall remain 7, this 7. devide into two
parts, the one will be 4. and the other 3. and say that by your devition you
find that the right flank of your squadron of pikes is to be lined, with
26. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank, (that don) say that for the linenge
shot of the leifte flank your devition yealdethe 26. ranks of 3. musketes in
each rank so are your two flanks of the squadron of pikes lined with
shot, now with the two linenges of shot you find the front to conteyne
33. and say that 33. ranks of 4. musketes is to line the full front of the
battle of pikes and 33. ranks of 3. musketes in each rank is to guarnish
the full front of the rerewarde, for by the rule of divition and proportion it
can not be other wise, so your unarmed pikes are in the center, proportionally
lined with the corseletes, and the corseletes with the gilted armor, and the
squadron of pikes proportionally lined every way with the 422. musketes as
you shall see by the figure and devisiones folowinge, advertisinge that in
your devisiones there do remain 4. unarmed pikes and 14. of the gilted
corseletes and five musketes as in the devisiones folo winge you may see, all
which are comprehended in the 23. the remainder of your last devision, as
here folowth declared.

A Squadron square of men.


256 Pikes. 64 Cors. 64 Cors. 96 Cors. 96 Cors. 24 Gilt. C. 24 Gilt. C. 26
Gilt. C. 26 Gilt. C. 104 Mus. 78 Mus. 132 Mus. 99 Mus. 4 Pik. 14 Gilt. 5 Mus.
1112.
16 Ran. 16 16 Rank. 4 16 Rank. 4 24 Ran. 4 24 Rank. 4 24 Rank. 1 24 Rank. 1 26
Rank. 1 26 Rank. 1 26 Rank. 4 26 Rank. 3 33 Rank. 4 33 Rank. 3
^

260 Unarmed Pik. 316 Armed Pik. 114 Gilted Corsel. 422 Musketes. 1112
Consideringe that many are ingnorante in knowinge the proportion of many
sorts of squadrones and unequal numberes ^ toughte necessary to put hire the
tabel and rules for the same as hire follows.
I Would wish allsuche as do pretend to step forward in the noble
profeshion of arms, troughe there prudent cariadge, and good applicationes,
to consider that many good parts are required in them, amongste the which we
find it most necessary that he be expert in aritmeticke, for otherwise hardly
can he bring unto perfection the rare curiosities required to the several
executions of the art of war. And especially the sundry devisiones of the
several sorts of squadrones, which by daily trial, and experience, we see
that many who are not curiouse nor expert in aritmeticke do err in uerie many
ocasiones, and can not compass, nor bring to just perfection with grace,
many rare occurantes in warrlike affairs; and that for the most part
resultinge of there little aplicationes in imitatenge the vertouse prudent and
approoved soldier; and also troughe the blind consideration of some, who
consideringe that now in our later wars for the most part all electiones
goes by favor frindship or affection: yea and uery many by means of enteres,
so that very many do not take the pains in aplieinge them selves in learning
the several rare curiosities of this art but rather mock, and floute at
those of rare and curiouse judgments by cause that their skill and capacity
can not reach in resolvinge the rare and deep secrets of this art, after
those of perfection in this art we look, for those of imperfection we find
on every foot: so none ought to reprehende in absence whereof in presence he
is ingnorante.

Proportiones of inequalities is that the battle may be more broad then long
or more in front then in flank.
Thief proportiones of inequalities is as 2. to 1. that is to say the battle
to be two times more broad then long, or more in front then in flank, as is
one to three or 1. to 4. ett. or the battle to be three times or 4. times more
broad then long, or more in front then in flank, or to be 2. or 3. more
broad then long or any other such like proportiones, to which effect i put
this table and the rules thereunte apertaininge.

1 is as -- 2 to 3 1 -- 3 -- 5 1 2/4 -- 4 -- 6 1 -- 5 -- 7 1 2/6 -- 6 -- 8 1
2/7 -- 7 -- 9 1 2/8 -- 8 -- 10 1 2/^ -- 9 -- 11 2/^ -- 3 -- ^8 2 -- 4 -- 11 2
-- 2 -- 05 2/1^ -- 8 -- 17 2 -- 3 -- 7 2 2/4 -- 4 -- 10 2 1/7 -- 7 -- 15 2 2/6
-- 6 -- 14 2 3/7 -- 7 -- 17 3 is as -- 2 to 7 3/^3 -- 3 -- 10 3 -- 4 -- 13 3 --
5 -- 16 3 2/6 -- 6 -- 20 3 1/7 -- 7 -- 22 3 1/8 -- 8 -- 25 3 2/9 -- 9 -- 29 3
3/^ -- 9 -- 30 4 -- 2 -- 09 4 -- 3 -- 13 4 -- 4 -- 17 4 -- 5 -- 21 4 -- 6 -- 25
4 1/7 -- 7 -- 29 4 -- 8 -- 33 4 1/9 -- 9 -- 37 4 2/9 -- 9 -- 38 5 is as -- 2 to
11 5 -- 3 -- 16 5/^4 -- 4 -- 21 5 -- 5 -- 26 5 ^/6 -- 6 -- 31 5 1/7 -- 7 -- 36
5 2/7 -- 7 -- 37 5 2/^ -- 8 -- 41 5 1/9 -- 9 -- 46 6 -- 2 -- 13 6 -- 3 -- 19 6
-- 4 -- 25 6 -- 5 -- 31 6 2/6 -- 6 -- 37 6 2/7 -- 7 -- 43 6 2/7 -- 7 -- 44 6 --
8 -- 49 6 1/9 -- 9 -- 55

To reduce these fractiones into whole numberes, and to know their proportion
you are to wourke in this manner folowinge. First multiply the whole number by
the fractiones denominator, and ad thereunto the numerator of the said
fraction, and the proportion is found, as for example to have the battle to
contain so much and the one haulf more in front then in flank which the ^
Spaniard call tanto i medio; seek in the table 1 where of the whole number is.
1. and the fraction is now multiply the whole number 1. by the fraction is
Denominator 2. and it makethe 2. whereunto you shallad the said fractiones
numerator which is 1. which two adisiones does amount 3. and the fractiones
denominator is 2. so say it is in proportion as is 2. to 3. and so must yove
wourke with all such numberes to know the proportion thereof, or say that
you will have the battle to be 3 3/3. more in front then in flank, and to ^
find the proportion say it is as 3. to 10. as in the table yove shall see, and
that yove may better understand it wourke as before taught, first in
multiplienge the whole number 3. by 3. the fractiones denominator and it will
be 9 to this 9. ad 1. which is the fractiones numerator and it will be 10
and say that it is in proportion as 3. to 10. and withdraw this observation and
rule you shall know in what proportion shall by anny number.

To frame a Battle of 819. Souldieres, which shall contain so much and the
one haulf more in front then in flank, which the Spaniarde and Italian call
de tanto y medio.
^

THe advantadge of ground good order, and Military discipline are such that
troughe the conduction of prudente and brave Comau^deres small numberes offten
times repulse far greater numberes, and some times the situatio^ and
disposition of ground-so faulethe out, that neither of the 4. forms of
Squadrones can serve; Wherefore a Sardgent mayor* or whosoever undertakethe to
by curious or perfect in this art, ought to be expert in framinge all sorts
of batteles, as well of equal and inequall numberes whatesoever, wherefore i
tought fit to set down the rules for the framinge of such batteles

Bigininge with a battle of so much and one haulf more in front then in
flank, which the Italian call tanto y metcho; which i supose to by framed of
507. armed pikes, and that the front thereof contain so much and the one
haulf more in front ^ then in the flank, to wourke the which put down the
number propounded which is 507. pikes, unto which number ad the one haulf of
the self number, which will be 253 ^/2. that don, ad both numberes and it
will a monthe to 760 2/1. out of which take the square root, which will by
27. and 21. remaininge, and say that 27. is the front of the battle.

To find out the flank take 507. the number of pikes, and divide it by 27.
the front, the quotient thereof will be 18. and 21. pikes remaininge, and say that
18. is the flank; and the 21. pikes which did remain out of your last
division will serve to guarnishe the culoures, so that 27. is the front, and
18. the flank, which comethe to the just proportion of the form and number
propounded, to see if yove have don, well multiply 27. the front by 18. the
flank the product of which multiplication, and the 21. which did remain in
your last ^ division, and if it agrie with the number of pikes propounded
yove have don well, if not yove err, advertisinge that the proportion of the
front and flank must be observed, the form whereof yove shall see here
followinge, and lined proportionally every way with the 312. musketes, as yove
more plainly may perceive by the figure followenge, and by the divisiones of
the same.

^

A Squadron of so much and the one haulfe more in front then in flank.
^

Pikes contained in the boddy of the battle. 486 p. Pikes remaininge to
guarnish the culoures. 021 p. The lineng shot of the right flank. 057 m. The
lininge shot of the leifte flank. 057 m. The lininge shot of the full front.
099 m. The lininge shot of the front of the reere. 099 m. 819 m.



A Squadron of so much and one third part more in front then in flank.
^

208 pikes. 2 pikes. 42 musk. 42 musk. 88 musk. 66 musk. 12 musk, remaininge. 1
1/^ 460.




SOme times occasion and situation may offer to frame a squadron of so much
and one third part more in front then in flank, which the Spaniarde Caul
tanto y un tercio, which i supose to be of 460. Souldieres of the which 210.
are pikes and 250 musketes, and consideringe that asargent mayor or any perfect
soldier ought not to be ingnorant in the framinge of all sorts of squadrones
as time occasion and situation shall require, wherefore i tought fit to set
down the rules for the framinge of any such or semblable sorts of batteles,
now biginenge with the above number. To wourke the which first take the
propounded number of 210. pikes, that don devide it by 3. the quotiente whereof
will by 70. this 70. the 3 part of the propounded number, ad to it the
propounde number of pikes and it will be 280. out of which take the square
root which will be 16. and 24. remainenge and say that 16. is the front of
your battle; that don, to find out the flank devide 210. the propounded
number of pikes by 16. the front, the quotiente whereof will be 13. and two
pikes remainenge, and say that 13. is the flank and 16 the front and two
pikes remayninge, to see of you have don well, multiply the front by, the
flank addinge to the producte of your multiplicatio^ the remainder, and if it
agrie with your propounded number of pikes it goes well.

Now for the devition of your propounded number of short which is 250.
musketes take the whole number of short and ^ pikes, which is 460. and divide
the same by 3. which quotient you shall find to by 153. and one remaininge,
now thiese 153. the quotiente of your last devision of the propounded number
of 460. the producte of which 2. aditiones will by 613. that don take the
square root of 613. which will by 24. the front of the number, now to find
out the flank, take your principal number of pikes and shot which is 460.
which you are to devide by 24. the square root of 613. and the number in the
quotiente will be 19 and 4. remayninge and say that 24. is the front and ^9.
the flank, that don deducte 13. the flank of your squadron of pikes out of
19 the last flank and there shall remain 6. this 6. divide into two parts
and yove shall find 3. in each part, and say that the first division of
shot is 14. ranks of 3. musketes in each rank comprehended one rank of 3.
musketes for the lininge of the culoures of the right flank of your squadron
of pikes, and say that the leifte flank or side of your battle of pikes are
to be lined with the self same order i mean 14. ranks of 3. musketes in
each rank; so is the two flanks of your battle of pikes proportionally
lined with musketes. Now to find out the shot that will line the front and
rerwarde of your battle of pikes deducte 84. musketes the lininge shot of
the two flanks out of 250. the full number of shot, and there will remain
166. musketes these 166. divide by 22. the full front of your pikes of the
two linges the quotient of which will be 7. this 7. divide into two parts the
one will be 4. and the other of 3. and say that the guarnison of musketes that
is to line the front is 22. ranks of 4 musketes in each rank, and 22 ranks
of 3. musketes for the linenge of the rerwarde, so is your battle
proportionally guarnished or lined every way, ad. vertisinge that 12. musketes
remainethe out of your division which will serve for to guarinsh the
culoures, so withdraw this observation and rule you may divide your shot of
any other such semblable battelles.

Advertisinge that two pikes, which does guarnish the culoures are above
the number the devision of the battle yealdeth, which at least are to be
taken out of some rank for that inescusable purpose to guarinsh the culoures,
as also to be rekoned but once in their first division; so that in all
squadrones when in the divisiones of their pikes and shot, shall not rest
the conueniente number required for the due lininge of the culoures, then of
force must that number be taken out of some part of the battle, advertisinge
that this number so taken is not to be rekened but once, and that is where
their first division sheovveth, as declared in the tabell of the battle,
which is the true observation, and explication of the divisiones both of the
pikes and shot. So is it to by understood that the number taken out of thies
divisiones for the culours the battle shall contain so many above the number
alued in their first division, and so for not to err, the divisiones of the
table are to be observed for bienge infallible, and for cause that most
commonly of force order and array must be broken to orderly place the culors in
the center as also to guarnish them withdraw the conveniente pikes and shot.

A Squadron of two times more in front then in flank.
^

TO find out the front and flank of any number of pikes, which yove would
have to be two times more broad then long or more in front then in flank,
which i supose at this instant to be 1008. of the which 520. are pikes and
488. musketes, ^ first take the propounded number of pikes which is 520^ and
multiply the same by 2. the producte will by 1040. now out of this producte
take the square root, which will be 32, and 16. remaininge, and say that 32. is
the front of your battle of pikes, now to find out the flank, take the
propounded number of pikes, which is 520. This 520. divide by 32. the front,
and the number in the quotient will be 16. and 8. pikes remaininge so yove
found out the front and flank, meaning that 32. is the front, and 16 the
flank, and 8. pikes remaininge, in your last division, which will serve to
guarnish the culoures, with the observation of this rule, yove may frame a
battle of pikes either of small or great numberes, and of whate form yove
will have the same to contain of 3. times 4. times or 5. times more in front
then in flank in multiplyinge the propounded number of pikes by the proportion
thereof, if yove would have it contain 3. times more in front then in flank
multiply your propounded number of pikes by 3. if yove would have it to
contain 4. times more in front then in flank multiply it by 4. and in
wourkinge as before taught yove shall find out the front and flank, and
there just proportion; for the impalinge shot i have spoken of in other form
of squadrones, but for such as would be curiouse and expert, is required
great consideration to be had for the several sorts of divisiones of shot,
as time occasion and situation shall require, and it is most necessary for him
that undertakethe this chardge in hand to by expert in Arithmeticke, and so
with continual practice shall he with great facility bring to just
perfection all the divisiones befitenge for this purpose, and let none be
ingnorante but that for the several and rare curiosities of the divisiones of
shot is required much practice, and specially in Aritmeticke, which is the
principal fundament in reducenge thees devisiones into there just perfection,
always consideringe of time occasion and situation, as also of before cast
prevention against the stratageames and orderes of your enemy.

A Squadron square of men of 3024. Souldieres of ^ the which 1764. are pikes,
and 1260. musketes divided into several maniples, and troops to march that
they may fall into battle presently when occasion is offered as by the figure
and divisiones folowinge set down, and for such as have not intered into the
deep judgment and practice of this art. I will here set down the order of
there divisiones, first take the propounded number of pikes, which is 1764.
out of the which take the square root, which will by 42. the which is the
front and flank of your pikes. That don take the full number of your shot,
which is 1260 and divide this by 42. the flank of the propounded number of
pikes, and the number in the quotient will by 30. That don divide 30 the
quotient into two equal parts, and you shall find the haulfe thereof to be
15 so say that 15. shot comes under the shelter of each pike of your flank
for the guarnison of the same, I mean to each of the two flanks, for trial
whereof multiply 42. the flank of the pikes by the quotient of your last
devition which was 30. and the producte will by the just number of shot
propounded, And that you may the more easy perceive thiese devisiones I will
set them down in brief as here folowinge you may see.

The first division is 42. ranks of five musketes in each rank which shall
march in the vangarde of the divisiones of your marchinge which mo^ted. 210
musketes. The second division of your squadron is 42. ranks of 7. pikes
which folowes the first division of musketes and monteth. 294 pikes. The
third division that folowes the second shall march with 42 ranks of 7.
pikes in each rank which monteth. 294 pikes. The fourth division shall by
of 42. ra^kes of musketes of 5. in each rank monteth. 210 pikes. The fifthe
division shall march with 42. ranks of pikes of 7. pikes in each rank
which monteth. 294 pikes. The sixte division is 42. ranks of musketes of 5.
musketes in each rank which is the last division of shot of the vangarde
and linenge shot of the right flank of the squadron of pikes which monteth.
210 musketes.

So are the pikes and shot of the vangarde divided and the rest of your
shot and pikes are divided as folowethe.

The first division of the rergarde is divided into 42. ranks of 5. musketes
in each rank which shall march in front of the line^ge shot of the liefte
flank of your battle which monted. 210 musketes. The second division of
the reregarde is 42. ranks of 7. pikes in each rank which monted. 294
pikes. Vhe third division of the rergarde is divided into so many more ranks.
294 pikes. The fourth division of the reregarde is 42. ranks of 5. musketes
in each rank the firstwinge of shot of the left flank of the battle of
pikes. 210 musketes. The fifthe division is 42. ranks of 7. pikes in each
rank monteth. 294 pikes. The sixte division of the rergarde is divided into
42. ranks of five musketes in each rank for the second winge of shot of
the liefte flank. 210 musketes. 3024.

If you would have the one haulf of your shot to march by them selfs in
the vangarde of the pikes as commonly many do, you may with ease and breuety
in observinge the same divisiones and without breakinge of any ra^ke, in only
comandinge that the first 3. divisiones of shot do march in the vantgarde,
and then cause all the divisiones of pikes to follow, observenge there order as
before set down, plasinge the culores in the center, and after them in
therergarde to march the other 3. divisiones of shot which is for the lininge
of the liefte flank and observinge their order as before spoken of.

1764 pikes. 1260 musk. 3024. men.




^

By the figure followinge you see the said divisiones fall out of their
march in to battle, and proporsionally lined on the two flanks with the
1260. musketes, as by the divisiones of the same, and the figure followinge
you may see as the table of the divisiones of the battle hire folowinge
sheoweth.
You shall understande that in the division of the pikes there did remain
nothing, and for bienge inescusable to guarinsh the culoures with pikes and
shot, i cut of the front of the battle one rank which contains 42. pikes
and 30. musketes, of thies pikes 20. shall guarnishe the two flanks of the
culoures and the other 22 pikes shall by employed for other purposes, and the
30. musketes with other 30. that are to be taken out of the battle shall
guarinsh the culoures, so for such as for curiosity would confronte this
rekoninge it is necessary they know the diference is that 60. mueketes are to
by taken out of the battle to guaruish the culoures as before declared. Which
are to be rekoned but once for otherwise there shall by 30. musketes diference.

The pikes contained in the boddy of the battle. 1722. p. The pikes that does
guarinsh the culours. 20. p. Pikes employed in ocasiones of service. 22. p.
1764. p.

1764 pikes. 1260 musketes. 3024 men.
Table of the battle.
210 musketes. 294 pikes. 294 pikes. 210 musketes. 294 pikes. 210 musketes. 210
musketes. 294 pikes. 294 pikes. 210 musketes. 294 pikes. 210 musketes. 3024
men.
SQUARE OF MEN. 3024. men. FRONT OF THE BATTLE.


1764 pikes. 1260 musk. 3024.
A battle square of men which ocupies place of 694. men in which battle goes
avoid center which ocupies ^oume of 49. men appointed for the safety of hurt
men and amunitiones, or for unarmed men and bagadge.
The empty center. 49 men. Unarmed pikes. 121 pik. Armed pikes or Corseletes.
172 Cors. Musketes. 352 mus. 694.

THe empty center for hurtemen ammunition and bagadge ocupies plase of 49. in
front and allsoe in flancke whose front and flank is 7.

The first division of unarmed pikes that lines the right flank of the uoide
center shall be divided into 7. ranks of 3. unarmed pikes in each rank. 21
pikes. The second division of the unarmed pikes shall also march with 7.
ranks of 3. pikes in each, to guarnish the left flank of the void center. 21
pikes. The third maniple of unarmed pikes that shall line the front of the
center shall be divided into 13. ranks of 3. pikes in each 39 pikes. The
fourth maniple of the unarmed pikes that shall march to line the rergarde of
the center divided into 13 ranks of 3. pikes in each rank. 39 pikes. The
first division of armed pikes shall be divided into 13. ranks of 3. corseletes
to line the right flank of the unarmed pikes. 39 corselet. The second division
of corseletes that do line the left flank of the unarmed pikes is divided
into 13. ranks of 2. corseletes in each. 26 corselet. The third division of
corseletes that shall line the front of the unarmed pikes shall be divided into
18. ranks of 3. corseletes in each. 54 corselet. The fourth division or
maniple of corseltes that shall line the rergarde of the unarmed pikes shall be
divided into 18. ranks of 2. corseletes in each rank. 36 cors. In the
divisio^ of the armed and unarmed pikes there did remain 18. pikes of the
which 17. are corseletes. 18 293.

THe division of the 352 musketes of the siyed squadron to line the battle
proportionally every way shall be divided in this manner fol^owinge, the rules
both for this division, as also for the divisiones of the dry pikes and
corseletes. I will set down af ter this.

The first division of shot of the said squadron shall march in the vangarde
with 18. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank for the lininge of the right
flank of the battle of pikes monteth. 72 mus. The second division of the
uangarde shall march with 18. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank for the
linenge shot of the lieft flank of the squadron. 72 mus. The first division
of shot of the rergarde shall be divided into 26. ranks of 4. musketes in
each rank for to line the front of the battle. 104 mus. The second division
of shot of the rergard shall be divided into 26. ranks of 4. musketes in each
rank which shall line the rergarde of the battle. 104 mus. 352 mus.

Table of the Battle.

^

I Do not doubpte but many who have not long practiced ^ in the framinge of
squadrones, and that are not skillful in the several divisiones of the same,
and in particular such as are not able in Arithmetike, will in the beginning
find great difficulte in well orderinge and dividinge in proportion thiese
batteles with centeres, and lined every way proporsionally with sundry
sorts of weapones. Wherefore i tought fit to set down in writing the manner of
their several divisiones. To wourke the which yove must bigin with the
center; Then with the divisiones of your unarmed and armed pikes, and then
with the divisiones of your shot to see how they fall to line the squadron
of pikes in proportion as hire folowethe.

To wourke the which, first bigin with 49. your propounded number for the
void center, and demand for the square root of 49. which is 7. so you
find that 7. is the front and flank of the void center, that don say that
your void place or center ocupies 21. foot in front and 49. in flank, then
place down 49. the center and 121. the unarmed pikes which two adisiones,
will amont to 170. out of which take the square root which is 13. and say
that 13. is the front of the unarmed pikes with the void center, that ^ don
substract 7. the front of the center out of 13. the front of the center and
unarmed, and you shall find that 6. remaniethe, this 6 divide by 2! and the
quotient will be 3. so say that by your division you find that 3. unarmed
pikes comes to the linenge of the center every way, beginenge first with the
right flank of the center which is 7. and say the linenge of pikes of that
flank is 7. ranks of 3 pikes in each rank, and just so many more ranks
for the linenge of the leift flank of the center, conteinenge 21. pikes in
each linenge, so by your division you fouude the 2. linenges of pikes of the
2. flanks of the center. Now say 7. the front of the center and 6 the 2.
linenges of the same makes. 13. the front of the center and 2. lininges, now
say that the third maniple of unarmed pikes that shall line the front of the
center and the 2. linenges of the same, shall march witth 13. ranks of 3.
dry pikes in each rank, so the 2. flanks and front of the center are linde:
that don say that the 4. maniples of unarmed pikes are to be divided into 13.
ranks of 3. pikes in each rank for to line the rergarde of the void center,
and say that the center is proportionally lined every way with the unarmed
pikes, and that one unarmed pike did remain in your last division.

Now to divide the armed pikes, to line the unarmed proportionally every way,
take the full number of the center, of the unarmed, and armed pikes propounded,
which 3. partisiones does amonthe 342. that don take the square root of this
number which will be 18. and rests 18. of the which 17. are armed pikes and 1.
^ unarmed, now substract the square root 13. out of the square root 18. and
there shall rest 5. this 5. divide and say that 3 comes to line one way, and
2. armed pikes the other side of your unarmed pikes; then say that the first
division of armed pikes that shall line the right flank of the unarmed, must
march with 13. ranks of 3. armed pikes in each rank which does amonth to
39. so say that the right flank of the unarmed is lined with corseletes, now
in the second division of corseletes shall march 13. ranks of 2. armed pikes
or corseletes in each rank to line the leifte flank of the unarmed as by
your division so fallethe out, now say that the 2 flanks of the unarmed
pikes are lined with the corseletes. Then in the third division of the
corseletes shall march 18. ranks of 3. corseletes in each rank for the
linenge of the full front of the unarmed pikes, and ce^ter. That don cause the
fourth division or maniple of corseletes to march with 18. ranks of 2.
corseletes in each rank for the linenge of the rergarde of the battle so say
that the void center is proportionally lined with the unarmed pikes, and the
unarmed with the corseletes, and that there did rest 18. pikes which shall
serve to guarinsh the coulors in the center, advertisinge that 17. are
corseletes and 1. unarmed pike all which diuisiones you se ordered as by the
figure followinge apeereth; now to divide your propounded number of shot
which was 352 musketes take the full number of the center of the armed and
unarmed pikes, as also of the musketes which will amonte 694 out of which
take the square root which will by 26. out of which substracte 18 the
square of the center of the armed and unarmed pikes, and there shall rest 8.
this 8 divide into two parts and each part will by 4 and say that to
guarinshe the right flank of the squadron of pikes you are to march with
18. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank, and with just so many more shall
you guarnishe or line the leifte flank of the full number of pikes, now to
find out the lininge shot of the fro^te and rerwarde, say that adinge to 18.
the front of the pikes 8 of the two linenges of the two flanks it makethe 26.
and then say that to guarinshe the full front you are to march with 26.
ranks of 4 musketes in each rank, which is the lininge shot of the front,
and just so many more ranks shall guarnishe the rerwarde of the battle of
pikes meaning 26. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank and so is your battle
proportionally lined every way as the figure and divisiones folowinge sheowethe.

A Squadron square of men with a void center.


Front of the Battle.


Table of the Battle.

^

Pikes. Musketes. Soilderes. Spaniardes. 1040 840 1880. Italianes. 0888 780
1668. Irishe. 0946 760 1706. English. 0840 740 1580. Borgonones. 0847 694
1541. Valones. 0939 686 1625. 5500 4500 10000.

A battle square of men framed of six nationes, and who they shall un
confusedly fall into battle with grace and brevitie, dividinge to each
nasion his part of the vangarde, acordinge the number of men they give in
relasion, as by the figure folowinge are orderly divided, to fall into battle
of a soddaine without any crossinge or confusion, with the ensigns of each
nation in the center of their pikes.
THe enemy aproachinge and understandinge that they are resolved to give
battle, the camp Master general knowinge of the prudent brave conduction,
and resolute determination of the Spaniard, Italian, Irishe, English,
Borgonones, and Valones, comaundeth that there should be chosen out of thiese
nationes to the number of 10000. of chosen men of tried valor and full
resolution givenge order that a battle square of me^ should be framed of the
said 10000. men, and for fear of confusion or contrauersie in time of
fallinge into squadron, he give the order that the Italianes should follow the
Spaniardes, the Irishe to follow the Italianes, the English to follow the
Irishe, the Borgonones after the Inglishe and the Valones to follow, the
Burgonones, and that each nation should follow one another as before declared
with the front and flank that touches each nation acordinge to the number
of men they give in ralation, that with grace and brevity and without any
crossinge or confusion each nation may fall into squadron of a sudden, and
that each nation may have his part of the vangarde acordinge to the number of
men he givethe in relation. To wourke the which i tought fit to set down the
rules for the divisiones of these nationes, as here follows.

First take the full number of pikes given in relation by the said six
Nationes, which is 5500. out of which take the square root, which is 74.
the front and flank of the battle, and 24. pikes remaininge, which shall
serve to guarnishe the culoures. That done bigin to guarnishe or line the two
flanks of the battle of pikes with short aleowinge five shot under the
shelter or defense of each pike, which is the most that can conveniently be
defended under the same. To find out the linenge shot of the right flank
of the battle of pikes, as before ordained, multiply 74. the flank by 5. and
the producte will by 370. and say that the linenge shot of the right flank is
74. ranks of 5 musketes in each rank, and say that the right flank of the
battle of pikes is lined with shot. To guarnishe or line the leifte flank
of the battle of pikes, also say that it is 74. ranks of 5. musketes in each
rank which makethe 370. musketes, and say that your two flanks of the
battle of pikes are lined, now to know the short that shall guarnishe the
full front of the pikes, and of the two lininges of the 2. flanks, ad 10. the
musketes of the 2. lininges to 74. the front of the pikes, and it makethe 84.
the full front, then say that the division of shot that shall line or
guarnishe the full front is to march with 84. ranks of five musketes in
each rank, and ^ just so many more ranks shall march in the fourte
division of shot that shall guarnish the full front of the rerewarde,
advertisinge that each division of the two last that lines the front and
rerwarde conteines 420. musketes in each, so that the full number of shot of
the before said 4. divisiones that shall line the two flanks front and
rerwarde does a mount to 1590. musketes, comprehended 10. musketes for to
guarnish the colors, thiese 1590. musketes deducte out of the propounded and
full number of musketes which is 4500. and there shall remain 2910. musketes
which i divide into 30. troops which comethe to 97. musketes in each
troop, the which 30. troops is divided in the 4. angles and two flanks of
the battle as by the figure and divisiones folowinge you may better perceive,
where all is ordered and set down, and with as great facility as the
divisiones can affourde, that there by such as are not expert in aritmeticke
nor in the theorike and practike of this art may the sooner conceive the same.

Pikes. Musketes. Soilderes. Spaniardes. 1040 840 1880. Italianes. 0888 780
1668. Irishe. 0946 760 1706. English. 0840 740 1580. Borgonones. 0847 694
1541. Valones. 0939 686 1625. 5500 4500 10000.

^

THe full number of shot of the said six nationes monted. --

Out of which is to be deducted the divisiones of the 4. linenges.

So that after deductinge the linenge shot of the 4. frontes of the battle of
pikes rests 2910. m. Which is divided into 30. troops at 97 m. in each
troop, which are divided in the 4 angles and two flanks of the battle of
pikes as by the figure and divisiones folowinge ordered and proportionally
divided. Advertisinge that out of one of the troops of musketes of the angles
you are to take 10. musketes to guarnishe the culores.

The divisiones of the pikes and the order wherewithe each nation shall march
to fall into battle with grace and brevety.
BY the divisiones of the pikes before spoken of in dividinge 74. the flank of
your squadron of pikes be 1040. the number of pikes the Spaniardes gave, yove
shall find the number in the quotiente to by 14. and 4. remayninge and say
that the Spaniardes are to march with 74. ranks of 14. pikes in each rank
which is the order they are to observe when occasion offerethe to fall into
squadron with there colors in the center of there pikes, advertisinge that
there restethe 4. pikes out of there division. 14 front.- 4. The Italianes who
gave relation of 888. pikes is divided by the self same rule into 74. ranks of
12 pikes in each rank, and in offeringe occasion without any crossing or
confusion shall fall into battle with this order, and close upon the leifte
hand of the Spaniardes with the culoures in the center, and conform them
selves with the Spaniardes in front and flank. 12 front. The Irish who gave
relation of 946. pikes, shall be divided into 74. ranks of 12. pikes in each
rank with their culoures in the center of their pikes, and restethe 58. pikes
out of there division, and they shall fall into battle with this order, and
close upon the left hand of the Italianes. 12 front. - 58. The English who
gave relation of 847. pikes is divided into 74. ranks of aleaven pikes in
each rank with there culoures in the center, and restethe 26. pikes. 11
front. - 26. The Borgonones who gave relation of 841. pikes are divided into
74. ranks of 11. pikes in each rank, and 33. pikes remaininge, and with
there culoures in the center shall close upon the left hand of the English,
when occasion offers. 11 front. - 33. The Valones who gave relation of 939.
pikes is divided into 74. ranks of 12 pikes in each rank, and 51. pikes
remaininge, and in offeringe occasion to fall into squadron shall observe this
order, and join upon the leifte hand of the Borgonones with there coulores
in the center. 12 front. - 51. Advertisinge that of the 172. pikes that did
remain in the divisiones of the Spaniardes, Irishe, English, Borgonones, and
Valones. They shall by divided into 74. ranks of two pikes in each rank and
shall close upp on the leifte hand of the Valones when occasion shall offer to
fall into battle, and there shall rest 24 pikes. 2 front. - 24. 74 front. -
24.

The first division of shot that shall guarnishe or line the right flank of
the squadron of pikes is divided into 74 ranks of five musketes in each
rank, consideringe that a pike can hardely defend under the shelter or
defense of the same above five shot at the most. 370 musk. The second
division of shot that shall guarnishe the leifte flank of the battle of
pikes is divided into 74. ranks of five musketes in each rank. 370 musk. The
third division of shot that is to guarnishe the full front of the battle of
pikes, and the two linenges of the same is divided into 84. ranks of five
musketes in each rank. 420 m. The fourth division of shot that is for to
guarnishe the rerewarde of the battle of pikes, and the two linenge shot of
the two flanks is divided into 84. ranks of five musketes in each rank. 420
m. In the division of the full number of shot there did remain out of the
division 10. musketes that is to guarnishe the coulores as in the divisiones of
the shot is set down. 10 m. 1590 musk.

After lininge your squadron of pikes proportionally every way as before
declared, the 4. guarnitiones ^ of shot montes 1590. musketes which are to be
subtracted out of the principal some or number of musketes which is 4500.
there shall remain 2910. musketes, this remainder divide into 30. troops and
you shall find by your division each troop to ^ contain 97. musketes
ordered and divided in the four angles and two flanks of the battle of pikes
to skirmishe acordinge as time occasion, and situation shall require as by the
figure folowinge you may see who all thief divisiones do fall out of there
march into aperfect squadron in the form and manner as before declared and
set down. Advertisinge that out of the last troop of musketes on the
liefte angle of the battle must by taken 10. musketes for the lininge shot of
the culoures, so that troop of musketes contains but 87. musketes and all the
rest 97. so that 10. muskeths difereth.

Advertisinge that the culoures of each division of pikes shall march in the
center of the same, so that when occasion shall offer they may with grace and
brevity fall into battle array, and without any crossinge or confusion nor
cuttinge of ranks nor order as many do, but unconfusedly with grace, and
brevetie fall into battle, as by the figure followinge you may see, the 10.
musketes you take out of one of the troops of the angles for to guarnish the
culoures are to by reckoned in their due place as the divisiones of shot
sheoweth, and you are not to reken them in the battle by reason they were
borrowed out of one of the troops of musketes.

And let none by ignorante that when the conveniente number of pikes and shot
do not remain out of the divisiones to guarnish the culoures, then of force
order and array must be broken, in cutinge the shot and pikes necessary to
guarnish them, and so for not to err in the rekeninge the divisiones of the
table of the battle are to by observed (for being infalible) and for bienge
the producte: of the general rule of all the divisiones of the battle, so is
it to be under stood that their is no better surer nor brifer rule for this
purpose.

By the figure folowinge and by the table and divisiones of the same you may
see who each nation does march with the front and flank acordinge the number
of men they gave in relasion, advertisinge that the culoures of each nation are
to march in the cinter of their division of pikes, and the 74 ranks of pikes
of 2 pikes in rank that did remain out of the divisiones of the said 6
nationes shall close upp on the leifte flank of the battle of pikes as be the
figure and divisiones followinge you may plainly see who orderly out of
there march they fall unto battle with grace and brevity.

FRONT OF THE BATTLE. SQUARE OF MEN.
TABLE OF THE BATTLE.
THe Spaniardes are divided into 74. ranks of 14 pikes in each rank monted.
1036 pikes. The Italianes into 74. ranks of 12. pikes. 0888 pikes. The Irish
into 74. ranks of 12. pikes. 0888 pikes. The English into 74. ranks of 11.
pikes. 0814 pikes. The Borgonones 74. ranks of 11. pikes. 0814 pikes. The
Valones into 74. ranks of 12. pikes. 0888 pikes. The remainder of pikes of the
six nasiones divided into 74. ra^kes of 2. pik. in each. 0148 pikes. Pikes
remaininge out of the divisiones. 24 pikes. 5500 pikes. The lininge shot of
the right flank of the battle of pikes. 0370 musk. The lininge shot of the
leifte flank. 370 musk. The guarnision shot of the front monted. 420 musk.
The guarnision of the reregarde. 420 musk. Shot remaininge out of the
divisiones. 020 musk. 2900. musketes divided into 30. troops. 2900 musk. 4500
musk.

Advertisinge that out of one of the troops of musketes are to be taken 10.
musketes with the other 10. that did remain to guarnish the culoures; still
observinge the divisiones of the table for being infalible.



The great battle of 10000. men before spoken of, is now divided into three
battelles square of men as by the figure following appears.
OF the then thousand men (before spoken of, and of which were framed
abattell square of men, and all redused into one boddy as before set down, and
the form of there divisiones. Now supose that the Campe-master general
would have the self same number of 10000. men to be divided into three
batteles square of men and to observe such good order in there divisiones
that with grace, and brevity and without any crossinge or confusion they may
fall out of there march into battle, as by the divisiones, and figure
folowinge you may see. Advertisinge that of the Spaniardes and Italianes there
shall by framed one squadron, and of the Irishe and English another, and of the
Borgonones and Valones an other.

Pikes. Musketes. Soulderes Spaniardes. 1040 840 1880. Italianes. 0888 780
1668. Irishe. 0946 760 1706. English. 0840 740 1580. Borgonones. 0847 694
1541. Valones. 0939 686 1625. 5500 4500 10000.

Pikes. Musketes. Soulderes. Spaniardes and Italianes. 1928 1620 3548. Irish
and English. 1786 1500 3286. Burgonones and Valones. 1786 1380 3176. 5500 4500
10000.

Now to our pupose take the full number of pikes of the Spaniardes and
Italianes which is 1928. pikes out of which take the square root which
will by 43. and 79. pikes remainenge, consideringe that 79. pikes are much to
remain out of the squadron divide 79 by 43. the square root, and the number
in the quotiente will by one, and 36. pikes yet remayninge, this one you
found out of 79. ad it to 43. and it will by 44. and 36. pikes remaininge,
and say that 44. is the front of the battle of pikes, and 43 the flank, now
consider that hardly above 4. shot can by, conveniently defended under the
shelter and defense of the pike. And say that you will line your battle of
pikes proportionally by 4. musketes every way. This resolution taken multiply
43. the flank of the ^ battle of pikes by 4. musketes the linenge shot, the
producte whereof will by 172. musketes for the lininge shot of the right
flank of your battle of pikes, and just so many more for the lininge shot
of the leifte flank of the battle of pikes. That don ad 8. the linenge shot
of the two flanks to 44 the front of the battle of pikes which two
aditiones makethe 52. the full front of the pikes and 2. linenges of the two ^
flanks, now to guarnishe the front of the battle of pikes multiply 52. by
4. the producte whereof will by 208. musketes which is the number of shot that
shall guarnishe the front of the battle, meaning 52. ranks of 4. musketes
in each rank. That done say that the two flanks and front of the battle
are lined with shot. Now to guarnishe the rerewarde of the battle, observe
the self same order, and number where with you did guarnishe the front of
the battle which was 52. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank, and with so
many shall you guarnishe the re reward of the battle, and say that your
battle is proportionally lined every way with shot.

Now for the division of the rest of your shot take ^ 1620. musketes the
full number of shot propounded, out of which deducte 760. musketes the
girdelinge shot of the 4. frontes of your battle, and there shall remain
860. musketes. Which i divide into 14. troops of 60. musketes in each troop,
of the which one troop shall contain 74. musketes by reason the division so
fallethe out, and divided on the two flanks of the battle as by the
divisiones, and figure followinge aperethe, which is the first battle of the
three, and on the right hand; advertisinge that in the last division of
shot there did remain 6. musketes where with you may guarnish the coulores
with them, and with the 36. pikes that did remain out of the division of
your pikes, so your propounded number of pikes and shot are divided.
Advertisinge that the front of this battle is 44. and the flank 43.
multiplienge the one by the other and adinge there unto 36 pikes that do
guarnishe the coulores makethe the propounded number of pikes, which was 1928.
as by the divisiones followinge apeerethe, advertising that you are to cut ten
musketes that wantes for the guarnision of the culoures, out of one of the
troops, which you shall find to much in the battle, be reason they are
borrowed of one of the troops so follow the divisiones as they are set down in
the table which is the right way, and infalible.

Table of the first battle.

^

Pikes. Musketes. Souldieres. Irishe. 946 760 1706. English. 840 740 1580.
1786 1500 3286.

THE SECOND BATTLE.
Now that yove have done with the number of pikes and shot the Spaniardes
and Italianes gave. Take the 3286 men which is given in relation be the Irishe
and English, of the which 1786 are pikes, and 1500. musketes. To reduce them
into a perfect squadron square of men, and to be proportionally lined and
guarnished every way with shot. To wourke the which, first take the number
of pikes which is 1786. out of which take the square root which will by 42
and there shall remain 22. pikes which may be employed to guarnishe the
coullores, that don say that 42 is the front and flank of the battle of
pikes and 22. pikes remaininge. And supose, that occasion offerethe that you
find necessary the lininge shot not to pass 3. in rank under the shelter,
and defense of apike. Now to find out the lininge shot of the right flank
of your battle of pikes multiply 42. the flank of the pikes by 3. musketes
that is aleowed for the linenge shot, the producte whereof will by 126. or 42.
ranks of 3. musketes in each rank, then say the right flank of the pikes
are lined with shot, and just so many more ranks of shot shall serve for
the lininge of the leifte flank of the battle of pikes, observinge the self
same number and order as did the linenge shot of the right flank of the
battle of pikes which is ^ 42. ranks of 3. musketes in each rank which
monteth to 126. musketes, now to guarnish the front of the battle of pikes
which is 42. ad thereunto the two lininges which 3. aditiones will by 48. the
full front of the pikes, and of the two lininges which you shall multiply by
3. the producte whereof will by 144. musketes or 48. ranks of 3. musketes in
each rank, so the two flanks and front of the battle of pikes are
proportionably lined.

Now to guarnish the reregarde of the battle of pikes with shot, observe
the self same order before set down for the lininge of the front of the
pikes. That is to say 48. ranks of 3. musketes in each rank, so your
battle of pikes is proportionally lined every way. That don substracte the
540. musketes the linenge shot of the two flanks front ^ and rerwarde out
of the principal number of shot which is 1500 and there shall rest 960.
musketes which you shall divide by 12. or into 12 troops and the quotiente
of your division alowethe 80. musketes in each troop, which yove may double
when occasion require (that don) say that the rest of your shot is divided
into 12. trovpes of 80. musketes in each troop to be divided on the two
flanks of the battle of pikes to squirmish in single or double siele as
occasion and situation shall require, so al your pikes and shot are divided,
advertisinge that the 22. pikes that did remain out of the division of the
pikes are to guarnish the coulores, as by the divisiones folowinge you may
see. Advertisenge that by reason no musketes did remain out of the
divisiones, you are to cut of one of the troops 12. musketes to guarnish the
coulores which are not to be rekoned in the boddy of the battle (but for
borrowed) but where the divisiones fauleth and sheoweth which is the right way
as here under you see in the table which is unfalible.

Table of the second battle.

^

Pikes. Musketes. Souldieres. Borgonones. 847 694 1541. Valones. 939 686 1625.
1786 1380 3166.

THE THIRD BATTLE.
Now to frame the third Battle of the 3166. men the Borgonones and Valones
gave in relation meaning 1786. pikes, and 1380. musketes, first take the
propounded number of pikes, which is 1786. out of which take the square
root, which yove shall find to be 42. so that 42. is the front and flank
of the battle, and 22. pikes, remaininge which shall serve to guarnishe the
culoures.

Put in case that occasion requirethe that your linenge shot is to be no more
then 3. musketes in rank, and say that 42. ranks of 3. musketes in each
rank shall guarnishe the right flank of the battle of pikes, and just so
many more for the linenge of the leifte flank, which two linenges makethe
252. musketes, that don take 42. the front of the pikes, and ad thereunto 6.
the linenge shot of the two flanks, which two aditiones will make 48. To
guarnishe the front of your battle of pikes, say that the third division of
shot is 48. ranks of 3. musketes in each rank, and just so many more
ranks for the linenge shot of the rerewarde of the battle of pikes,
observinge the self same order as does the third division of shot, meaning
148. ranks, of 3. musketes in each rank, which two divisiones for the
linenge shot of the front and rerewarde makethe 288 musketes, and so the 4.
sides of your battle of pikes are proportionally lined every way, the four
linenges importheth 540. musketes.

That don substracte 540. musketes out of the full number of shot which is
1380. and there shall remain 840. musketes, which yove shall divide as time
occasion or situation shall require: which now i suppose conveniente to be
divided into twenty troops to be divided on the two flanks of the battle of
pikes to skirmishe where occasion shall require in single or double fiele, as
the situation shall permit, and the occasion shall require, at 42. musketes in
each troop, so all your shot and pikas are divided, as before declared;
Advertisinge that the culoures shall march in the center guarnished with the
22 pikes, that did remain in the division of the pikes, and by reason no shot
did remain out of the divisiones of your shot yove may take 12. shot out
of the last division of shot to guarnishe the culoures, so your three
battelles are framed, and by the figure folowinge you see how out of there
divisiones they fall into battle. Great consideration and curiosity is to by
understood for the several divisiones of shot, as time and occasion shall
require, always consideringe the situation and disposition of the ground, as
also of the several occasiones and advantadges in skirnmishenge with great
or small troops with single or double file and in whate distance (when, the
enemy does abound on horse, and when not) and also in preventinge in due
time the orderes and stratageames of the enemy.

Let none by ingnorante that when in the divisiones of pikes and shot their
rests not enough to guarnish the culoures, of force the necessary shot and
pikes required for that purpose are to be cut of the wings or troops of the
flanks, and are to be rekoned where their first divisiones did fall, as
declared in the table of the battelles for if you reken them in the battle
and where their first division did fall, it can not confronte with the
divisiones, so observe still the rule of the divisiones as set down and
declared in brief in the table of the battelles, which is the right way and
general rule. This table is neowlie invented for that purpose, where
presently without any pains or trouble you shall find the reasones, and
proportion of all the divisiones of the batteles in brief (as well of the
shot as of the pikes) as also whate remains out of the divisiones, which
table is of rare importance for the brief explicatinge and orderinge of all
the divisiones of battelles. And besides for cause that many auctores do leave
the same in obscurity to avoid prolixity, as also to disperte the ingeniouse
understandinge of those of perfection in this art.

Table of the third battle.
Pikes contained in the boddy of the battle. 1764 pikes. Pikes remaininge to
guarnish the culors. 022 pikes. Lininge shot of the right flank. 126
musketes. Lininge shot of the leifte flanck. 126 musketes. Lininge shot of
the front of the battle 144 musketes. Lininge shot of the front of the
rergarde 144 musketes. Musketes divided into 20. troops on the flanks of the
battle. 828 musketes. Musketes deducted to guarnish the culours. 012 musketes.
3166 men.

SQUARE OF MEN.
Front of the second Battle.
Front of the first Battle.
Front of the third Battle.


^

A Squadron square of ground of 1116. souldieres of ^ the which 576. are
pikes, and 540. musketes, to reduce them into aperfecte squadron square of
ground first take the propounded number of pikes which is 576. which you
shall multiply by 3. the producte whereof will be 1728 this producte divide by
7. and the number in the quotient will by 246. out of this 246. take the
square root which will by 15. and say that you found out the flank of the
battle of pikes, now to find out the front of the battle, take the
propounded number of pikes which was 576. which you shall divide by 15. the
flank, the quotiente whereof will by 38. which is the front of the battle of
pikes and there restethe 6. pikes which shall serve to guarnish the coulores,
so that 38. is the front and 15. the flank. Now for the division of your
540. musketes first say that for the girdelinge shot of the right flank of
the battle of pikes must march 16. ranks of 5. musketes in each rank
comprehended the rank of the culors, so the first division of shot of the
van guard is divided into 16. ranks of five musketes in eacheranke. And the
second division of shot of the vangarde and first winge of the right flank
of the battle of pikes is divided into 19. ranks of 5. musketes in each
rank. The third division or winge of the va^garde is also divided into 19.
ranks of 5. musketes in each rank which shall serve for the second winge
of shot of the vangarde and right flank of the battle of pikes, so that
270. musketes, the just haulf of the propounded number of shot, are
comprehended in the said 3. divisiones of shot of the vangarde and right
flank of the battle of pikes.

And for the girdelinge shot and two wings of the leifte flank of the
battle of pikes are also left just so many more. Which shall observe the
self same order in linenge the leifte flank of the pikes. Imeane 16. ranks of
five musketes in each for the girdelinge shot of the leifte flank of the
battle of pikes and 2. slives, of 19. ranks of 5. musketes in each rank, in
which 6. divisiones are comprehended the full number of shot which was 540.
musketes advertisinge that the first three divisiones of shot shall march
before the pikes, and the other three divisiones of the rergarde and leifte
flank shall march after the pikes, as by the divisiones folowinge set down
in brife and shall be better understoode by such as are not expert in this
art: so that they may the sooner conceive and come to understande these
divisiones, and how out of there march they fall into battle with grace
and brevity without any crossinge confusion or breakinge of ranks as many do,
which are not expert in aritmetike nor in the several sorts of divisiones of
fiery weapone.

The first division of shot and first winge of the vangarde is divided into
19. ranks of five musketes in each rank which conteines. 95 musk. The
second winge and division of the vangarde is divided into 19 ranks of five
musketes in each rank. 95 musk. The third division of shot of the vangarde
for the girdelinge shot of the right flank of the battle of pikes is
divided into 16. ranks of five musketes in each rank comprehended the rank
of the coulores. 80 musk. After theabove 3. divisiones of shot of the vangarde
shall march the first division of pikes of 15. ranks of 10. pikes in each
rank. 150 pikes. The second division of pikes is also divided into 15. ranks
of 10. pikes in each. 150 pikes. The third division of pikes Idem. 150 pikes.
The fourth division of pikes is divided into 15. ranks of 8. pikes in each
rank which does co^taine. 120 pikes. Or the coulores did remain. 006 pikes.
The first division of shot of the rergarded that follows the pikes and that
shall line the leifte flank is divided into 16. ranks of 5. musketes in each
rank monted. 080 musk. The second division and first winge of musketes of
the reregarde is divided into 19. ranks of 5. musketes in each rank which
follows the girdlinge shot of the leifte flank and conteines. 95 musk. The
third division of shot of the rergarde is divided into another slive of 19.
ranks of five musketes in each rank. 95 mus. 1116.

The said 1116. souldieres are divided into ten divisiones as before declared
and who out of there march they shall fall in battle either in singell or
double fiele as occasion shall require, and the situation and disposition of
the ground shall permit, advertisinge that there did remain 6. pikes for to
guarnishe the coulores, and that in the divisiones of the lininge shot and
rank of the coulores is comprehended 2. ranks of shot and that each one of
the 4. wings does contain 3. ranks more then the divisiones of the
girdelinge shot, and that for cause that ordinaryly the wings are augmented
with 3.4. or 5. ranks more then the girdelinge shot.

^

Front of the Battle.
Table of the Battle.
570 p. Boddy of the battle of pikes. 6 p. Remainder of pikes. 95 m. First
wing of musketes. 95 m. Second winge of musketes. 80 m. Lininge of the right
flank. 80 m. Lininge shot of the leifte flank. 95 m. First winge of musket.
leifte flank. 95 m. Second winge of mus. leifte flank. 1116.



^

TO frame a Squadron square of ground of 2782. ^ Souldieres of the which
number 1050. are pikes, and 1732. musketes, to reduce this number into a
Squadron square of ground, which the Spanniarde caulle Quadro de terreno,
first take the propounded number of pikes which is 1050. and multiply it by
3. the producte, whereof will by 3150. this producte divide by 7. and the number
in the quotient will be 450. out of this quotiente take the square root
which you shall find to be 21. and 9. remayninge, and say that 21. is the
flank of the propounded number of pikes. Now to find the front of the
battle take the full number of pikes, which is 1050. which yove shall divide
by 21. the flank, and the quotient will be 50. and remainethe nothing, and
say that 50. is the front of the battle of pikes, and 21 the flank.

Now for the division of your shot suppose that yove would have the lininge
shot not to contain more then 4. in rank, and that yove would have the
battle of pikes, to be proportionally lined every way with shot. To wourke
the which, take 21. the flank of the battle of pikes, and multiply it by 4.
the producte whereof will by 84. and say that the first division of shot is
84. muskete* or 21. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank, which is the linenge
shot of the right flank of the battle of pikes, and the second division of
shot for the linenge of the leifte flank shall contain just so many more,
now to find out the number of shot that shall be in proportion to guarnish
the full front of the battle of pikes and of the two linenges, ad to 50. the
front of the propounded number of pikes 8 the number of shot of the two
linges which two aditiones will make 58. and say that 58 ranks of 4. musketes
in each rank shall be the guarnison, or linenge shot of the front of the
battle of pikes, and of the 2 linenges, and just so many more for the
guarnison of the rerewarde of the battle ^ of pikes, meaning as before
declared 58. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank, so the two flanks front
and rerewarde of the battle of pikes is proportionally lined every way with
640. musketes, and restethe 1092. musketes which i divide into 22. troops or
maniples, ordered and divided in the front, rergarde, and 4. angles of the
battle of pikes, to skirmishe either in single or double fiele as time
occasion and situation shall require, and permit; all which divisiones you
may see by the figure folowinge, for the divisiones of shot let none be
ingnorante but that there are many considerationes, and curiosities to be had
as time and occasion shall require, and especially if the enemy be superior on
horse.

Hire folowethe who the full number of pikes and shot is divided into 31.
divisiones and who out of their march they fall into battle.
THe first division of shot that lines the right flank of the battle of
pikes is 21. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank. 84 musk. The second
division of shot for the linenge shot of the leifte flank of the battle of
pikes just so many more 21. ranks of 4 muskets. 84 musk. The third division
of shot that guarnisheth the full front of the battle and 2. lininges is 58.
ra^kes of 4. musketes in each rank. 232 musk. The fourth divisio^ of shot
that does guarnishe the rerewarde of the battle of pikes and 2. lininges is
58. ranks of 4. musketes in each rank. 232 musk. 22. maniples of 50.
musketes in each, divided on the front rergarde, and 4. angles of the battle
makethe. 1100 mus. 1732 mus.

Advertisinge that of one of the troops of musketes on the angles of the
battle are to by taken 8. musketes which wantes to guarnish the culoures be
reason no musketes did remain in their last division, also be reason no
pikes did rest in the division of the pikes y cut 21. pikes of the flank to
guarnishe the culoures so the front of the battle of pikes shall by but 49.
pikes. And by reason the divisiones are before shut upp thies 8 musketes
difereth in the rekoninge, so that when aconv eniente number of pikes and shot
do not remain out of the divisiones suficiente to guarnish the culoures the
above observation mu ste be kept as ordered in the Table of the battle, so to
confronte the divisiones with the propounded number yove are to by informed by
the table for bienge infallible.

^

A Battle of 2025. Souldieres divided into five battelles square of ground,
of the which number 945. are pikes, and 1080 musketes which are equally
divided into five batteles, and proportionally lined with the propounded
number of shot which is 1080. musketes as the divisiones and figure folowinge
sheowethe.

To wourke the which first take the propounded ^ number of pikes which is
945 and divide it into five parts or by five, and the number in the quotiente
will by 189. which is the just number of pikes your division yealdethe for
each battle of the five, now to find out the front, and flank of each
battle take 189. pikes which your division alowethe for each battle of
pikes, and multiply the same by 3. the producte whereof will by 567. this
producte divide by 7. and the number in the quotient will by 81. out of this
81. the quotiente take the square root which will by 9. and say that 9. is
the flank of each one of the five batteles of pikes, now to find the front
take the propounded number of pikes which your division did allow to each
battle of pikes which was 189. this 189 pikes divide by 9 the flank, the
quotiente whereof will by 21. and nothing remayninge, and say that 21. pikes is
the front, and 9. the flank of each battle of pikes before spoken of and
when yove will have them fall into squadron let them march in 3. maniples of
9. ranks of 7. pikes in each rank with the coulors in the center of the
midel maniple, and so shall they fall with grace and brevity into battle, and
without any crosinge or confushion. To guarnishe the coulors yove may cut
nine pikes of the flank of each battle, and so shall the front contain but
20. pikes; now for the division of the propounded number of shot which was
1080. musketes supose that yove would have each battle of pikes to be
proportionally lined alowinge 3. musketes under the shelter or defense of the
pike, first say that the first division of shot that shall girdel the right
flank of the first battle of pikes shall contain 9. ranks of 3. musketes
in each rank, and just so many more for the girdelinge shot of the leifte
flank, so is the 2. flanks of the battle of pikes guarnished: Now to
guarnishe the front of the battle of pikes with shot say that 21. is the
fro^te of the battle of pikes, and adinge thereu^to the two lininges it
makethe 27. and say that the third division of shot is to march with 27.
ranks of 3. musketes in each rank, which shall guarnishe the full front of
the battle of pikes, and two lininges; Now the two fla^kes and front of the
battle of pikes are guarnished, and guarnish the rerwarde of the battle of
pikes observe the self same order as yove did in guarnishinge the front of the
battle of pikes which was 27. ranks of 3. musketes in each rank, so your
battle of pikes is proportionally lined every way as before declared. The
self same order shall by observed for the linenge, and girdelinge shot of the
other four batteles of pikes as more plainly shall a peer by the divisiones
and figure folowinge

The first division of shot that does guarnishe the right flank of the
battle of pikes is divided into nine ranks of 3. musketes in each rank. 27
musk. The second division of shot that guarnisheth the leifte flank of the
battle of pikes shall observe the self same order. 27 musk. The third
division of shot that shall guarnishe the full front of the battle of pikes,
and of the two linenges is divided into 27. ranks of 3. musketes in each
rank monted. 81 musk. The fourth division that does guarnishe the rerwarde
of the battle of pikes shall observe the self same order Imeane 27. ranks of
3. musketes in each rank. 81 musk. 216 musk.

By the above mentioned four divisiones yove see ^ who the first battle of
pikes is proporsionally guarnished with shot, which 4. divisiones makethe
216. musketes, and the self same order shall be observed to guarnishe each one
of the other four battelles of pikes which makethe up 1080 musketes the
propounded number for the five batteles, as you may plainly see by the figure
folowinge how they fall out of there march, and divisiones into battle as
before declared, advertisinge that in the divisiones of the pikes and shot
there did remain nothing.

^

Front of the second Battle.

Front of the first Battle.

Front of the third Battle.

Front of the fifthe Battle.

Front of the fourth Battle.

Table of the five Batteles.
Divisiones of the first Battle: First division is 9. r. of 7. pikes. 63
pikes. Second division. Idem. 63 pikes. The third division. Also. 63 pikes.
189 pikes. Multiplied by five. 5. Pikes of the five Batteles. 945 pikes.
Lininge shot of the right flank of the first battle of pikes, 9. ranks of
musketes in each rank. 27 musk. Lininge shot of the lieft flank 9. r. of 3.
musketes. 27 musk. 945 musk. Liningh shot of the front 28. r. of 3. m. in each
rank. 81 musk. 1080 pikes. Guarnision of shot of the reregarde 28. r. of 3.
musketes. 81 musk. 2025 men. 216 musk. Multiplied by 5. Lininge shot of the 5.
battelles. 1080.

Advertisinge that no pikes nor shot did remain out of the divisiones to
guarnishe the culoures, so that one rank of pikes and shot may by cut all a
longeste, the front or flank of each battle to guarnish the culoures.



^

COnsideringe that cross batteles are of wonderful force as well aganiste
horse as foot as also for the safegarde of bagage amunitiones, and hurteme^: i
toughte necessary to put down the rule for the framinge of such forte of
batteles, put in case that you have 2032. souldieres of the which 1000. are
pikes and 1032. are musketes and that you wouled have this number divided into
four battelles of broad front proporsionally lined every way with the
propounded number of shot. To wourke the which first take the number of
pikes which is 1000. and divide the same ^ by 4. or into four parts and the
quotiente will by 250. which is the number of pikes that your division
yealdeth for each of the 4. batteles of pikes, now to frame the first
battle take 250. pikes, and divide the same by 3. the quotient will by 83. of
which 83. take the square root which is 9. and say that 9. is the flank of
the battle, now to find out the front take 250. the number of pikes and
divide the same by 9. the flank, the quotient will by 27. and 7. pikes
remayninge, and say that 27. is the front and 9. the flank, and 7. pikes
remayninge: so yove find out the front and flank of each battle of the 4.
and 7. pikes remaininge in each battle which shall serve to guarnishe the
coulores, now for the division of your shot take the propounded number of
shot which is 1032 musketes, and divide the same by 4. or into 4. parts and
the number in the quotiente will by 258. which is the just number of shot
your division yealdethe for each battle of the 4. of pikes: that done take
the number of pikes, and shot that each battle does contain, which is 508.
this full number, divide by 3. the quotient whereof will be 169. out of which
take the square root which will by 13. the flank: now to find the front of
the full number of pikes and shot take 508. and divide it by 13. the flank,
and the quotiente will be 39. and 1. remaininge now take 10. the flank of the
pikes comprehendinge the linenge of ^ the culors, and substracte it out of 13.
the last flank of the full number of pikes and shot and there shall remain
3. and say that the first division of shot shall march with 10. ranks of
3. musketes in each rank which shall serve for the girdelinge shot of the
right flank of the first battle of pikes, and just so many more for the
linenge shot of the leifte flank, so the two flanks of the battle of pikes
are lined, now to guarnishe the front of the battle of pikes, ad 6 the 2.
linenges to 27. the front of the pikes which two aditiones makethe 33. and
say that the third division of shot ^ shall march with 33. ranks of 3.
musketes in each rank, and just so many more ranks of musketes shall march
to guarnish the rerewarde of the battle of pikes, and two linenges, so the
four sides of the battle of pikes are proportionally lined every way, and the
self same order shall be observed for the divisiones of each battle of the
other three as the figure and divisiones followinge sheowethe, these cross
batteles are esteemed to be of wonderful force, consideringe well the framinge
of them, and they are also of wonderful safegarde for the bagage, amunitiones
and hurteme^, and if the enemy do come to charge on the first battle or on
any of the other outewarde batteles, which being alone are but of little
force, but the two outewarde batteles marchinge upon both sides of the
first, then it is of triple force, and if the enemy do charge on the
rerewarde of the two alone batteles they close to gither, and are of double
force, and if the enemy be strong on horse, and should charge at once on the
front and rerewarde then the bagage and hurtemen are to march betwexte the
two double batteles, of the uangarde and rerwarde and cut so many pikes as
shall guarnish the same on both sides to keep of the fury of the horse, so it
is guarished every way as the divisiones and figure folowinge sheowethe, by
reason the culoures are doble lined and that yove must cut 6. musketes for
each battle in the rekoninge shall difer so many, it imports nothing be
reason yove are to observe the general rule of the table which is infallible.

Front of the first Battle.

Front of the third Battle.

Front of the second Battle.

Front of the fourth Battle.

^

BY reason that by the divisiones the conveniente number of shot did not rest
for the lininge of the culoures, the 6. shot that wantes for that purpose in
each of the four battelles, are to by taken out of some of the divisiones;
so that thies 6. musketes borrowed shall difer But for not to err in the
rekeninge always observe the (...) of the di^isiones as set down in the
Table, for being infalible) and that most commonly to much or to little pikes,
and shot are wont to remain for the lininge of the culoures, so that the
first divisiones ordered in the Table, is the right way, for otherwise such
as are not curiouse and of rare judgment can not choose but err in the
rekeninge, and so for to prevente remedy of this confusion, and obscure
rekeninge, always observe the divivisiones of the Table, for being
infalible, by reason that the convenient number of pikes, and shot did not
remain out of the divisiones you may cut one rank alongste the flank or
front to guarnish the culoures*

Table of the cross Battle.

^



Several orderes are used for the repartinge and prudente orderinge of an army
into sundry battalones, as the occasiones and judiciouse intendimente of the
prudente and brave Comaunder shall find conveniente, in devidinge them into
3.6.8.12. or 16 battalones, which with facility are ordered by the prudente
and experimented Sardgente mayor.

An army of 19200. divided into 16. battalones of broad front, bienge divided
by 16. each battle shall contain 1200. whose front is 60. and flank 20. as
by the figures folowinge yove see ordered.

The army divided into 16 batteles of broad front.

16. BATTELES.



The self same army of 19200. is divided into 12. battalones of broad fro^te:
yove shall by your division find each battalon to contain 1600. whose front
is 69. and flank 23. as the figures folowinge sheoweth.

The army divided into 12 batteles of broad front.

12. BATTELES.



Three thousand men divided into six battelles of broad front ordered to
fight, as by the figure followinge yove see, the front of each battle is 41.
and flank 12. and 8. remaininge in the divisions of each battallon.


Several opiniones are for the divisiones and orderinge of the fiery weapon,
some use wings of 200. some 300. shot, but in my opinion it were far better
to divide them into small troops of 50.60.70. and so till a 100. for by
experience i know the same to by of for greater execusion in ocasiones of
service, and more ready either in plain straighte or narowe places, for the
more troops of shot yove have being prudently ordered and conducted, the
more shall the enemy by a plied, the one orderly secondinge the other, which
questionless their execution shall by far greater then if they were divided
into great troops. When yove shall come to any narowe or straighte pasadges,
consider whether the straighte by such as will suffice that yove may pass
trough the same with the order yove march, if not conform the order with the
pasadge, and let the order not by so broad in front but that it may
convenientely march without breakinge order or array, nor lesher then the
third part of the front of the battle of pikes, if the situation so permit;
for cause thatt all prevensiones posible to be had for the brief framinge of
battelles are to by more esteemed, rather then fall abreakinge often times
order and array, as very many unable Sardgente mayores commonly do, but rather
prudently with grace and brevitie, and without any crossinge or confusion or
breakinge of any rank fall into battle, thies and many more dificulties are
with facility reduced into their just perfection by prudente and brave
conductores, and with grace and brevitie.

The rule to frame triangle battelles is to bigin with one man in the first
rank, 3. in the second, 5. in the third, seven in the fourth, and so
consequenty augmentinge 2 in every rank until you finish your battle, this
unused proporsion i put down to content those which would feign know the
form of such battelles, and bisides that a Sardgente mayor ought not to by
ingnorante in any manner of form or proporsiones of squadrones, and that with
facility and speed he may change the form and proporsion, as time ocasion
and situasion shall require, and that bisides ocasion may offer that situasion
should present fit for such forms, so that a Sargente mayor ought not to
by ingnorante in no form of squadrones.

Front.


^

A Battle of broad square of 6000. men of the which ^ 1930. are complet
corseletes and 4070. musketeers, ordered and divided as folowethe: first take
the propounded number of pikes which is 1930. this number divide be 3 the
quotiente whereof will by 643. out of this quotiente take the square root
which will by 25. which is the flank of the battle of pikes. That don to
find out the front of the battle take the propounded number of pikes, and
divide the same by 25 the flank; which quotient will by 76. and 30. pikes
remaininge, and say that 76. is the front and 25. the flank of the battle of
pikes, and that the 30. pikes shall be to guarnishe the coulores, now for the
division of the 4070. musketes put in case that yove would have the battle to
be proporsionally lined every way with shot, consideringe that five shot is
the most that can be conveniently defended under the shelter or defense of the
pike, and say that yove will have the battle to by guarnished with five
musketes in rank, to wourke the which take 27. the flank comprehended: the
two ranks of the coulores and say that the first division of shot is 27.
ranks of five musketes in each rank which is the girdelinge shot of the
right flank and just so many for the linenge of the liefte flank, now to
find out the shot that shall guarnishe the full front of the battle of
pikes and the two linenges, take 10. the linenges of the two flanks, and ad it
to 76. the front which two aditiones makethe 86. and say that the guarnision
of shot of the front of the battle of pikes, and two linenges shall march
with 86. ranks of five musketes in each rank; now for the linenge shot of
the rerewarde of the battle of pikes observe the self same order meaning 86.
ranks of five musketes in each rank, so the two flanks, front, and
rerwarde of the battle of pikes is proportionally lined which 4. divisiones ^
of shot makethe 1130 musketes now for the division of the rest of the shot
substracte 1130. the 4 lininges out of 4070. musketes the principal some, and
there shall rest 2940. musketes which can not come under the shelter nor
defense of the pikes, which i divide into 40. maniples of 74. musketes in
each maniple, exepte one troop that conteines but 54. musketes which i
divide on the flanks of the battle of pikes to skirmishe in singell or double
fiele as time, ocasion, and disposition of the ground shall permit, so all
your shot are divided as before set down, and as by the divisiones, and
figure folowinge ordered, and how out of there march they fall into squadron
advertisinge that the coulores shall march in the center and midele maniple of
pikes, and the 30. pikes that remainethe for to guarnishe the coulors shall
also march in the same maniple all which divisiones are plainly ordered as by
the figure folowinge yove may see, who out of there march they fall into
battle with grace and brevity, in observinge the divisiones ordained when of
a sudden yove would have the pikes out of there march to fall with grace
and brevity into battle, cause the first division of pikes to march with
25. ranks of 16. pikes in each rank, then another maniple of 25. ranks of
15 pikes in each rank then another maniple with the self same order with
the coulores in the center guarnished with the 30. pikes that did remain,
after the maniple of the coulors shall march two other maniples of 15. ranks
of 5. pikes in each rank as hire folowe^ge yove shall see.

The first division of pikes is divided into 25. ranks of 16. pikes in each
rank makes. 400 pikes. The second division of pikes is divided into 25.
ranks of 15. pikes in each rank which shall follow the first monted. 375
pikes. The third division in which center the coulores are to march is
divided into 25. ranks of 15. pikes in each rank and does contain in all
the some of. 375 pikes. The fourth division and maniple of pikes is divided
into 25. ranks of 15. pikes in each rank which does contain. 375 pikes.
The fifthe and last division also. 375 pikes. And 30. pikes that did remain
for the colors. 30 pikes. 1930 pikes.

FOr the framinge of batteles bastard square which ^ the Spaniarde and
Italian call prolongado, that is to say long in flank, the rule which is
used for the framinge of these sorts of batteles is the self same of the
broad square, and the diference is, that the front of the one is flank of
the other, as for example supose yove would have abattell bastard square to
be framed of 700. pikes. To wourke the which, do as yove did in framinge the
batteles of broad front, in dividinge the said number of 700. pikes by 3 the
quotiente whereof will be 233. out of which quotiente take the square root
which will by 15. which is the front of the bastard square, now to find
the flank take 700. the propounded number of pikes, and divide the same by 15.
the front, the quotient whereof will by 46. the flank of the bastard square,
and restethe 10. pikes. And if of this self same number of 700. pikes yove
would frame asquadron of broad square the flank of the bastard square will
by the front of the broad square, so that the rule which is used for the one
will serve for the other. The diference is that the front of the one will serve
for the flank of the other.

A SQUADRON OF BROAD FRONT. FRONT OF THE BATTLE.


^

Table of the Battle.

25 ranks of 16 pikes. 400 pikes. 25 ranks of 15 pikes. 375 pikes. 25 ranks
of 15 pikes. 375 pikes. 25 ranks of 15 pikes. 375 pikes. 25 ranks of 15
pikes. 375 pikes. Pikes remaininge 30 pikes. 1930 pik.

27 ranks of 5 musketes. 135 musketes. 27 ranks of 5 musketes. 135 musketes.
86 ranks of 5. musketes. 430 musketes. 86 ranks of 5 musketes. 430 musetes.
50 troops conteininge 2940 musketes. 4070 musk.

Advertisinge that the 20 musketes for the lininge shot of the culoures are
comprehended in the divisiones of the lininge shot of the two flanks; which 20
muskees were cut of the last troop on the liefte flank, which troop
remains with 54 musketes, and all the rest 74 musketes.

No soldier (i hope) ought to be ingnorante but that the squadron of pikes
being framed, it is to be empaled and girdeled with shot as many ranks of
shot as pikes. But the right and natural girdelinge shot indeed ought to
be no more shot in rank, then that the pike may well cover and defend,
espesially where the enemy are strong of horse, and so under the favor of the
pike, there can not conveniently be defended but one rank of three or four
shot at the most, and so many in my opinion shoule the girdelinge shot
contain and knelinge upon one knee under the coverte of the couched pikes,
should at the charginge of the horsemen discharge there voley in there face,
and bosom; which would be no small gallinge unto them, butt when this danger
of horse is not to by feared, then the impalement may be made of more shot in a
rank, acordinge to the quantity of shot, and the rest of the shot into
small slives or troops to troop round about the battle in reasonable
distance from the same, the which divisiones of small troops, i esteem to be
far better then the great inproportionate wings, which many do use,
containinge far greater numberes, and are much more ready to be brought to
skirmishe either in single or double fiele, and every several troop to be led
by a Sargente or Corporal, and some Captains to oversee the whole, and at
every angle of the battle it were not a miss to a point certain troops of
shot, which would flanker itt every way even as the Cavallero or Travessos
do the curtine of a forte.

Let none be ingnorante but that for the several divisiones of pikes and shot
is required great considerationes, as time, occasion, and situation shall
require; continual application in the theoricke and practicke of war together
with perfection in arithmeticke makethe easy many difficulties of deep
judgment, and rare importance in warlike affairs, all which continual use
and exercice make the easy, for the several divisiones of shot many
considerationes are to be had acordinge as occasion shall require, and the
situation and disposition of ground shall permit, for the girdelinge shot
some use three some 4. and five is the most that can conveniently be defended
under the shelter or defense of the pike, and specially when the enemy are
strong on horse, so that for the right guarnision of shot ought not to be
more then the pike can defend, but in such occasiones as the enemy is not to
be feared on horse the divisiones of shot can be ordered of greater numberes to
skirmishe, acordinge to the judgment of the Sardgente mayor, dividinge them
in wings or maniples, as he shall think most conveniente, observinge their
just proportion in their divisiones, some use great wings of shot, which
are not comendable in occasiones of fight, for the small troops are more apt
and easieste to by governed, and of a sudden you can skirmishe with them
either in single or double fiele, and that bisides they bring more men to
fight at once, but when the enemy are superior on horse, and we feowe or none
it is good to get the 4. frontes of the battle of equal resistance both to
offend and defend, so that the enemy may not take advantage of one place more
then of the other. The wings or maniples of shot are not to go any great
distance from the battle of pikes; and specially when the enemy are strong on
horse, but rather under the shelter, and defense of the pikes, that thereby the
squadron may by the stronger and more safe in receiuynge any damage when their
force is united in one boddy as happened to don Alvaro de Sandy in the journey
of caruan in barbery when the exercito of Ciderfa King of the moors charged
on him, one of his Captains named Luis Bravo de Laguna saying a winge of shot
a good distance from the squadro^ cried on don Alvaro wishinge him with speed
to turn and receive that winge for freare that for loosinge the same he
should incur danger to loose the body, by daily experience we see that small
numberes do repulse far greater, and that the army which is best ordered,
and disciplined most commonly is master of the victory, whereof there are very
many examples in writing of famous and antiente auctores, so that these
happy proceedinges resulte of the good order, prudence, and approoved
experience of the chief and brave Comaunderes and of the resolute valor of the
Souldieres, as Vegetio de re militari give the reason how the antiente Romans
came to Master all other Nationes, saying that they were not so great as the
Germans, nor so great in number as the Frence, nor so prudente as the
Greeckes, nor so many in number as the Spanardes nor so subtle as the
Africanes, nor so furiouse as the Britanes, butt by their continual practice
and experience in war they overcomed al these difficulties, by only
mantayinge there people well exercised in arms and practice of war, when a
regimente does march some times great disorderes are comited, the Souldieres
runinge away from there culoures, robinge and spoylinge the country, and poor
inhabitants little regardinge in not acomplishinge there obligationes, in
being absent from there culoures; little respectinge or fearninge there
Officeres, and no respect to military discipline, whereof resulteth great
ruins and revoltes in many countries, some superiore and inferiore Officeres,
are culpable in thiese intolerable disorderes offencive to the laws of god and
common wealth in not procuringe, sollicitinge and daily instructinge their
Souldieres as a father is bound to do for his children, and that as far as
his ability and power can reach, and not to be inclined to steal or wrong the
poor Soldier, in keepinge any thing wrongefully from him, but rather
sheowinge him self very, lovinge and kind to them.

In equalinge him self in all dangeres and travayles with them, in
continually, givinge them good instructiones, and comfortinge them in all
necessities, yea and in assistinge them to his ability, in ministringe equity
and good justice a mongste them, in honoringe and preferenge those of brave
carriage, and good examples, that otheres may imitate the^, in redresinge in
due time disorderes, in saying severely punished factioneres wholly given to
vice and bad examples; which are more dangerouse then the devil, so shall he
both by beloved and feared by the Souldieres, in knowinge that he is careful
in ministringe and procuringe justice to each one acordinge his deserte, and
specially to se base factioneres banished, and severly punished, when there is
no hope of there amendmente.

In occasiones of marchinge the Sardgent mayor is to take a special care to
procure all things to be in a readiness to bigin his jurney very early that
the Souldieres may come in good time to their quarter for many considerationes
to their comodity and ease, and in their march not to opress them, but keep
an ordinary pace, for otherwise very many shall stay behind: To make al to
now, and then where he shall hit upon good water, and he ought to have
aregarde in pasinge narowe pasadges, and make alto a distance of till they all
have paste and fall into there former divisiones and ranks, a Sardgente ought
to be leifte in each division of the Regimente, that he may yealde acompte of
them at all times, and observe the order as it was ordained by the Sargente
mayor, with so many ranks and the self number, so that with facility out of
there march they may fall into squadron, when occasion shall require, and
such a Sardgente or Sardgentes as troughe negligence shall not acomplish his
obligation, to reprehende him in public. In time of the Romans such as were
inclined to disobedience in not acomplishinge there order and obligation, they
were so severly punished, that no Soldier durst by absente from his rank,
and the Sardgentes and Officeres of each division of their marchinges had
such care in acomplishinge whate was referred to there charge with such
punctuality, that full satisfaction was yealded.

In extraordinary heat weather in somer when the Sardgente mayor marchethe
with his Regimente great consideration ought to be taken as before spoken
of, by cause of the extraordinary heat, and heavy burden of the Soldier, some
times they are chockte, and burned with heat, and for shame, and regard of
there honor they rather try danger of death then stay behind there culoures.

When the Sardgente mayor shall march with his Regimente in any place or
contry where the enemy is to be feared the divisiones ought not to by greater
then that they may comodiously march, nor less the^ the third part of the
squadro^ of pikes, some times with the one haulfe, and some times in battle,
always takeng regard ofthe situation and occasion.

The Master de camp in marchinge with his Regimente as chief of the same is
to march in the vangarde next to whose person is to assiste the Sardgente
mayor as a principal minister to whom he deliveres the orderes of his
Regimente, but if the enemy should chance to charge on the reregarde he as a
chief conductor of his Regimente is to assiste in the place most to be feared
of the enemy, to comaunde and execute in due time whate is most fit.

The Sardgente mayor being in campiana, and being informed that his Regimente
is to march the next morrow, he is to repair to the Captain general of
whom he is to demand order where his Regimente shall march in the vangarde
battle of reregarde, and he is to advertice, and give order to the Captain de
campania to get all the bagadge charged upon the a poincted hour ordained,
and not to fail in acomplshinge the same, and if the vangarde belonges to him
he is to comaunde the Captain de campania to get all things in a redineshe at
the break of day, and to give order that the culoures and companies of his
Regime^te, with speed draw out of the quarter, and to march on to the
place of arms, and there to frame his squadron, givinge order to each
Captain, where he shall march that day, and divide the Sargentes and sheowe
each one his division, and givinge the^ straighte charge that they acomplishe
there obligation with care and punctuality, and that no Soldier do miss his
rank, nor break the order given, if the narownes of the pasadge do not
constrain him, and let no Soldier pass to spoil the poor inhabitants, and
if he want any Soldier of those of his division, or if any come unto them
more then the order given to adverice the Sardgent mayor, and for recompense of
his punctualitie and care in acomplishinge his obligation he shall gain the
benevolence of his Master de camp and Sardgent mayor, and in reason they
ought to have a memory of his punctual care, and to prefer him into a greater
office for his obedience and punctuallitie a monghste other Sardgentes, and not
once nor twice but still making known his aproved parts, care and diligence
in acomplishinge the orderes of his Superiores, so can he not by forgotten by
the superior officers till he by adva^ced for his undeniable care and obedience.

Most necessary it is for a Sargent mayor to be couriouse and expert in
executinge well his office, for in time of framinge of squadrones the Judges of
his errores are many, in time of framinge of squadrones, some Sardge^ts mayores
do fall into many errores, by reason of there little exercice, and specially for
not applie^ge them selves with care and diligence both in the theorike and
practike of this art, and specially to by skillful in Arithmeticke, which
with practice makethe easy many rare occurrantes in warrlike affairs, and
such as are not curiouse in well appleinge them selves in learning the rare
and deep curiosities of this art do some times find them selves pusled and
amassed before there enemy in time of most need: A most unfitinge thing it
is for one to be ingnorante and unhabele in his office, so i supose that such
as do not diligently apply them selves, can hardly reduce into perfection that,
whereof he is ingnorante and knowethe not the art, by daily experience, we see
that favor* frendshipp, enteres, and affection, hinderethe much prosperity and
good successes, and specially in this noble art of war.

Many opiniones there are for the divisiones of shot, and specially when the
enemy are strong on horse, and that you have two third parts of shot, unto
one of pikes, your battle being empaled and girdeled proportionally with
shot, there will yett remain good store of shot. The question is how they
shall be bestowed to be safe from the fury of the horse, the sureste and best
way is to put them into the center of the battle of pikes, where they are more
safe, and if any shot be killed or hurt you can take at all times out of
the center as many as you shall need of.

For the framinge of thiese battelles with centeres i have already declared
how they ought to be framed, and proporsionolly lined, and if the enemy horse
should chance of a sudden to chardge on yove, and that you have no time to
place the overplusse of your shot in the center divide them betwixt the
ranks of pikes all alongste from the front to the rear ward, so they shall
by safe and yove can use them at any time when ocasion shall require, but
havinge inteligence that the enemy are strong in horse, and we feowe or none
in such ocasiones i woule first bigin in framinge the cener of the overplusse
of the shot, havinge opportunity for the same, and also leave place for
hurtemen in the ce^ter and divide them into so many maniples that they may of a
sudden fall into squadron square of men in the center, without any crossinge
alue^ge there just front and flank and then divide the pikes into maniples
to proportionally guarnishe the center on every side or front of the same, and
then divide in proportion the girdlinge shot that is left to guarnish the 4
frontes of the battle of pikes, and center, this is the perfect and right
way, but when urgent necessity requires the overplusse of shot may be plased
and divided betwexte the ranks of pikes as before set down, advertisinge
that the coulores is to go in the center.

As the battle does march on toward the enemy and cominge once within
reach of the musket then the first ranks of the wings of musketes are to
march in this manner; the first ranks steppinge some two or three paces,
forward havinge in the mean time made them selves ready, and cocked there
matches, then with readiness and expedition all those of the first ranks
(there musketes byenge upon there restes or forkes) to discharge at once,
permitenge other ranks to proceed, then presently those of the second rank
to stepe upp before the first rank, as the battle or batallon do march, and
so to discharge as their former follows had don before, and then the third
rank before the second, and the four. the before the third, and so all the
other ranks consequently with this kind of double march and at the train
of the last rank those of the first to follow upp a gain, and so
consequently the rest. But if chance that the squadron of pikes be distresed,
or constrained to retire, they are to discharge at the enemy, retiring back
upon a counter march each feel or rank, consequently, and with expedition
one after a another, and with speed fall bake into there rank, to give place
to the next ranks, that no time be idell, employed.

Sundry opiniones there are of comparisones betwext the Infantery, and
Cavallery, which of them is most utill in the wars, the one and the other
are most necessary in occurantes of warlicke affairs, but in my opinion the
Infantery is to be preferred first being well disciplined in the art of war,
never the less the cavalleria being well monted and armed and being
experimente, souldieres, being conducted by prudent and brave conductores
douptlesse their executiones and resolution is to be feared, but they are not
comparable to deal, with resolute foot, except upon manifest and great
advantages and in place or ground of great favor for them. For being well
known that a resolute stand of pikes well ordered, and girdeled with shot,
will give them sore stoppes, and retournes as plainly apeered when Marquis de
Pescara with 800 short aptayned the victory of Charles de noy then Visroy of
Napoles, with his Cavallery at the battle of Pavia, a another example we have
of the Conte Francisco Carmognolla, being Captain general of Filip Viconte
Duke of Millanes army, goinge with 6000. horse a gainste the Swisheres army,
was by them repulsed by the valeure, and lenghte of there pikes, who havinge
regathered this disordered troops, consideringe from whence there disadvantage
greowe, turned head again upon the enemy: and he him self and his companies
disamounted on foot, and with there lances in hand framed afoote squadron,
and charged the enemy afresh, and brake and overthrewe them in number above
fifteen thousand when by force of horse could not by removed, imitatinge
herin Marcus, Valerius, Cornelius, who being consul and Captain against the
samnites in the first punny wars, and in their last battle not able to
enter upon them by reason of there long pikes where with they defended them
selves, commanded his horsemen to disamounte, and on foot they arived as they
were with there lances, to fight with there enemy, and over threw them and
putt them to flighte optaininge the victory, and remayninge with there
baggadge, and in the battle given by Constantine Roxianus Captain general to
Sigismund King of Polonia with Basilius the great Duke of Moscovia by the
river Brisva, who surmounted him on horse back, three thousand foot men;
only, he had in his army, won him that day the honor and victory, also as did
apeere by the memorable batteles of the Inglishe against the provde cavallery
of the frence at agincourte field and other places, many more examples might
be recited both ancient and modern, remembringe that among the antiente
Romans there foot was always of more estimation then there horse, always
houldinge a true opinion, that the Infanterie well disciplined is the right
sinue of the war, the walls of the city and fortress of the realm.

I have heard say that in thies wars of the netherlande after that the grand
Comendador died that Don Alvaro de Vergas, who at that time commanded the
Spanish Cavallerie, did great exploictes in encounteres, he had with the
states foot and horse, but it must by considered that those were oulde and
experimented Soldiers, restenge upon a resolute and valerouse determination.

The otheres for the most patre Bisones, and raw people raised upon a
sudden conceipte, in which actiones is marvelouse to be marked the diference
between men of experience, and raw Bisones the prudent cariadge, resolute
valor and good conduction of the one, and little practice, and experience of
the otheres, as did apeere in the reincounter at tilmonte, and at the
souckeringe of monts-dog being Taken by them of Mastricke, and most notable
in the sack of Antwerpe where less then with the number of 5000. Spaniards
enclosed within the sitadel gave the overthrowe and foil unto 16000 of the
Anturpianes. Bravely armed and encamped within their own town. In like sort
at the overthrowe of Gibleo where not above 600. horse, of don John de Austria
his troops defeated above 15000 of the states, (most strange and wonderful)
only for want of good conductores and the enemy spyinge these advantages
resultinge of there simple conduction found them selves amassed.

And for as much as i have spoken much of this office, i will conclude in
saying that he ought now and then to visit and revisite at diveres and
differente hours all things by him provided and a pointed, and see that they
be prudently ordered and performed, reprehendinge whate he shall find wourdie
of punishmente, but that to be don prudently and in curtouse sort, and
presentinge good reasones with amiable and gentle wourdes, with gravitie and
natural grace, and not with puffinge inconciderate pride and bad examples, so
shall he by obeyed in such sort that when he would determine to execute his
designs and orderes of his superior comaunderes, all officeres and souldieres
might bear him that due respect and obedience, which should by required to
bring his purpose to effect, and let not griddy covetousness overcome him in
wronginge or permitinge to by wronged the pour souldieres of their right,
and specially in time of extreme necessity, but rather make known his gentle
inclinationes and true love, so shall he by beloved feared and respected.

Let him not by inclined to any odiouse rancor nor malice in waitinge
opportunity of revenge of some wourdes or disputes, which hapened betwexte
him, and some Officeres or Souldieres of his Regimente for defindinge their
honor and right, and findinge that he be so inclined is sign of aloe
unconsiderate and base mind. All Officeres and Souldieres of his Regimense
ought to have a special care in not loosinge him his due respect, and such
as do not a complish with their obligationes hirein are right wourthy of
reprehension, so all things don with moderation and justice is laudable.

An army of 11200. men divided into five batteles Square ^ of ground ordered
to fight, as by the figures folowinge you see. The front of each battle is
72 and 31. the flank, and 8. remaininge out of the division of each battle;
each battle contains 2240.

The army divided into five battelles.
SQUARE OF GROVNDE, by the rule of proportion.


The saiede army of 11200. divided into seven battelles. Square of ground,
each battle shall contain 1600. and the front of each battle is 61. and
flank 26. and 14. pikes remaininge out of each battle to guarnish the
culoures, the which 7. battelles are ordered as by the figure folowinge you
see. -- 1600. men in each battle.

^

The army divided into 7. battelles.
SQVARE OF GROVNDE, By the rule of proportion.


A Battle square of men, with a center of Arcabuseros, which can not by
defended under the shelter of the couched pike, when the enemy do a bound on
horse, and we feowe or none, in such ocasiones the sureste way for the
overpluse of shot is to by putt into the center, and proportionally guarnised
with the pikes and musketes, as by the figure folowinge you see, and how they
are divided by the rule of proportion.

276 Arcabuses. 360 Pikes. 364 musketes. 1000.


^

Table of the battle and center of Arcabuseros deposito.
BY the division of the center of Arcabuseros the square route of the same
number yealdeth 16. Arcabuses in front and flank of the center, and 20.
remaininge out of the division, monteth 256 arcab. The first division of
pikes that guarnisheth the right flank of the center, divided into 16. ranks
of 5. pikes in each, monteth 80 pikes. The second division of p. that
guarnisheth the liefte fla^ke of the center divided into 16. r. of 4. p. in
each. 64 pikes. The third division that guarnisheth the full front, and the
two linenges of the center is divided into 25. ranks of 5. pikes in each
rank, monteth 125 pikes. The fourth division of pikes that guarnisheth the
full front of the re^warde is divided into 25. rank of 4. pikes in each
rank, monteth 100 pikes. The lining of musk. that guarnisheth the right flank
of the pikes is divided into 25. r. of 3. m. in each. 75 musk. The second
lining of mus. that guarnisheth the liefte flank of the p. divided into 25. r.
of 3. m. in each. 75 musk. The third division of musketse that guarnisheth the
full front of the pikes and center, is divided into 31. ranks of 3. musketes
in each rank. 53 musk. The fourth division of musketes that guarnisheth the
re^warde of the pikes and center is divided into 31. ranks of 3. musketes in
each rank, monteth 93 musk. The remainder of musketes, that do guarnish the
culoures. 8 musk. Of the 20. arcabuseres, that did remain goes to guarnish the
culoures. 4 arcab. The 11. pikes that did remain out of the division of pikes
are employed to guarnish the culours. 11 pikes. Of the remainder of arcabuseros
their remains out of the battle. 16 arcab. 1000.

The election and office of a Master de Camp of a Regimente of Infanterie.
THe office of the Master de camp of a Regimente of Infanterie is an office of
great reputation, which by all reason ought to be recomended to one of great
prudence, brave conduction, and skillfull in martial affairs, for being the
head, leader, and ordinary justice af all the Companies a pointed under his
chardge.

He be all reason ought to by one of great consideration, because that by him
are all the orderes, and necessary prevensiones for the general good and
utilititie of his regiment delivered to the Sargente mayor, also to the
Captains, Souldieres, and other Officeres of his Regimente, as also to all
sort of people, which do follow and depend on the same: To him apertaineth
the ministringe of justice, and reprehendinge of faults, and unrulie factes
committed in his Regimente, in such places, as his Master de camp, General,
or Captain general, are not in presence, to whom he is to present many
matteres which do ocurr, Which by right in such places as they are present
must govern all.

But as an ordinary justice the Master de camp is to by comunicated withal,
in all matteres which ocurr in his Regimente; the examinationes of thies
causes are to be taken, and examined by his Author, and if occasiones of
appellation should represente they are to be remitted to the camp master
general.

This election of a Master de camp, or Coronell is made by the Prince, with
the advice of his Counsel of state and war; And in this election great
consideration ought to be taken. For being such an honorable chardge of
high degree; as chieftaine or head above all the Captains, and other
Officeres of his Regimente, havinge dominion and jurisdiction over them all: By
which may by perceived the high dingnitie and degree of such a person, and
the a proved parts brave conduction, valeoure, and good examples, which of
him is to be expected, (to the end that the Captains may imitate his prudente
perfection and brave govermente.) In such places where the Captains of his
Regimente do assiste with him, of all occurrances and occasiones of war they
are to advertice their Master de ca^pe, and if any Officer or Soldier by a
prehended, for faults committed, they can not by put at liberty, without the
Master de camps order, being in his jurisdiction.

In time of the Romans Polybe writes that this name we call Colonel or
Master de camp was then cauled Tribunus, and they cauled Legion, of that
which we call a Regimente, their legion was of 4200 foot men, which they
divided into 10. parts, as if it were betwexte 10. Captains, each division
they cauled Cohortes, which we call a Company, each legion had 300. horse,
their Captains Cinturiones, some of 150. and some of 200. Otheres were
Centenarios, which had but 100. men. For the ministringe of equity and
justice, and reprehendinge of faults and disorderes, and that military
discipline may by duly, observed with infalible punctualitie; he is to choice
an Auditor of a man well learned and of good judgment, with his Clearke and
Augusill, which are used a monghste the Spanish and Italian Regimentes, to
take informationes of such injuries, and disorderes as are committed, this
Auditor is to give the sentence, but no authority to execute the same,
without consultinge first with the Master de camp, and getinge his firm to
the sentence, for other wise he has no authority to execute nor dispatche the
same, the Agusill serves to assiste the executiones of the Auditores a faires,
and also to by employed, and solicit many other things, that do pass
trough the Auditor is hands.

For making or dividinge of quarteres marchinge in campaina or garrison, he is
to get a skillfull Quartermaster able in readinge and writing, and specially
perfect in Arithmeticke, for to him apertaineth, the receavinge of all sorts
of amunitiones and arms given, and delivered by the Prince, but the
distributinge of the same belongs to the Sarge^t mayor, to see that all
things by duly and equally distributed. Of al sorts of amunitiones received
of the King, the furiell mayor is to yealde a co^pte, when it is sought for,
for bienge his office and duty. The furielles of the Companies are to assiste
him in all occasiones in marchinge, and to receive their orderes from the
furiell mayor, and he from the Quartermaster general; and the from the
general. Great care ought to be taken in saying that the Sutleres be well
provided with all necessaries, and to see that they by well paiede; A special
care ought to by taken that they do not deceive the Souldieres with faulce
weighte and measure, nor nothing above the price ordained by the Master de
camp.

It is necessary that the Sutleres and Marchantes, which do follow the
Regimente, that they be well guarded, that their vituales and wares may depend
upon good security, for thies affairs the Captain de campaina and his
Leuetenante ought with care to assiste in executinge his duty and office.

In occasiones of marchinge he and his teniente and men are to by very
vigilante and careful, in not permitenge the Sutleres nor their boys to
stragle, or fall a spoylinge the country and poor inhabitances, nor to take
perforce any thing that comes to by soulde in the camp, as also to have a
special care to let no Souldieres pass, causinge them to fall into their
ranks, rather then to be permited to run straglinge and spoylinge the
country; And such as are found gilthi in breakinge the proclamation to see
them presently executed. So being earneste and careful in thies affairs
shall he oblidge all such Souldieres as are inclined to minester good justice
and examples, and esteemed for a true father and brave conductor. A necessary
thing it is also to have a good Doctor of Physic well learned and of long
practice, as also a Surdgente mayor one well known to have had long practice
in handelinge of wounds and other disceaces, such a one chosen by favor or
affection (and not havinge the parts befitinge) causes the death of many
Souldieres trough his little skill, to the disgrace of him that made choice of
such a one.

Very necessary it were that in his Regimente do assiste a Chaplen mayor,
and preacher to over see all the Chaplenes, that all things touching there
obligationes, may by observed and ministered in due time, givinge good
examples, and still assistinge with gravitie and vertueuse cariadge, also to
be careful that the Captains of his Regimente give good examples for it
imports for many respects.

In the election of a Drom mayor he is to by very well informed that he be one
of good fufficiencie, for being an instrumente very necessary in war, who
is to instruct, and give good examples to all the Dromes of the Regimente,
which being chosen of one who has the good parts and sufficiency in him
required, is an instrumente of great importance in a Regimente, and specially
to the Sardgente mayor, in carieng orderes, and beatinge of the proclamationes,
he is to by skillfull in beating the drom, or at least in understanding all
sort of marchinges, to beat an a larme, a call, a retire, a disafie, a
battle, to know who to carry him self very discret in carienge any mesadge
to a camp, town, city, or castle, and know how discretly to deliver his
mesadge, and answer many demaundes, as also in understandinge, and well
relatinge his answer, and to inform him self in as much as he may posible of
whate occurreth, if he be permited in taking a view of the walls ditches,
and if the ditches be dry or with water, and who deep, and whate place or
places of the walls or fosses may by won with moreease, as also of the
necessity or plintie of vituales, if by fair means he may spy the same out
it is necessary that he speaks many languadges, to beat afuriouse a larme,
and battle when ocasion shall require, as also a presumed retire. A
necessary thing not to be permited (but rather defended) that no officer nor
souldior by given to winchinge, and that for many good respects, but some
public woomen are wont to be permited in each company, some three or four
for a 100 men, which are to be in a separated quarter, and specially if in
garrison let them be in as secret and as hidden a place as can by posible, for
by reason it imports to honest men and negboures, and the cause why this is
permited and tolerated, is to shun greater danger: In the oulde laws or
statutes six or eighte woomen were a lued for every 100, men, to thies is
wont to be given lodginges and service as to the souldieres, all which is
thought profitable to the negboures, that the lesh suspision and ocasion of
scandal may by of their shisteres wifes and children, and for many respects
it ought not to by permited that a ny soldier do sleep with thies woomen
out of his quarter upon pain of severe punishmente, also such weemen as
do not observe thies constitusiones to punish her in the purse, which will
grive her most, for this business is wont one to by a pointed to ouersee if
thies laws by observed or no. For it imports much the souldiores health,
where fore the barber mayor is wont to uisitt now and then. The Captain de
campana is to tak aspeciall care to see that thies orderes by duly observed.

The Master de camp is to be earneste in informinge him self well of his
regimente, as well of secret as of public matteres, that he may prevente and
remedy in due time all, and cause to be severely punished such as do break
the proclamationes by him commanded, and such as are inclined to base factes,
as theives, quarleres, dishoneste dronkardes and base mutineres, of little
pascience and lesh honor, of no discression, fear, nor love, nyther of god
nor of their prince, such base fellows are to by severelie punished in
public, and to by driven a way like men tatched with uglie crimes, unwourdie
to equal themselves with brave souldiores, of honest life, full of patience,
obedience, fear and good examples; of which persons, the master de camp
Sardgente mayor, and Captains, are to take notice, and have a special care in
honoringe and preferinge them, sheowinge them a fair and lovinge countenance,
and givinge them great hope of avancemente, and let trial of time and
ocasiones verify the same with deeds, which shall by a great comfort to
such as are inclined to virtue, and great grief to those given to vices and
unrulie factes and bad exemples, which ought to a mende their lives, and
imitate the steps of those of honest life, prudente and vertuse cariadge,
full of love, fear and obedience, given to continual good applicationes,
shuninge idelnes and bad company, which of right ought, by there Superiores
to by highly estimed, (whereunto they are bound in conscience) For the
security of ocasiones in marchinge and in preventinge of sudden and
unprovided incursiones, ambuscados, and stratagemes of the enemy: A necessary
thing it were to imitate the Romans, in a luenge fiftine horses to every
100 foot, so that in many plases in marchinge where their may by any
suspicion of the enemy, the Master de camp, then should a point a conductor
to lead and govern thies horsemen, and in offeringe time or occasion, to
divide them into as many parts, as the occasion shall require, (apointinge a
leader for each division) and for the intertainemente of thies horsemen they
should enjoy so much means as other horsemen; so that in ocasiones of
marchinge, the Infanterie may go with far greater security, being divided
into three or four parts, to recnoledge the places of most suspicion of
ambuish, and other secret stratagemes of the enemy, which being recnoledged
and discovered, necessary prevention may by taken in due time, thies men may
serve both for horse and foot acordinge as ocasion shall require: Of each
division or part of thies horse it is necessary to name a Comaunder or
leader, who shall take care to govern them, forbidinge and comaundinge that by
no means they lend thies horses, but get them always ready to by employed,
when or where occasion shall require. Thies horses may serve for many good
purposes, in pasinge the Infanterie over riveres, in recnoledginge pasadges, as
also in cominge in possession of pasadges, which being feared that the enemy
should come to posess the same before ours.

The End of the first Book.
TO l^che is to say the measuringe of the ground required for to lodge a com^
foot and 8. foot for the street betwext every 2. feiles and plasinge the
doors front of his company, which is 24. foot broad, and the deepnes he
shall best ^^r persons as do provide the company withdraw victualles, and other
necessaries, of some souldiores. The lodginge of the Master de Camp in the
rergarde of his ^oote broad and 15. foot deep or in the flank, and if it
chance that the foot and (...)



^O lodge acompany of Infantery in campain^a, and the measuringe of the due
distance, and place required and observed by the Roman Castrametasio, which
is to say the measuringe of the ground required for to lodge a company of
foot conteyninge 100. men, Is ordained 2. feiles of barackes, and in each
feile 200. stepes deep, and broad inthe front of each feile 8. foot and 8.
foot for the street betwext every 2. feiles and plasinge ^oores of the
barakes toward the street. The Captains lodginge in the head of his quarter
in quadrangell manner, occupienge so much ground as the full front of his
company, which is 24. foot broad, and the deepnes he (...) best think,
and a distance of 10 or 20. foot betvvexte him and his company, and in the
rergarde, and behind all is to lodge the sutleres and such other persons as
do provide the company withdraw victualles, and other ne^ries, where also the
soildores are to kooke their vituales for fear of firinge the quarter as some
times it happens troughe little care fear, and discipline of some souldiores.
The lodginge of the Master de Camp in the rergarhis (...) his quarter by the
great street. The horse also if their should chance be any. Each company
is to be divided into two feiles, alovvinge each feile 12. foot broad and
15. foot deep or in the flank, and if it chance that the (...) and horse do
lodge in one place the Infantery are to be placed and ranked on both flanks
or sides and the horse betvvext them. FRONT OF THE QUARTER.



BY the figure and plat above ordered for the encampinge of an army both of
horse and foot, you see the quantity of ground required for each, with the
due measuringe required both for foot and horse, with their due places and
streets. (And in the most comodiouse place about the middiste of the ground
little more or lesh, where you mean to encampe the army, (marcke asquare plat
of ground of 60. or 70. paces square, for the goals pavilion and place.) And
then shall by lined two straight streets, which shall come to cross one
another, right against the generals place, which are caled the principal
streets, and at the head of every one shall be apoin^ a guard or watch
toward the enemy. And on the out ward parts of all shall by apoincted
gardes of horse, to by prevented against the soddaine exploites and
stratagemes of the enemy. And at every streets end a guard. also other
pasadges, and entries where the enemy are to by suspected are to by fortified
and shutt as behooves, and with vigilante watches for our better security,
and to by prevented against sudden exploites of the enemy, so for the better
repose and security of ours: So that all things by prudentlie prevented in
due time, in as much as military prudence, care, and vigilance requires. Some
houlde opinion that for many respect^^ that the lodges of the Captains should
by plased in the rere of their companies and the Alferishes in the front.

THE SECOND BOOK TREATINGE OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE, COMPOSED BY CAPT. GERAT
BARRY IRISH.
THE FIRST CHAP. Bigininge with the election and office of a Campe-master
general.
THIS Office troughe great consideration is to by commended and bestowed upon
a personadge of great gravitie, prudence, and valeour, and of tried experience
and exercice in war, that thereby he may comaunde with great authority, and
by estimed acordinge his quality and trust; Which ought to by reputed in a
personadge of so many a proved and good parts. This office is of such great
importance, that the security and good success of the whole army dependes for
the most part on him, as a cheefetaine and head over the whole army, and all
the orderes of the King are by him given, and by his comaunde observed. But
when the Captain general is in presence, (all must depend on him) being a
Superior, and next under him the Camp-master general, as Lugarteniente, and
in his absence does comaunde the whole army.

This office with the Romans was of great and high estimation; which they
cauled Metador, he is to be of such extraordinary prudence and care, that not
withstandinge he givethe the necessary orderes, he him self must visit, and
see who all things are ordered, for which he is to have next his person a
rare Inginier for many effects, and for the dividinge of the camp betwexte
the Regimentes, Cavalleria and Artillery, the necessary ground, distance,
and circuide for the same, in dividinge the just proportion of ground due to
several sorts of nationes, in which great consideration ought to by used,
for which purpose he hafe a Quartermaster general, which ought to by
curiouse in thies.

First shall be a pointed the fitteste place for the General, and if their
by any real personadge consideration also is to be taken: This place is to by
chosen for the most a sureste and best, placinge the Cavallerie on the
outewarde side, and the Infanterie on the other side, he being shutt and
inviorened betwexte both. The quarter of the Artillery, and of his court and
train is to be ordained in a sure place, and well guarded round a boute on
every side; Their train of Officeres gastadores wourkmen pertrechos of
sundry sorts of munitiones, ocupies great room: The Cavalleres and
pinsioneres next the general is person, Auditor general, Provoste general,
a Tambor mayor general, and many more folowinge the General, are to be placed
not far from the General, and the Provedor general is also to be placed not
far distance if a conveniente place can be found for his purpose, for he
also requires much room for his amunitiones and wagones. The Infanterie
shall invieron the whole camp, the Ingineres are also to visit all over the
camp, and findinge that water is not plintifull to open pittes in the best
and convenienteste places for the same.

In the ocasiones and repartitiones that shall offer in imployenge the foot
and horse in convoyes to scoute and recnowledge douptefull places and
oecasiones, and to featche foradge, it ought to go by turn, so that each
one shall take his share of the pains and troubles, except only in time of
hot and extraordinary service, for in such ocasiones great considerationes
ought to by had, in choysinge those that are more fit for the purpose, which
shall by employed as it shall by more fit. Great care ought to by taken in
due time to by well provided of all sorts of amunitiones, as also of all
sorts of vituales, and take a special care, that all things be prevented in
due time, that the enemy do not let or hinder your convoyes, nor the
pasadges, where they come with all sort of provision for the camp, and to by
prevented a gainste all stratagemes they can prevente: When the army shall
march, and that their shall by many regimentes of several nationes, in
their divisiones, and in the observinge of good order great care and
industry is required, givinge order that each nation by their turn shall
march in the vangarde, battle, and rergarde, for being so conveniente for
his Majesty's service: If you chance to march troughe an enemy country, or
near unto their frontieres great vigilance, and good order needs to by
observes, it imports also to get good and faithful guides, and diferente
spies of trust, for fear of fraud, as also for to have good inteligence of
the enemies designs in due time.

In such ocasiones needs much to send before some horse in a certain
distance to discover, and learn the plottes and stratagemes of the enemy to
hinder our journey. Havinge had inteligence, and being well informed that the
enemy are waitinge for to hinder you; Cause the Artille^ie to march with
their guard, and draw upp the Infanterie in good order on the other side of
the Artillery betwexte them and the enemy, and the horse also on the
outewarde side of the Infanterie, (and in a good distance of.)

It is necessary to by prevented of the enemies designs, and consider the
situation where you march, so that your divisiones may acordinglie be
ordered, as the situation shall permit and require; In narowe and straighte
pasadges, good order is to by observed, and specially where the enemy is to be
suspected, and that the Sardgentes be very careful in acomplishinge their
obligationes, so that their be no crossinge nor confusion, and such as shall
not keep their ranks to severelie punish them in public, in as much that
they and the behoulderes may take notice of the same, so that in oferinge
ocasion with grace and brevitie they may of a sudden fall into battle. If
inteligenee be had that the enemy be strong on horse in the vangarde or way
where we intend to pass, and that the pasadge where we march be so narowe
that our horse being in the vangarde, and being chardged and broken by the
enemies horse, and that the narownes of the pasadge do not permit that they
may pass on either of the two flanks of the Infantery, and being brocken they
fall on our order, and we incurr great danger if the enemy do follow with
a brave resolution, if their be no remedy that they may pass on either of the
two sides, of force way is to be made for them, and the shot are to come all
on one side of the pasadge, and make way, and the pikes are to be opened on
both sides of the way, in thies ocasiones and many more occurrantes in war
great danger may ocurr, except prevension be prudentlie taken in due time.

In such ocasiones a troop of musketes and arcabuseros are necessary to by
sent in the vangarde, and then five or six ranks of pikes, which with their
front shall ocupie the pasadge, which shall reviwe recnoledge, and advertice
if their by any danger or ambuscado.

After thies the rest shall march in good order as before declared in the
office of the Sardgent mayor; In the rergarde shall the Cavallerie march with
a guard of short and pikes, after which shall march the Cavallerie in order,
and if inteligence be had that in the vangarde, their by any impedimente, or
let that our Artillery can not pass or any part of the army, let their
march a Company of gastadores, with their Captain to acomodate thies
impedimentes, and in case the enemy by suspected, to conducte them for their
better security with a troop of light horse, (together with an Inginier)
with thies gastadores being in quantity, unespected and dificulte matteres
are brought to pass, and sometimes riveres are taken from their moother, and
conducted to other places, as did Ciro King of Percia goinge to beleager
Babilonia he divided the river Gange into 360. parts for the revenge of the
drowninge of a Gentleman a dear frinde of his, so that this mighty river was
left of no force? King Ciro saying it so fe oble said thove haste not
respected nor feared my, but now all thy forces for a revenge, are separated
that a wooman with a child may pass thy over without fear or danger: So the
General of an army is always to consider, that it is of great importance to
have many gastadores, for by their means matteres of great dificulte are
brought to effect with facility, for many hands makes light wourke.

Great industry and many aprooved good parts are required for the rare
executiones of this office of a Master de camp general, of whose prudence and
brave conduction great exspectationes are to by hoped: When he aprocheth near
the place where he thinks to pitch his camp upon, he is to go forward
with a suficiente guard of horse to viwe all the circuide, and he is to be a
companied with one or two Ingineres, to ordain and divide the quarteres; And
when, the army shall inter into the camp or place where they intend to pitch
their quarter' the General of the horse shall remain in the field, he and
all his troops mounted, till all the Infantery be in camped, and then to inter
orderly with his troops, and repair to their quarter, leavinge his scoutes
in the field till the Trumpetes sound, and the watch by set, and the cinteries
placed in their posts, at which time, and when the watches of foot and horse
are set in their due places, they shall retire, and not before, for the better
security of the camp, and that nothing may happen without preventinge in
due time the necessary remedies, or as near as can by posible.

THE SECOND CHAP. The election of the Captain general of the Artillery.
THe office of the general of the Artillery, troughe great considerationes
of his aprooved good parts and suficiencie, is chosen and appointed by the
Prince, consideringe his long and tried experience in war, his gravitie,
prudente and brave conduction, and valerouse acts.

This honorable office of so high dingnitie and trust, in choysinge of his
Officeres and Gentlemen of the Artillery, it imports that he by well
informed that they by men of many good parts, skillfull and curiouse in many
ingines, and to by very careful, and vigilante; For this office of manadginge
of powder in sundry manner of ways is of wounderfull danger, except it by
prudently carefully, and with great vigilance handled, as well simple as
artificial; which be several triales i caused to be tried by several
persons, (and often times) and hardly could i find any of such care and
vigilance for the manadginge, and keepinge of the same as required, for being
the most dangerouse thing that is, or can by handled in war. An enemy who
gives no time nor respect, his treasones are most terrible, speedy, and of
unmercifull executiones, and most comonlie do fall on such as do most trust
in it, in his exeeutiones there is no appellation, nor grace to by expected.

This Office requires many Officeres; First his Leutenante, Mayor Domo,
Contador, Pagador, his ministeres for the examinationes and executiones of
justice, Amunitioneres, Gentelmen of the Artillery, his Ingineres, Masteres of
several sorts of ingines of firewourkes* Canonieres, Masteres of the mine, or
Minadores, Gastadores, or Wourkmen, with their Captains, a Furiell, Smittes,
Tembermen. A great store of tents is required for the saftie of thies
variable sorts of amunitiones and pertrechos, as powder of all sorts, led,
match, and all sorts of bulletes, and in quantity for great and small
ordenance, it is also necessary he be a compained with a curiouse Inginer
curiouse in all sorts of fire-wourkes, necessary for very many exeeutiones,
if one of such aprooved parts can by hit upon, he is also to have Masteres
who hase good skill in making and refininge of powder: When ocasion shall
offer to plant his great ordenance to beleager or batter a town, city or
Castle, his Leutenante, Ingineres, Mine-masteres, and Powder keeperes, and
Gentelmen of the Artillery, are all to by in a readiness to dispose of the
Artillery and amunitiones, when occasion shall offer, that it must by
planted, or sent from one place to a another, and his Leutenante is to get a
relation, who many cannones shall by appointed in each place; and consider such
as are fit for one execution, and for a another, but thies resolutiones must
com from the Captain general, or Master de camp general, which of them does
comaunde in the field, but the execution belongs to the General of the
Artillery, and to such under him to whose chardge they are recomended, the
Leutenante of the General of the Artillery is to see that their by horses
and wagones inoughe, and to be very, vigilante, and careful to visit often
times the store houses, where the powder led or math do lie; Of which doble
cinteries ought always to be putt upon, for many good respects, and
specially for fear of spies to use industry to give the same fire, wherefore
prudente Generalles of the Artillery are wont to divide thies munitiones, in
sundry and secure places, (fearinge of a sudden disgrace.) Also he is to see
that his Canonieres or gunneres do lie every night by their canonnes, that
they may in a readiness upon the first advice, and it were necessary that each
Canonnier should have a boy to assiste him.

The Leutenante is to by very curiouse and vigilante to see that the great
ordenance by still well provided with all necessary instruments, and rather
more then less, fearinge of urgente necessity, and that their want no kind
of munition, nor instrument fit for their sundry executiones. It is
necessary that their be a certain quantity of good refined saltpiter three
times refined, camphora, vinager, sal armoniak, sal gema, rosen, colofonia,
strong brandevin, a store of o kom, linsat-oyle, gineper-oyle, all which are
required for several executiones of fire-wourkes, when occasion shall offer,
but for the curiouse orderinge of thies compositiones, for there several and
rare executiones, we find but very feowe:) It is necessary that he be a
companied with good carpinteres.

He ought to by curiouse and careful in saying that all sort of munitiones
be boughte before he shall have need, for offten times we see that in times of
most need. Very little can be had, and sometimes all most none at all, and
specially powder and match, for often times our enemy secretly under hand
buys all that can be had; so the General knowinge this matter to be of such
importance to his Majesty's service, is to see it prevented before hand;
Great consideration ought to by taken in knowinge where best to plant the
ordenance, and to fortify and intrinche with speed, as time and ocasion shall
require, and to keep good watch, and to by a companied with good Controulers,
for to provide all sorts of provisiones.

He is to know who to a proach, and who with prudence and good watch and
vigilance to secure him self and Artillery, and in many ocasiones not to
trust to many, butt rather in person, and with speed to see thies things
putt in execution as the importance of the occasion shall require, (and to be
well guarded on every side,) He is to see that his Artillery do orderly
march, and such as do not obey the orderes by him given, to see them severelie
punished; he is to know at night who his ordenance shall by planted for the
execution he shall exspecte, and by day see the same ordered, in taking the
heighte and line for his purpose, either a far of or near, if it by into a
city town, or forte, or in the front of the enemy, or if by chance they
should come to defeat him to by prevented.

When occasion shall offer to pass an army over deep riveres, it is necessary
to by well provided of boathes of two yardes and haulfe deep, wheruppon
bridges are to by framed, which are to be made of strong tember, and plankes
to pass the Artillery, and the whole army, as did that famous and prudente
Conductor Marquis SPINOLA in taking of Reinbarke, and the scounse over the
Rhine, and in taking Vesell, and in the honorable regaininge of Breda.

They are wont to carry for thies bridges sometimes 30. boathes sometimes
more: First consideringe the greatness of the river, where they mean to pass
over. To which purpose is required a Captain for every fiftine boathes, and to
each boath four Marineres, some, times more, and sometimes less, acordinge as
the General shall think fit and as many Carpinteres as shall by toughte
necessary, also-Smittes to sheowe horses, and for many other purposes, a store
of anccores, cables, graplinges, while wrightt with such necessaries;
Befittinge his purpose, and always must not fail whiles to spare, for the
cannon, and great ordenance, fearinge least any while should break, that
presently prevension may by had.

THE THIRD CHAP.
THe Artillery which is to by conducted with an army, is to by commanded by
the Captain general, consideringe the executiones he doethe pretend, and the
greatness of his army, and the circuide they may ocupie, they carry 30. or 35.
canonnes of great cice for battery some more, sometimes lesh, acordinge the
execution, some shoot a bullet of 45.50.60.66. pound, from 7. to 8. inches in
heighte.

15. Haulfe cannonnes from 25. pound bullet to 30. 16. Culverines from 16. to
20. pound bullet. 26. Demi Culverines. 25. Falcones and falconetes. 82.
Great store of cannon-pouder, and also a good quantity of powder, for
small shot, a store of leader bags to carry powder behind men a horsebake,
when any sudden occasion so requires, hides to cover the powder in the
cariadge of the same, pices of chains and broken iron, cartages full of musket
bulletes to shoot out of great ordenance in the front of a battle, or any
order of men a prochinge near to execute thire intent: In such and semblable
ocasiones the aforesaiede instruments bienge well handled by good and
skillfull Canonieres in due time, are of wonderful executiones, and do putt
the enemy in mighty terron, in many occasiones by sea and land, great
quantity of bullettes for your great ordenance, and good store of match,
and bulletes for the small shot, a store of mattokes shoules and pickaxes,
hatchetes, and axes to cut wood and fagotes, and a store of wood houkes, a
store of plankes, and pieces of timber, which may serve for many purposes,
great store of basketes to carry earth to fill the gabiones and cover the
small shot in trinches and fortificationes, sledges and iron bars to break
rocks, great and small sawes, laddeles of brace and their staufes, sponges,
rameres for each sort of the great ordenance; great store of A Table for to
find out the names of the great ordenance now used for ofensive and
defensive wars, the height of their diameter or height of their bullettes,
and their weights, the compass of the same, weight of the powder required to
each piece, the weight of each piece of ordenance, lenght of the same, their
thicknes, linght of their laddells, and the bread of the same, the number of
men sufficient to draw each piece, and the number of horses requisite for to
draw the same, the distance of paces each piece cariethe at point blanke, the
distance of paces each great piece shootes at utmoste random, the lenght of
the coyler rope requisite for to draw each piece.
The names of the pieces of great ordenance. The height of the diameter of
every piece in enches and parts. Heighte of the bullet in inches and parts.
Weight of the shot in pou^des and parts. Compass of the shot in inches and
parts. Weight of corn powder due to charge each peee in pou^des. VVeighte of
the piece in pounds. The lenghte of the piece en feet. Thicknes of the
metal at the touch hole in in^hes and parts. Thicknes of the piece at the
neck of the same. Lenghte of the laddel in inches and parts. The bread of the
laddell. Lenghte of the planckes of the carriage in feet. The number of men,
suficient to draw each piece, when need require. The number of the horses
requisite to draw each piece of ordinance. Distance of pases the piece carries
at point blanke. The distance of pases each great piece shootes at utmoste
randon. The lenght of the coyler roape requisite to draw each piece. Cannon. 8
7 64 25 1/7 32 8000 12 8 4 23 15 16 90 16 300 1500 70 Cannon serpintin 7 7 52
23 4/7 26 7000 11 7 3 22 14 16 80 14 340 1600 66 Frence Cannon. 7 7 46 22 11/14
23 6500 12 7 3 2/^ 21 13 16 70 12 360 1740 64 Demi cano^ eildest 6 6 36 21
^3/14 20 6000 11 2/4 6 3 22 12 15 65 11 370 1800 60 Demi cano^ ordin. 6 6 32 20
2/7 18 5600 10 6 3 20 11 15 60 10 350 1700 54 Demi canon. 6 5 24 18 6/7 16 5000
11 6 3 1/10 21 11 16 56 9 340 1600 46 Culveringe. 5 5 19 17 2/7 15 4600 13 5 3
22 9 18 50 8 420 2100 40 Ordinari culver. 5 5 16 16 12 4300 12 5 2 21 9 17 2/4
46 8 400 2000 36 Demi culveringe. 4 4 11 14 1/7 9 3000 11 4 2 4/^ 20 8 16 36 7
380 1800 34 Demi culveringe, somvvhat leshe. 4 4 ^/2 9 13 5/14 7 2300 10 4 ^/4
2 19 7 2/4 14 2/^ 28 6 320 1600 30 S^k^r ordinary. 3 3 6 11 11/14 5 1900 9 3 2
1/^ 16 6 2/4 14 24 5 300 1500 28 Saker or minnon. 3 3 4 10 3/14 3 1100 8 3 2 14
5 11 20 4 280 1400 24 Faucon. 2 2/4 2 2 ^/3 8 9/14 2 750 7 2 2/4 2 12 4 10 ^/4
16 3 260 1200 20 Fa^conet. 2 2 1 7 1/14 1 400 6 2 1 2/4 10 3 ^/4 8 2/4 10 2 220
1000 20 nails little and great, coradge of small sorts, horse sheowes and
horse nails, little and great bands of iron for the whiles, and spare whiles
without fail, lanternes and store of candles, for Carpenteres to wourke at
night time when necessity so requires, talowe and tarr for the whiles,
torches, wax, candeles, scalinge leaderes, a quantity of musketes and pikes; A
store of compositiones and mixtures for fire wourkes, saltpiter, camphora,
solfer, armoniacke, sal gema, colofonia, rosin, red wax, strong brandevin, a
quantity of o came, small cords, and iron wires, giniper oil, linseede-oyle,
turpintin non preparata: The saltpiter used for fire-wourkes is most commonly
refined three times, of thies mixtures there needs no great quantity
because that they are seldom used and besides they are very costly and feowe
can by found for there due orderinge for several executiones.

To draw a cannon of great cice in fair weader is required 18. or 20.
horses, sometimes more if the situation by not good, but in fool weader is
required 24. horses, sometime more if the situation by not good, thies horeses
is to by chosen both great and strong, for a demi cannon 12. or 16. horses,
in fool weader 16. or 18.

A strong and good wagon will carry 70. cannon shot and of otheres of lesher
sieze acordinge to that rate, to the drawinge of which is required 4. or 6.
horses, and acordinge to that weighte are all the other wagones laden, with
powder and other munitiones, bridges, barckes requires more horses acordinge to
the greatness of the load.

For the manadginge of thies amunitiones, and of the great ordenance is
required many men, a monghst the which it is most necessary that their by
good and experimented Carpinteres, Canonieres, Gentlemen of the Artillery to
govern and conducte the same, prudently. A Contador, Mayor domo, Pagador,
Comesaries or muster masteres, a harbinger to whose chardge, is 250. horse, and
a provoste over the horses that caries the Artillery, some Smittes and many
pioneres or wourkmen, to make trinches rampares, mines, and contra-mines to
make plain and eiven bad pasadges, that the great ordenance may pass,
skillfull Ingineres to under-mine walls of towns, and fortreshes; to digg
wells for water, over thies pioneres are a pointed Captains to govern and
comaunde them, which of necessity ought to by expert in fortificationes,
contramininge, trinchinge, and knowinge who to manadge ingines of fire-wourkes
to burn boats shipes, or any such combustable thing, and in knowinge the
compositiones fit for them, and who to make them.

There ought to by one of perfect skill for a condestable or Master gunner to
govern, comaunde, instruct, oversee and examine all the rest gunneres, and
to by very careful to see that they do their duty, and know who to a
complish with their obligationes, for some raw and unexperimented men do
undertake the charge of a gunner who knows just nothing: Their ought to
by instruments to take the leavelles, ingines to monte and dismonte all sorts
of ordenance.

The General of the Artillery, as a superior comaunder, ought to procure and
take a special care in due time to see all matteres provided and put in order,
rather then to think theruppon, when occasion should present, and specially
in the low countries, where wars are daily in exercice, and sundry
interprises, and brave exploites executed of a sudden. He is to get a list of
all sorts of amuninitiones and arms, as well defencive, as offencive both for
foot and horse, givinge order and chardge of the same, to the Mayor domo, the
which they ought to give out by librances or ticketes, from the General,
because that good acompte may by yealdeth of provisiones of such great
importance, in as much that no fraud might by suspected: When occasion shall
offer to plant your cannon or great shot, to batter a city town foot or
castle, or any other occasion.

And pretendinge to effect well your purpose, you shall place them by 5.6
7.8. as occasion shall require, a leowinge a certain distance betwexte every
two pieces, acordinge as the occasion and situation shall require or permit,
first orderinge the place where they shall by put with plankes or tables all a
longste under their whiles, a leowinge 7. foot little more or less behind
their whiles, for the retiring of the piece, so that of it self, or with
little pains it returns a gain to his due and former place; And also before
the Artillery is to by set a resistance of tables, betwext it and the gabiones
and parapet, and so of a neowe bigin to chardge it. And when the Artillery
bigines to be hott, it is not to by refreshed with vinegar, but rather
weathinge the trimer in water, and with the same to refress the cane or barrel.

This observation being fullfilled in due time you may still shoot of, if
occasion require: It is also to by considered the thicknes and metal,
advertisinge that the Masteres of the ordenance do a leowe no more then 40. or
50. shot a day, if the occasion by not of such importance.

He who takes this honorable chardge in hand ought to by skillfull in the
art of war, and of great care in givinge all orderes and instructiones in
due time, and see that with great care and punctualitie his orderes be
observed. He ought to know the names of every piece, and their several
weightes lenghtes bigness, and the just boar of the cilender, the weighte and
thicknes of their bulletes, the quantity of powder necessary for every
piece, their best advantadge at poincte blanke, the diference and goodness of
their powder, the laddels, sponges, and rammeres necessary, and befitinge for
each one, their ought to by bulletes and a rows of wild fire.

It is still to by considered the goodness or badnes of the powder, for the
powder being good the lesser will serve, and is of far better execution, and
does less heat the piece: To know who much powder you ought to a leowe to
each piece take in powder the waighte of the parts of the bullet, and so
with all sort of ordenance ^ of whatesoever cice, as for example a cannon of
66. pound bullet requires 44. pound of powder, which is the. of the waighte
of the bullet, and so with the rest. The laddell being filled two times is
the right chardge of each piece, but that consideration ought to be taken in
the goodness of the powder and piece upon the powder and Artillery ought
always to be a pointed a good and vigilante watch, so that no fraud may
take effect, in naylinge the ordenance, or givinge fire to the powder, both
foot and horse ought to guard the same if need require, and specially good
roundes.

The setinge, montinge, or placinge the Artillery belongethe to the Camp
master general, or high Marshall of the field: Their ought to by a
speicall care taken that of all sorts of munitiones their should by rather
more to spare then that their should want, for two many good respects, for
the more you have always to spare of powder, and other munitiones, the more
honor you gain and the quieter your mind.

If you should chance to come to conqueste a foraigne country where you are
well asured to get both horse and foot, and being fully resolved to overcome
that country, and remain in possession of the same, it is very necessary
you carry a long with you a great quantity of saddeles, briddles, spurs,
and Masteres to make such wourkes, and also to carry a long with you a
quantity of many sorts of weapones and munitiones, which suchc countries can
not a fourde, and to take a special care that you receive no men which
might by suspected, for fidelity is a preciouse guel of great wourth, for
next under God their is nothing of so great importance to a Prince as to
have loyal subjectes, for trough their love and unity, the fertility of the
country, a companied with good laws, good discipline, prudente and brave
conduction of his Captains and Comaunderes in war, as also a companied with
thies said a faithful and resolvte determination of his Souldieres, who
being exercised and experimented in war is a wounderfull comfort security,
and repose both to the King and country.

THE FOURTH CHAP.
WHen occasion is offered that a small or great number of Souldieres are
besiedged in a citti town forte or castle, where they are appointed by their
King or General for to defend the same, like faithful and true subjectes,
where rather they should dye honorably in defense of the same then yealdeth
it, except great extreamitie, and good reasones, constrain them thereunto,
and making notoriouse there prudence, valor, and fidelity; And if it
should chance to fall out their comaunder or governoure of such a place
trough a covardelie mind, or by means of sellinge the same for money to the
enemy, and findinge that he should presume to yealde the same to the enemy,
little regardinge his Prince is service, nor his own reputation, and knowinge
that such a place might be defended; They all with a brave resolution are to
comfort the comaunder, presentinge their reasones that such a place may be
well defended, and at le^ghte, findinge his mind yealde to the base act, and
saying that reasones can persuade not a veil. They are with a brave and
resolute determinotion to say that to honor their Prince, and mantaine
their one reputation, that like unto faithful subjectes and honorable
Souldieres they rather chouse to dye in defense of the place, then yealde the
same, till they know the will of their general; And if the General find no
opportunity to advertice them with answer, or in soucorringe them; They are
with a brave and noble determinasion to proteste to die in defense of the
same, with aresolute mind then yealde the same covardly, estiminge but little
the honor of their prince and their one reputasion, and findinge that the
Governor of that place will not agrie but still go forward in his base mind
they may lawfully aprehende him, and elect another in his place, to whom they
ought to obey and respect as if he were elected by the king or general,
protestinge to fulfill with him as a superior, and for the better performance
thereof to putt all their conclusiones in writhinge; so that the enemy being
informed of their valerouse determination brave spirits and fidelity, they
shall hardly fall upon them, but upon great and extraordinary advantadge,
saying that they are resolved rather to die in defense of their honor and
reputasion then to yealde or hasarde their fame in rinderinge the same to the
hands of their enemy, which may use there one discression in a matter of so
heavy importance, in either gaininge honor or disgrace, so considerenge the
diferince betwext thies two points in the noble profession of arms, better
and more honorable it is to die in defense of a just and honorable cause, and
perpetuate the^e fame to all posterity, then yealde to any low or base
imagination.

When an army do inter into a foraine country and determines to remain
their that winter, and conquest the same, first he is to fortify him self,
or com in pocession of strong places if it might by posible: Secondly to
gather all the corn cattle wine bire and all other sort of vituales
necessary for the manteinance of his army: So that his may not want, and
that his enemy may by driven unto great extreamitie (and that trough mere
extremity they may come to offer them selves to serve as faithful subjects)
so that of materes which bienge prudently and diligentely manadged do often
times resulte prosperouse and good successes: A necessary thing in war that
the souldiores of each army do carry their device and token whereby they may
by known by their own as friends, rather then to fall upon as if it were an
enemy not knowinge them as it may well fall out.

When a general of an army does inter to conqueste a kingdom the provinces or
places trough which he marches, he is to take care to leave them well
fortified and sure, with good and strong garisones that his soucors
munitiones and convoyes, may with the better security pass and repass, for
cause that importeh much for the better security and good success of his
jurney and pretended purpose: And if by chance in such places his convoyes by
beaten or broken, as it may well fall out, he may retire to the next
adjoninge forte castle or town, for his security, and so shall all sort of
trade, merchandise, munitiones, and traficke freely pass from place to place,
conducted with strong and vigilante convoyes both foot and horse. Such
persons as shall by chosen to recnoledge cities towns, fortes castelles,
their fossose and walls, and the places easieste to by won, as also to
recnoledge the place more conveniente to cut trinches. Thies persons ought
to be chosen of men of long experience in war, as well in the Theorick and
practice of the same, ingeniouse and of a grtate spirit, of a settled mind to
houlde and take notice of whate he sees, the peril and danger of the matter,
the necessary preventiones for the same in as much as may be possible in
taking advantadge of the enemy; Some that are employed in thies ocasiones do
carry arms of proof and targetes, otheres do only carry targetes, which i
think is inoughe, by reason of the great weighte of both, such men are to
arm them selves with a settled mind, not fearful but of a brave spirit
scilente and patiente, for otherwise hardly can they bring to perfection
their purpose, nor give a good relation of whate is recomended to their
chardge which by experience is often tried in the ocurrantes of war.

When ocasion shall offer to give an escalada to a town citti or forte it is
necessary it by at night alitle before day, and in an obscure night alitle
before day, and that to be very scilent and secretly, and with great
expedition to execute his purpose, but first and before hand ought to be
taken the heighte of the wall and place of your execution, that the laderes
may just conform with the place and that it be nothing higher for bienge
dangerouse, for the part within discoveringe him, with little pains may turn
the ladder and hinder the execution pretended, and the ladder ought not to be
so short but it may come within two foot to the upper patre of the wall, or
just to the same little more or less; for otherwise time and ocasion may be
lost, and the first that are to by chosen for such exploites are to be
pikmen and chosen of persons of brave spirits and valerouse determinationes
to intertaine the place with their pikes till the shot do inter; and as the
pikes do inter they are to turn their faces toward both sides of the wall to
keep of the fury of the enemy till the shot do inter; And then the leader is
to march forward in good order till he come to the best post of the enemy,
and most fit for his purpose, with a troop of chosen and resolute
muskettieres in the uangarde who dischardginge that value gives great terror
to the enemy, and let them make their rekoninge before hand that their is no
turninge bake, but with a brave resolution step forward with a ualerouse
determination, otherwise athousand to one they are lost, for such and
semblable executiones is required prudente and brave conductores of tried
ualoure and resolusion.

Next under god, true religion and pure concience, there is nothing to be so
highly esteemed and commended in the profession of arms as obedience,
acompanied with good discipline and examples, for otherwise all other good
parts in him are to little purpose and of little estimasion, yea and of what
sover quality or condision he be of, from a private soldier to a Master de
Camp general; always the lower is to respect the higher in degree (for the
prosperouse succeses of warlike afaires.) And it is most necessary that those
who does militate in the same do serve with agoode, will cencerly and faith
fully, sheowinge them selves louinge and loyal, in all ocasiones to their
Prince, and General, which they are to sheowe by testimony of good examples,
so they shall be beloved and gain good fame, and by all likhoode shall have
good successes* And many souldiores who bienge assured that their chief does
inbrace and recompense all brave actiones in war do venture them selves with a
better couradge, and resolute determination; Then if they were constrained by
force, and of little hope of recompense.

Julius Caesar that famous Captain of great renoome who in all his actiones
sheowed him self with such a generouse mind and lovinge toward his
souldiores, acompanied with his military prudence did triumph and over com in
52 battelles and incounters of great hazard and dificulte, with the slaughter
of 110000. persons for the space of eighte years he governed Wourthie to be
noted and kept in perpetual memory when he touke his jurney to pass over the
river of the Rhine in germany to fall upon the Suitseres, to revenge the
injury and treason committed by them against the republicke of the Romans in
killinge Casio a famous Roman Consul, and all his people: But Julius Caesar
for a revenge thereof gave them a battle, they bienge in number 290000. men;
Notwithstanding he defeated 130000. of them, and they askinge for peace after
that Caesar did overcome them he came to a gremente and composition with them.

A another thing wourdie to by noted that when the Suitsers did pass the river
of the Rhine, with 43000. men to inhabit, and overcome France, Borgondie, and
Flandes. Julius Caesar heeringe of their presomtion, presently departed to
meet them, and defeated and overcom them, and for the most part such as
escaped the battle, for the great renoome and relation they had of his brave
govermente, and kind intertainemente, they were content to remain in service
under him, so that trough his prudence, bra ve conduction, and the great
contentemente souldiores had to serve under his comaunde, he did overcome all
the Provinces of the Suitseres Fleminges, and Frence, and passed into Inglande
and did put them under subjection, and after pasinge over sea, the Inglish
begone to rebel against him, so that he was forced to return a gain to
recover the^, and leavinge them settled, went into spain and drived a way
Pompeo, and mastered all that he had under subjection: So that this laudable
and renoomed Captanie left to all warriers many brave examples of perpetual
memory.

His brave and prudente conduction, liberality clemency and mangnanimitie
made him victoriouse, so that he triumphs over Asia, Africa, and Europa. And
so many more brave and valerouse warrieres for bienge beloved by theires,
kepinge them still contented, have optained manny rare victories. And to the
contrary o there is who were of bad conduction, and careless to content their
Armies had but little good succeses; As did happen to Atilla king of the Hunos
a proud and cruel man, an enemy and scourdge of cristianes, was overcom in
the battle betwexte him and Theodorico King of the Burgonones in the camp of
Cathalanos, though he had more men then the Burgonones he was overcom with the
loshe of 180000 men, in which battle the King Theodorico was slain, many
more comparisones might be related, but now a days the wars are so
diferente in usinge no tyranny, but rather by industry brave and prudente
conduction good discipline, daily subtilitie engeniouse wits, inventenge of
fire wourkes and other military acts in war, to which helps much the
readinge of antiente histories of prudente and valerouse Captains to sharpen
the wit of men, and increase the hearts and understandinge of such as do
follow the noble profession of arms: But let none presume that by only
readinge he can be apt to govern in war (in governinge of an army) nor
trust to the same without havinge exercised him self and practisinge him in
many ocurantes of warrlike afaires, but the learning becomes none better then
the souldior, for it bringes him to great perfection, firimnes and authority.
Many Kings Emperoures and Captain generalles do embrace the letteres with
arms and find it most necessary, and are of rare importance, and find that
learning is most required to the executiones of this profession more then to
any other profession, for bienge the true fundamente of nobility: In the
profession of arms the wicked uice of invie is most odiouse and uileste of
all acts; for bienge master of many vices which resulte of rude and blind
ingnorance, subjecte to quareles, murmurasion, backbitinge, disgraces and bad
examples, enemy to all good proceedinges, truth and virtue, which does so
penetrate the unconsiderate and base understandinge of many of little conscience
and reputation, daily decaienge and fallinge unto many crimes and disgraces,
enemy to frindshipp and acorde, subjecte to afrontes and vices, of bad life and
bad end: In the profession of arms great care ought to be taken of such as
are given to such and semblable vices; and when by fair means and good
instructiones they do not a mind to see them severelie punished, or drive them
a way, like base factioneres inclined to vices troubles and bad examples.

THE FIFTH CHAP.
WHosoever would wish to be a perfect souldior and desirouse that matteres of
importance were refered to his care and chardge, first he must by exercised
long time in wars, sheowinge him dilige^te in a plienge him self in the
theoricke and practick of this art, to be couriouse and ingeniouse in many
ocurrantes and warlike exploites, in fortifienge him self in ocasiones of
necessity either in plain or hilly ground, riveres or pasadges or where
soever. He is to be couriouse in understandinge the dificulties of the
situation, the uantadge and disadvantadge of the place, and how he may
intertaine the place, in as much as industry can a fourde, in consideringe
how soucor can be kept from him, and the necessary prevension, if he by
inviorened with wood gardines ditches valeyes old buildinges in 700. or 800.
paces, and if their be any such empedimentes to see them with speed plained
and prevented that he may discover every way, and let him look well that he be
not deprived of water, and in as much posible to inform him self in knowinge
all means the enemy may use to cross him of soccoure; and the sureste way or
means who he may receive soucor, and use all industry posible in so much
that the enemy do not cross him of the pasadges, and put them selves in
posession of the same: He is to fortify him self in as much as may by
posible, and as the situasion shall permit, not grudginge at the great pains
required to that effect, in raisinge the walls in the heighte and form
requisite, the ditch of the bread and heighte conveniente. To raise the
bulwarks of the same in the heighte that they may discover the sircuide and
places befitinge on each side, let him by provided in due time of all
necessary munitiones, and as much as may by, and rather have to spare then
want, also to be provided of several sorts of fire wourkes which are of
rare emportance in many ocasiones, let him by always vigilante and wary, and
fear of the sudden plottes and stratagemes of his enemy, which may fall
upon him when he least thinks, so let him not wholly trust to his and his
souldiores valor, but rather always be ready to receive the alarm with
great vigilance and brave resolusion, so shall he a complish the obligationes
of a prudente careful and vigilante souldior, and defend his reputasion.

When any strong place is beseeged and that yove would cut atrince to win the
same, the person that undertaketh this chardge must by curiouse and skillfull,
the trince is to by five foot deep and the earth to be cast up on both
sides then it shall be seven foot deep in some places it is to by ten foot
broad, in some places eighte, but in the biginenge it needs not to be above
eight foot broad, and in every place it must by five foot at least deep.
Thies trinches are to by cut and go on crossed (and crouked) so that the
enemy do not discover our front, but givinge them still our side, and so
shall the companies inter with the better security and feowe men kilth, and
they may go upp and down the trince at their own ease, but they must
beware and by in all redines least the enemy should chance of a soddaine come
to try their valor, and kill such as they find in the trince, and nail
the artillery if they can come so far, therefore let their by chosen the
best and most valerouse pikemen, and order them in three in rank to hinder
the entinte or empetue of the enemy, in thies and semblable ocasiones in war
where carelelie Officeres and souldiores do assiste they find them selves
amazed for there little care and vigilance in soddaine prevented exploites of
the enemy, after bienge well informed of trusty spies of the little vigilance
and care of the enemy it is an easy thing to triumph victory of them, so in
ocurrantes and ocasiones of warrlike afaires all security is to by prevented
in due time in as much as industry vigilance and care can afourde, and such
as do not think upon them selves to prevente the necessary remedies, are
most commonly lost, and such as do escape remain tatched with great
disgrace, for bienge overthrowen trough careless minds and little discipline,
so let none by ingnorant but that vigilance and care acompanied with military
prudence and brave resolusion is of rare importance in war.

THE SIXTE CHAP. Treatinge of the Office of a Captain general of an Army.
THis office being of so high dingnitie and degree, the King does choose and
elect it be the advice of his prudente counsel of state and war; and in this
election great consideration ought to by had, for bienge the office of
higheste degree in the field; which of all reason ought to by commended to the
care and chardge of a personadge endued with the befitinge parts for the
executinge of so honorable a chardge: Therefore he ought not only to have the
perfection and aproved parts of all other officeres under his comaunde; but to
excel them all in experience, gravitie, policy, secrecy, temperance, valor
constancy, vigilance, care liberality, and to by of brave and resolute
determinations, preventinge and executinge in due time with care and prudence
all things apertaininge to his chardge: To relate of all the good parts in
him it were tedious, for he is to by of such perfect judgment of all
things which has and shall by written of this art, so that the good parts
in him required are infinite.

He is not only to by of perfect judgment in excellinge all the rest, but
also to by of a verteouse life in givinge good examples, as apateerne light
and lantern of all the army (so that they may imitate him) for most comonlie
averteouse prudente and valiante general will choose valiante verteouse and
prudente Captains and Officeres; prudente and valerouse Captains ought to
estime verteouse valiante and skillful souldieres.

The accidents of war are so many that it altherethe the houmore of some
professores of this art, except they by endued with singular virtue and
constancy, which are found but in very feowe. Very many dificulties do
offer in the daily ocurrantes of war, but great ability is requiered to see
them prudently ordered; and hardely can any master be had of such perfection,
but that some times he must err.

To relate in particular of the parts required in a general it were tediouse,
Wherefore i will name the four princlpal parts the Greeks and Romans
desired to occurr in such personages; first to be skillfull in the art of
war, to be valiante and of brave and prudente resolution, to sheowe him self
with great gravitie and authority, and to be fortunate in his sucesses. If he
be acompanied with the parts and propriety before declared it is enough.
Nevertheless he hase inoughe to learn.

For the better security and success of his army it is necessary that his
person be still well guarded in all plases where he marches with his army. (And
trough his valeoure and mangnanimitie) findinge that he is inclined to present
him self the first in all dangeres, his consell of warris not to permit him
for many respects, for bienge kilth or taken prisoner it were no small matter.
That besides it is an ocasion to animate the enemy, and to disanimate ours,
whereof great consideration ought to be taken.

The Greeks and Romans for the defense and repose of their republike have
chosen their Captain generalles of souldieres of great and long experience
in martial actiones, whereby they might prudentlie govern and comaunde with
full authority and due respect. And therefore they always did choose thies
personadges of men of long practice, great experience in war, and of reepe
years and judgment.

It is true that Alexander Magnus, being but of young years begone to govern
and comaunde an Army, and conquered all Asia and did put the world in amace.
Sometimes it is most conveniente that Kings and Princes in person be present
with their armies for many respects, thouge their experience be not great;
but when such ocasiones do present they carry with them the most anciente
and experimented Captains they find as did Alexander of those Captains
which King Philip his father had for his Counseleres and conductores of war.
And as did King Philipe of Spain when he elected don Juan de Austria for his
Captain general, he a pointed for his Lieutenante don Luis de Suniga the gran
comendador of castilla.

And to the contrary who unfortunate hapened to don Sebastian King of
Portugal not to imitate thies renoomed examples of perperpetuall memory, in
his unfortunate and disastred journey made into barbary, he being young and
vnexperimented in war which was cause of his and his armies perdicion, so
that young Princes in wars ought to have for their Counseleres grave and
experimented Captains, none can denay but this King was of a high conceit
and of amoste brave and valerouse determinasion but by reason of his young
years and less experience in war, he wanted prudence for the due conduction
of such an honarble action.

In the honorable journey made by the famous and renoomed conqueror King
Edward the third into France, sendinge his eyldest son the Prince of wales for
general, Naminge for his Counselers and Captains the valiante prudente and
renoomed Earls of oxforde warwick, suffolk and salisbury, where at the battle
of Poytieres they made known their undeniable prudence and great valor,
that at lenghte they overthrewe the whole power of france, and their King
John and his son Philipe were taken prisoneres, with very many of the frence
nobility, to the Inglish is perpetual glory and fame.

Aniball that renoomed Captain of perpetual memory was but very young when
he began to govern an army, but he had for his Counseleres anciente and
prudente Captains, and was ruled and governed by them till he came to
understandinge, givinge many famous battelles and overthrowes to the Romans,
till at the end he was overcome with Cipio Africano that renomed Captain of
the remains.

The Captain general ought to inform him self well of the forces quality
and condiciones of his enemy, if bisonos or raw men, or oulde and experimented
soldiers, also to be well informed of the cituation strenghte and form of
their cities towns, fortes, and strong houldes, and of the convenienteste
plases to pass over thire riveres. Also to inform him self of the situation
of their camps, so that he might be the better prevented when ocasion shall
offer, also to be well informed of persons of good judgment and trust of
all the dificulties that may hinder him, so that in due time he may prevente
all necessary prevenciones, and specially see that he trusts the relatinge
of thies and many more ocasiones to persons of great fidelity and trust and
of good understandinge.

When the Captain general shall inter to conqueste aforaigne country he is to
indevoure with speed to put him self in pocession of the principaleste
pasadges of riveres casteles and strong plases, and with speed see them well
provided with all necessaries, that thereby he may put the country under
subjection, and that his amunitiones and all other necessaries may be
transported with the more security from one place to another, and with speed
to see all places fortified in as much as can posible, where any part of his
army being constrained trough extreme necessity may safely repair unto.
For it faleth out often times that the ocurrantes of warlike affairs are
subjecte to many disgrases, and may be when we leshe fear. Wherefore aprudente
comaunder ought in due time to prevente such dificulties, which is the kea
and security of his army, and specially to see thies plases well provided with
all sort of amunitions, and to see that they be recomended to the care and
chardge of careful vigilante prudente and valerouse Captains.

When resolution is taken to scale any town forte or strong place, first
information ought to be taken by skillfull and trusty persons of al
dificulties which might be suspected or feared, as also of the just heighte
of the walls that ladderes may be made for that purpose, and not to be
overlonge for bienge dangerouse for cause that the enemy may easily turn them
up side down. Thies ladderes are not to be so short but that they may reach
to the place of their execution (for thies executiones most comonlie are
first employed pikemen of chosen and valerouse souldieres) to make way till
the shot follow to socoure them, duringe which time they are to mantaine the
place with great valeoure till all the shot do join, and then with speed go
forward, well and prudently ordered, and with abrave and resolute
tetermination til they come in pocession and master the place, and strongeste
watch they find. In thies and other semblable ocasiones there is no lookinge
after, still go forward with great couradge and valeoure, which execution
ought to be recomended to the care and chardge of prudente and valerouse
Captains and chosen souldiores, which bienge so hitted upon, great
expectasiones might be hoped of their good sucesse. And order ought to be
given that in pain of death no soldier shall stir out of his order till the
enemy be wholly vanquised and all things duly ordered and prevented.

Good successes are often times optained by means of military prudence care
and diligence, wherefore it is necessary the Captain general be very
industriouse in knowinge who to invente neowe occasiones of war to diverte and
intertaine the enemy when ocasion shall require, and to corupte them with
money, for many ocurantes in war it is necessary to have many trusty spies
which serve for many purposes, it is most necessary that thies persons by
known for men of trust and fidelity; for otherwise being of double dealinge
they are most dangerouse. In all ocasiones he shall atempte he is to be very
careful and diligente, and to know the quality and condision of the enemies
comaunder wheader he be raish and inconsiderat or prudente and reposed in his
actiones, and wheader he be a man of a high mind to come to the fact of
arms, and to know the quality of his counseleres conductores and officeres,
and of whate determinasiones, and to be well informed if his army be of bisones
or raw men or of anunciente skillfull and practiced souldiores, and of whate
nasiones and of whate desingnes. A general can help him self in many
matteres havinge good and trusty spies, which are to be very well rewarded
and paid for be their, means often times matteres of great momente is
prevented in due time, and to the contrarry for want of such trusty and
careful persons great disgraces do happen, and brave interprises lost,
thies persons being of confidente trust care and ability is agreate repose
of mind to the general.

Most necessary it were that some Captains and Alferises reformed of long
practice and experience in war should still asiste next his person, to
inform of many matteres which do occurr unknowen to the General, and of
great importance to his majesty's service, and which should by prevented in
due time. Thies persons for cause of there long experience and a proved
fidelity in materes of war should rather by employed then otheres ordinarily
sent with comisiones in visitinge frontieres, fortificasiones amunisiones
magasenes or storehouses, and of very many more ocasiones of importance to the
furtherance of his majesty's service, and in givinge true relasion of the
extreme necessities of souldiores for want of the ordinary and inescusable
necessaries ordained for them be the Prince in their garisones as lodginges
bedes, etc. And saying that none do procure nor pity them they run away from
their colors which might be prevented in due time be means of faithful
and trusty relatores, to the better performance of his majesty's service and
repose of the common wealth and pour inhabitances, it were very necesary he
should have trusty persons of good skill and understandinge in war who
should in due time advertice him of many matters which does ocurr unknowen to
him or his counsel, and very necessary for his majesty's service.

To by prevented in due time against the poisonous designs and practices of
the enemy, it were most necessary to get faithful and trusty spies to know
the intentes of the enemy, and to whate end they aspire, and to see thies
spiees well rewarded, so that with the greater care they acomplish the trust
emputed in them, so that matteres of great importance may by discovered and
prevented without fact of arms, only with military prudence. His ceasless
care and high conceit, ought never to be weery in toylinge after virtue, and
to attain with travail care and military prudence the gloriouse issues of his
deep designs.

In thies our later wars for the most part all electiones goes by favor
frindshipp or affection to the great discomoditie of his majesty's service;
wherefore the Captain general as a supreme justice over a whole army should
have aspeciall care in informinge him self well in due time, to see amatter of
so great importance prudentely prevented. It also falethe out that when the
General Caules for arelasion of the Master de camps to reform so many
Captains of each regimente of each nasion to reforce other companies. In
such and semblable ocasiones, the General should take aspeciall care to by
well informed, for cause that by daily experience we see thies afaires
sinesterly handled; Reforminge those of great service suficiency and valor,
which is manifest, and to no small discomodity to his majesty's service, in
the atemptes of many honorable interprises and incounteres, and to the great
decay of military discipline. So that for want of prudente conductores, many
honorable ocasiones are daily lost. And that resultinge of the little
perfection of many officeres in military discipline. To see thees ocasiones and
many more duly prevented, the Captain general for many wourdie respects
ought to inform him self well, in as much that favor frindshipp nor
affecsion may take place, but rather forward and advance those of long and
faithful service, prudente cariadge, renoomed acts and valor. So that in
the administrasion of justice he shall by reputed for one inclined to minister
equity and right, as also for one of great disgression and wisdom, And
so most commonly by all reason the sucesses of military discipline shall
prosper, to the great renoome of the Prince, repose and furtherance of the
common wealth. Happy is the Prince and renoomed is the General who in his
electiones do imitate the Greeks and Romans, in electinge the conductores
of their armies of men expert and skillfull in the art of war, and most
commonly wise vertuese and valiante Generalles, will choose wise valiante and
vertuese Captains, of long practice renoomed acts and good examples; So
with the asistance of the divine powere (great hopes ought to by expected of
their happy successes) as Alexander the great, Scipio Africano, Aniball, and
many more renoomed warrieres left in writhinge suficiente examples of the same.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK TREATINGE OF FIREWOURKES OF RARE EXECUTIONES BY SEA AND
LAND. After which follows A DISCOURSE OF THE CONFINES OF A KINGDOM; And the
good laws to by observed in the same, and how it is to by fortified, and
strong by art, or by nature, or by both.
THE FIRST CHAP. Treatinge of Patarres.
TO chardge a pattar to break a bridge is required six pound of powder, or
six and haulfe, and to break strong ports or gates, four pound, or four
and haulfe, and for palisados two pound, or two and haulfe.

This pattares are to be chardged of the fineste and best powder that can by
had, which to do well for the perfect execution of the same. Powder should
be made for itt of refined mixtures of saltpeeter and solpher, and at the
chardginge of the same it must be well beaten, but not so much that the grain
of the powder by brocken, and when it is chardged, the mouth of the pattar
must be very well stopped with apeece of tember (and wax) oboute the which on
the outward part, or abouth the mouth of the pattar must be wrapped and tied
apeece of canuas dobbed in wax, fearinge that water might come to touch the
powder to hinder the execution of the same, if in case it should chance faule
into the water. (Advertisinge that the pattar is not to be wholly filled,
rather to leave three or four fingeres void, and to fill the most part
thereof with okum, and the touch hole is to be coated with apeece of waxte
canuas, and well tied to the same for fear of water and fire.

The touch hole must be filled with mixtures ready and quick to kindel fire,
but sloely to effect that the patardier may have time to retire after giving
fire.

The compositiones required to charge a pattar.
FOr this purpose take three parts of fine and strong powder, five of solpher,
eighte of refined saltpeter, or eight and haulfe, afterward mingell all thies
mixtures well together til yove corporate them, and put to them alitle petrol
oil, so much that they corporate together, and let them dry well in the sun,
and being well dried, fill the pattar with the said mixtures, for the tienge
of thies pattares aforck with two teethes is estimed the best, and in time of
execution to putt the same trough the ears of the pattar to fasten the same
both with a chain and cord.

When yove would surprise a ny place of emportance by scalinge pattar, or by
means of any fault in the walls of the same, whereby yove may easily come
in, or by inteligence or treatment of treason. Ifby pattar yove determine to win
the same, yove must first by well informed of skillful and trusty spies, or
of persons of trust, of the strenght and entry of the gates, batteries
bridges, palisados, bucketes, and chains of the bridges, the height and
distance to come to the place of execution, and if the ditch by dry or with
water, and who deep and lardge, and if there be any forlorn centeries, or
corpse de guard that may hinder yove, and in whate place they lay, and if their
by any great ordenance that may play on yove, and on whate side it lays and
in whate distance^

The place being well discovered, to effect your entention, yove are to use
stratagemes to divert and ocupie the enemy another way. Just about the time
that yove are ready to execute your desire.

The time beeingh well hit upon, with opportunity, and being well informed by
trusty spies of no deceit nor fraud, fasilitateth much the interprice, which
is most comonlie alitle before day; at which time the centeries are most
laesie and have more desire to sleep, beesides that the obscurity helps
much the interpricce and aprochinges.

When the pattares are to be planted to their execution betwexte the mouth of
the same and the gate or bridge yove are to put aplancke of strong wood, of
two foot broad and two foot and haulfe long and three foot distance from
the place of execution, and if yove find that the plancke be not strong
enough, you are to take two bars of iron and put them cross wise for the
better performance of your execution, and that betwexte the said planckes and
the place of execution, and to order all thies things in areadines with every
thing apertaining, before yove com to the place of execution. Great
consideration and curiosity is to be used be the engenious and skillful person
that takes in hand this business, in givinge fire to the same, which is easy
and enfalible for such as are of perfect skill in fire wourckes but to
otheres very dangerouse.

THE SECOND CHAP. How to make a torche to endure against the force of wind
and rain.
TAke of fine cotton threede, which is used for candles the one third part,
and the other two third parts of threede made of fine ocam, and make of this
acorde as thick as your finger. Then take a quantity of saltpeter, and let
it by finely stamped, and then tacke a quantity of Aqua vitae, and let the
cord boil therein a good while till it almost be dry, then put into the
same a little quantity of gineper oil, and one part of powder, two of refined
saltpeter, and one part of rosen; and corporate them all together, and let
them boil over a soft fire till the cord be almost dry, and turn the same
often times with much vigilance or it will kindel fiere if any extraordinary
hett come nere it. Being dry enough tacke it up, then take one part of wax,
one part of rosen, haulfe part of colofonia, one fourth part of
linesatt-oyle, and so much of camphora, one part of saltpeter three times
refined, one part of powder, and boil all thies mixtures together, and when
they are well corporated dob your cord in the same mixtures as if you were
to make a candel, and after being dobbed in thies mixtures often times, set
the candel a part till it be dry enough then let it be dobbed in wax, as you
do other candels till such time as it be of the thicknes you would have it
to be, then lay it upp till it be dry, and in lightinge the same it will burn
with great fury and force, and no rain nor wind can quince it, and it will
yealde a great flame, and terrible noice, that the behoulderes will much
admire at the same.

To try who to reduce saltpeeter into water take three onces of rain water,
and put it in acaldro^ over the fire, and put into the same two onces of
saltpeeter well stamped, and let it boil so long till it come to be water,
which for many effects of this wourke is good, and specially to guie more
force to mixtures that are not in their full substance and perfection.

To refine solfer and make it more strong put into the same one eighte part
of quicksilver, and. parts of refined saltpeeter, and melte them over a soft
fire till they corporate well, and after, takings the same up and being alitle
hot cast it into strong veneger, and within alitle while take itt up and it
will by of full strenghte.

To discover the enemy at night when yove would fall to do any execution,
cause aquantitie of fagotes secretly to by put in the most convenienteste
place for that purpose (that will give yove inogh light) en vsinge them in this
manner followinge and also will endure long.

Take agoode quantity of to sen, and four times so much turpintin de
Venetia, and haulfe so much of colofonia as yove take of roosen, and put
aquantitie of the said mixtures on each faggot and give the same fire with awad
of okum, dobbed in powder brandevin and turpintin, which wad being dried will
presently give fire to the fagotes and yealde agreate flame and endure long,
and if yove will have it to endure longer put aquantitie of colofonia upon the
fagottes in the thickeste part of them and the fire will endure long inoghe.

THE THIRD CHAP. To arm tronckes or canes made for several executiones of
this art, the figure of which canes you shall see hire followinge which are
made of light wood and are to be of two foot or two and haulfe long, and
some shorter for cause of their weighte in time of execution.
THies canes are hollow within and made of light tember like the barrel of
apeece of ordenance, and they must by well bound all round about with
strong marlin cord, fearinge least it should splinter by means of the
strong compositiones, and mixtures put into the same, of which we will now
treat. After yove have well tied the same alongste with the cord all about,
yove may doabe or coat the cord in a mixture made of pitch and wax for the
more security of the cane in keepinge it from water, and not to splinter.
Which douptles they will exepte they be well handled by men of good
experience, and practice in this art, and let none presume that for the
readinge of many good books he ca^ bring this wourcke to perfection, for it
is of such rare and deep judgment in the orderinge and measuringe in
proportion of the seaveral sorts of mixtures required for the same. In the
drienge and manadgeinge of them is required great consideration, good skill,
vigilance, and rare judgment of long exercice; whereof i have seen many
dangerous triales both in the handlinge and executiones of this wourcke, in
his due measure and proportion, therefore confideration, care, and vigilance is
required.

The compositiones required for the said canes, take six parts of musket
powder, four, of solfer, a haulf part of quicksilver, one part of cristal
glashe beaten into powder, one part of armoniacke also beaten into powder,
one part of camphire, three parts of saltpeeter three times refined, two
parts of rosen, all which cause to by well stamped and mingled together, then
tacke of gineper-oyle, or petroll oil, as much as will wet a little all the
said mixtures, then put as much strong brandevin, as shall be sufficient to
weate well all the saiede mixtures, and mingel them together, and let them be
dried in the sun or over a soft fiere till they corporate well, then putt a
monghste them a litel quantity of fine cotton made or a nointed in fine beaten
powder and gineper oil, and when all thiese compositiones are dry, fill your
cane or troncke, putinge in the bottom of the same three musket-shotes of
powder, or more, acordinge to the greatness of the cane, then a quantity of
your mixtures then a little powder, then mixtures, then alitle powder, and so
till you almost fill the cane to the brim, leavinge two enches empty where
you shall put dry mixtures quick and apt to kindel fire, and haulfe, a
quarter of an once of fine powder in the very mouth of the cane, and stike
into the same a piece of match made of fine cotton, and boiled in Aqua vitae,
gineper oil, and fine powder of the best you can find, to presently kindell
fire, when occasion shall require; And when you will bigin with the execution
of the same, you are to give fire in the mouth of the cane, and it will
yealde a most furious and great flame till it burn out, and the execution
of the flame will reach some 12. foot, and with a great fury and force,
which artificial canes are excellent to inter per force into ships, or into
a breach or trinche, also it is most excellent to break any order or
array, and specially in narrow or straighte places, as the draught marked with
the letter A. sheoweth.

A.


THE FOURTH CHAP. Another way to arm artificial canes of fire-wourcke.
TAke three parts of rosin, two parts of brimstone, one haulfe part of the
grease or fatt of a hog. part of red wax, cause the rosen and brimstone to be
beaten into powder, and mingell them together. Then put to them the grease, and
red wax and put them over asofte fire in a caldron, or earthen pott, stirringe
them still til they corporate well, and remain a good while over the fire:
Then take five parts of serpintin powder of the best, and of saltpeeter three
times refined three parts, which must be beaten to powder, then take two
parts of camphire stamped, then one part of cristall glash, which must be
beaten into fine powder, also one part of armoniak which must be beat in
into powder, all which yove shall putt into the said mixtures, and let them
all boil over asofte fire till they be well corporated and dried, or if yove
will tacke them up when they are well corporated and reasonable dry it
emporteth nothing, by reason they are quick to kindle fire, and required not
over much drienge, and if yove find that the mixtures be not well wet that
they may the better corporate, put alitle a qua vite or petroll oil or of
both to them, till yove see that they be very well corporated, he that
undertaketh to macke any store of thies Fire-wourckes must make up a furniesh
for the beater security of the same, for putinge the mixtures in caldrones or
pottes over the fire as many do, it is dangerouse exepte it be handeled be one
of perfect skill and great vigilance which jhave often times tried.

For the fillinge of your artificial canes or tronkes with the aforesaid
mixtures, needs much consideration and practice, for the perfect execution
of this wourcke. Put in case it is acane where aboy is arm can inter into,
yove must fill it as follows but if greater or lesher consideration must be
taken in fillinge the same with the mixtures in measure and proportion, or it
will fail in burninge all of asodaine or very sloe so that great practice
and curiosity is required for the perfect handelinge of this wourke.

For the fillinge of the said canes before spoken of put into the bottom of
the same two hands and haulfe full of musket powder, then three hands full of
the drieste mixtures, then two hands full of powder, then four hands full of
the mixtures, then a little powder, then five hands full of the mixtures, and
so still in this course, till you fill your cane within three eaches of the
mouth of the same, which you shall fill with very dry and quick mixtures
apt to kindle fire, and on the upmoste part or mouth of the cane some powder.
That don take a piece of match made of fine cotton, and sod in Aqua vitae,
gineper-oyle, and fine beaten powder, and well dried, in the sun or over asofte
fire till ib be very well dried of this match cut three enches and sticken
itt into the mixtures that is in the mouth of the cane, and when you are ready
for your execution do but give fire with your ordinary match to this
gunpouder match, and presently at the first touch of your ordinary match, or
of any other fire it will instantly kindel fire: Advertisinge that you are to
cover the mouth of the cane with a piece of strong parchmente, and bind it
well, so that the mixtures may not faule out of the cane, the very end of the
match must a peer trough the said partchment to give it fire, when occasion
shall require, and then the cane shall presently bigin to wourcke with great
fury and terrible to the behoulderes, for the wonderful flame and terribel
noyce.

I have seen trial made often times that theyer is nothing that puteth one in
more terror then thies instruments, being well made and duly handled, and
douptles the flame and noyce of this fire will put the enemy in great terror,
when it bigines his course of execution, and none so valiante durst stay near
it as long as the flame indures, and questionles it will make a way as far as
the haulfe pike and flame can reach though ever so valiante your enemy be,
and it is a most excelent instrumente to bourde ships per force, or to give
fire to their mines if you perceive where the same does lay, advertisinge
that the said cane shall shoot of two shottes one after a another, the first
that lays in the third degree, and the other that lays in the bottom.

Thies canes can be made several manner of ways be such as are curiouse in the
manadginge of this art, whicc none can bring to perfection, but with long
practice, and much chardges, be reason the compositiones and mixtures required
for the same are wonderful dear, so that for the said respects hardely can
you find one in ten tousand that will undertake the executinge of this
wourcke; may be some will that are curiouse in readinge many brave Auctores,
thinckinge that only by the same they know enough, they are far deceived,
for i know that without practice they shall fall into very many errores,
whereof i have seen very many triales made, and besides great chardges before
they could come to the perfect judgment of the deep secrets and
curiousities of this rare art.

Thies canes or tronckes of fire-wourcke, are handled several manner of ways
be such as are curiouse; for some are of quick executiones, otheres of slow
acordinge as the ocasio^ shall require, in putinge to the^ mixtures agriable
for that purpose, some yealde a flame of 16. foot but thies indures but very
short, otheres yealde a flame of 12. or 13. foot, which endure longer,
which are made for sudden executiones, otheres are made which do yealde a
flame of 9. or 10. foot, which do endure long i nogh for any sudden
exploite, for thies are made for such executiones: Such as do not endure a
bove the part of a quarter of an hour will almost wholly burn the cane, i
mean all the inner part of the same, such as are made to endure haulfe a
quarter of an hour will wholly burn the cane into a eishsees as fast as the
mixtures or compositiones do burn. So any boddy may perceive that thies
compositiones are of wonderful force, and of rare executiones, which
questionles shall so by found by such as will take the pains and chardges,
to make trial, and being expert in the due handlinge and manadginge of them.
Thies mixtures are to be putt in canes made, like the figure folowinge mareked
with the letter B.

B.


THE FIFTE CHAP. Artificial bullettes, and cross bars made of fire-wourke,
to shoot out of great ordenance to burn ships or houses, or to be shot
into magasens or munition houses of the enemy out of great ordenance, or to
be shot into the enemies camp to burn their quarteres, which are to be made
and ordered in this manner folowinge.
TAke four parts of saltpeeter three times refined, of brimstone two parts,
of camphire one part and haulfe, of rosen two parts, of armoniak one part,
of cristal glash beatin into powder half aparte, of bay saulte one fourth
part; all thies compositiones being beaten into powder mingle them together,
this being don take one haulfe part of the fat of ahog, of turpintin one
fourth part, of linsat oil so much more, of aqua vitae one part, then putt
thies mixtures together over a soft fire in acaldron or strong earten pott,
and mingel them altogether till they corporate very well, then when they are a
good while over the fire put to them six parts of serpintin-pouder, and
corporate them well, and when you find that they are reasonable dry take
them upp, and make a plaster or cover of oecam, so thick as the back of a
knife, and so broad as shall cover the bullet or cross bar. All that being
ordered as before declared take 4. parts of serpintin-pouder of the best, and
cause it to be beaten into powder, take of refined saltpeeter two parts, of
rosen two parts, armoniacke one part, brimstone one part, all which must be
beaten into powder, then wet thies mixtures with two parts of strong
brandevin, or Aqua vitae, one part of gineperoyle, one part of turpintin,
haulfe part of linsat-oyle, that don put over the fire the rosin, brinstone
Aqua vitae, the geneper-oyle, the turpintin and linsat-oyle a bove mentioned,
and when they are melted, and well corporated putt into the same the saltpiter,
armoniack, and four parts of serpintin-pouder, and corporate all thies
mixtures together, and a noynte the twoa in them till you find it full of the
subce of the same. Then let the ocam be all over covered with the first
mixtures made for the bulletes a boute a finger thicknes or more; alwaes
tackinge regard that it do agree with the piece out of which you entende to
shute the same, and when the coat of the said bullet is covered, and full of
the said mixtures, then wrappe it round a boute the bullet, or cross bar,
and tee it very well with strong marlin cord, and benge well bound with the
said cord, and shot out of a piece of ordenance it will burn with terrible
force, and great fury, and water can not quince it, of the which for
curiosity as also to know of the operation thereof i made several triales.

Thies mixtures needs not much drienge when they are well corporated over a
soft fire, but the outewarde plaster of twoa of the three, wherewith you are
to cover every bullet, and in such sort that presently it may kindell, and
give fire to the inner co^positiones, to the which when you give it fire, it
will burn with great force.

Thies bullettes are excelente to burn ships, and to by cast into towns to
burn houses, their execution is of such wonderful force that questionless
they will burn an oaken boorde, and if you cast water upon them the more
they will burn, and will make such a wonderful noyce able to putt the
behoulderes in great terror, and specially such as have no understandinge of
their operation, for when the water is cast upon them they shall give a
great cry just as if it were of a wild boar, whereof i made several
triales wourdie the lookinge upon, and none of the behoulderes of the same
durst stay near in a great distance for the strange operation of the same,
and the terror whereunto they put the behoulderes but such as know of the
course of their operation, which is almost incredible but to such as are a
quainted with the same.

For the better execution of the cross bars and specially be sea they should
be made with iron chains fastened to the end that first must by put into the
piece which is most excelente to cut sails of ships ropes mastes, and to
make other great spoils, the figure of which yove see here following where
the let C. sheoweth.

Thies cross bars are to be coated as before taught and with the self same
mixtures, the bulletes are also to be coated taking regard that the bullet
be made no greater but that it might inter into the piece of ordenance out of
which yove mean to shoot the same. And they are to be doble bound all
round about very well with strong marlin cord, fearinge that be the great
force of their roaringe and wrastlinge out of the piece the ocam and
compositiones, being not well bound should be untied, and tacke no effect,
which questionless it will except it by very well bound as before declared;
of the which i caused my self trial to be made. The figure of thies bulletes
and cross bars you see hire marked with the letter C.

C.


THE SIXTE CHAP.
TO arm a haulfe pike with fire-wourcke to inter or bourde ships per force
or to inter into a trence or baterie or break any order or array where the
balls fastened to them shall fall, thies balls are to be made of light wood
of the bigness or somwhate greater then abuter box, and of the very self same
making, but that it must be bored with four holes crosswise, and of the
greatness that your thom might inter into them, which shall by filled in this
manner folowinge.

Take of the same mixtures and compositiones that was ordained for the
artificial canes to which you are to ad two parts of rosen and one part of
brimstone of the best, and melt thies together putinge alitle Aqua vitae to
them of the strongeste yove can find, and bienge well corporated and molten,
put the other mixtures over the fire and when they are hot put the molted
rosen and brimstone to them, and corporate all together, and being almost
could fill your artificial balls therewith as full as they can houlde,
putinge a little of the drieste mixtures and powder in the mouth of each hole
of the four, and alitel cotton boiled in gun powder, brandevin and
gineper-oyle, and afterward dried very well, that thereby they may presently
kindel fire. That don take as much ocam or towe as will cover or coat them,
making aplaster of the same of ahaulfe ence thik or little lesh, this coat or
plaster cause to by sod over asofte fire in fine beaten powder to the quantity
of four parts, of saltepiter two parts, rosin two parts, armoniacke haulfe
a part, brimstone one part and all thies being first beaten into powder let
them be wet in brandevin and giniper-oyle and well corporated together, then
take as much ocam as will cover them as before declared, and when all thies
mixtures are well corporated and dried over asofte fire, then spread them upon
the ocam with which yove entende to coat your ball and put on the same to
the thicknes of haulfe anence or little lesh of the said mixtures and wrapp the
same round about the ball and let it be tied very well with marlin cord,
and when all this is don take a piece of gunpoder match being well handled
and dried, and bind it in several parts of the ball that in touching the
same with your ordinary match it will presently kindell fire, and without
delay and it will bigin to burn with amoste wonderful flame and terrible
noyce that it will put the behoulderes in great terror; and if it fall upon
abourd or any other thing apt to kindle fire it will burn it into aeishes,
and also the cover that goes about the same: the terror whereunto thies balls
do put the behoulderes of rhem when they burn is incredible but to such as do
see the same, whereof jmade several proofs and found it so that no boddy
durst stay near, thies haulfe pikes sometimes are armed with skubbes made of
fire wourcke which also are good to offend or defend, thies balls and
haulfe pikes are of rare executiones which draughte yove see hire under marked
with the letter D.

D.


A prudente and brave conductor of aforecaste considerasion, bienge determined
with military prudence, and resolusion of his and of his souldiores valor to
fall on any execusion most commonly they are wont to have good sucesses, to
which effect many stratagemes and military prudence is required. And bienge in
the field and resolved to give battle or at least to dommadge or put the
enemy in great terror; Very necessary it were to by provided with bulletes
cross bars and iron chains armed with wild fire to by shutt out of great
ordenance, the which in such ocasiones, as also in sea servicees are of rare
execusiones bienge prudently armed and manadged, by one of perfect judgment
and long practice in this art. Thies bulletes or cross bars bienge shoot
out of great ordenance in the front of abattell or of an army in areasonable
near distance are of wonderful executiones, and specially iron chains and
cross bars They are also good to cut the tackle of ships shroudes mastes
yardes top mastes sails, etc. The draugh of which bulletes yove see hire
folowinge where the draughte with the letter A. sheoweth. And how to chain
them together when yove put them into a piece of ordenance.

And the draughte with the letter B. sheoweth how the same flies trough the
air when it is dischardged out of a piece of ordenance, and who it spreads
a sonder, in some execusiones they are armed with artificial fire-wourckes to
burn towns, ships, the quarteres of the enemy as also their store houses
or magasenes which cross bars are envented for that purpose and bienge
prudently handled and armed by one of perfection in fire wourckes i am asured
that if they fall into any thing apt to kindle fire without delay they shall
burn and kindell fire, for often times i made trial of their operasion and
incredible force and terror and often times to try their nature and course of
their execution i caused to cast water upon them, notwithstanding they
burn with the more vehemence and terror, and when the water is cast upon
them they give such aterrible noyce wourdie the admiringe and burn with such
force.

Thies haulfe pikes are armed another manner of way with fire-wourcke, that is
to say take apece of the strongeste canuas yove can find as big, or of the
greatenes yove think fit for your purpose, and fashionige the same as yove
shall see here folowinge be the figure marked with the letter E. This piece of
canvas yoveshall cause to be dobbed in molten colofonia and when it sukes i
noghe of the licor take it up and put aforme into the same or fill itt with
dry sand, and when it is dry cast the sand out and fill it of the receite
made for the artificial canes. But that they must be mingled with two parts
more of rosen, and ahaulfe part of brimstone, which must by smelted over
asofte fire, and corporate the same and the other composiciones together, and
fill the said canuas with them, being well fastened with marlin coarde and
the half pike trouge the midel of the same as the draughte followinge sheoweth,
and in the mouth of this scuibb yove are to putt a quantity of very dry
mixtures, and some powder, that without delay it may kindell fire, the
execution of this instrumente is execellent to bourde ships, to burn sails,
to inter atrince or anay narrow place, or to break any order or array, if yove
please yove may fasten or sticken into the said scuibb in degrees light pipes
or canes of iron or brace of five enches long, being of apistol or caliver
boar, placinge the touch hole thereof toward the out ward side of the
mixtures, being well bound to the pike so that it does not fall, at least
till the execution be finished, and let the touch holes be primed with good
powder; also yove may put abullet into each one of thies pipes, being chardged
with good powder, and well handled they will do great execution.

E.


To arm haulfe pikes with fire-wourcke, which is rare to burn sails of
ships or to bourde or inter per force into ships or assaults, trinches or
any narowe place, they are both good in many defensive and offensive
occasiones be sea and land, they are to be filled with the self same receite
before taught, and also coated in the self same manner. For executiones at
night to inter into a trince or forte, per force they are of most rare
executiones, and douptless they shall put the enemy into great terror by
reason of the fury, terrible noyce, and force of their flame, in the
executiones of patarres and camisadas they are wonderful good, being
recomended to the chardge of brave Souldieres of aproved valeor and resolute
determinationes, for douptless they will put the enemy into great terron, for
sudden ex ecutiones in trinches or breaches at night they are wonderful
good. The figure of their draughte you may see hire under set down, as
marked with the letter F.

F.


For to offend or defend in diverses occasiones of importance you may arm a
halbarde with a device of fire-wourcke in the self same manner as before
taught to arm pikes. And with the self same mixtures and coated, with the
like coatinge as before taught for the arminge of pikes, to which you may
bind with copper wire three or four short pipes like caliver barreles, of six
or seven enches long made of brace, and laden with powder and bullett, as
the draughte by the letter G. sheoweth; which also being plased betwexte
pikes is good for several ocasiones of service; you may also arm targetes
in the self same manner which for very many executiones in war are good,
and let none be ingnorante that thies engines of fire-wourcke, being well and
curiously handled do put the enemy in wonderful terror, and specially in
sudden occasiones, and stratagemes used often times at night.

G.


THE SEAVENTHE CHAP.
THe figure followinge being armed and well ordered is ofrare execution in
narowe or straighte places, either to ofende or defend, and are very
necessary in many ocasiones be sea and land; On the two shoulderes whereof
you may arm two scubbes filled with the receites before taught, and in the
inner part of the instrumente, which is made of iron for this purpose which
you see by the figure followinge and goes cross the pike, you may put five
pipes of yro^ or brace prepared and made for that purpose, and that each of
them be of eighte or nine enches long, and so great in the boar as a
pistol barrel, which are to be fastened with nails and coper wire, and to
chardge them with good powder bullet and wad, that don you may cause them to
give fire one after on other, in layinge all a longhste the touch holes a
piece of fine linenge clath filled with fine powder, and wett in gineper-oyle,
that the fire may take her course by degrees; so that the said pipes shall
shoute one after a another as you would desire it to do, (either quick or
sloe;) Advertifinge that the lininge wherein you put the powder to give fire to
the touch holes is to be well fastened or bound yuste upon the touch holes
with marlin cord, so that the course of their execution may tacke effect in
just the due time ordained, the which in givinge fire to the first the rest
will dischardge one after an other.

Duringe which time the two scubbes placed on the two shoulderes of the
instrumente, being fired will burn; duringe the time of the execution of
thies pipes, and rather more, and will yealde a great flame, the compositiones
that goes to this instrumente are the self same before taught for to arm
scubbes, so that this instrumente being handled by one that is skillful and
curious in this art, the execution whereof is wourdie the behouldinge, and
shall see who orderly shalll those five shottes dischardge one after an other,
either quick or floe, as the curious understander of this wourcke will have
the same to be, (so acordingely shall he put the proportion required for the
execution he desires) the draughte of this instrumente sheoweth the letter H.
hire after.

In ocasiones of triumph you may cause other pipes or canes greater then thies
to by made of the greatness of the boar of an arcabuse de crocke, and of
fiftine inches long in the barrel, which being filled in this manner
followinge, is wourthie to by admired, fill each of the said canes as follows
first take a caliver shot of powder, and chardge the first cane therewith,
then beat upon the same a stopp^ or wad of fine cotton boiled in powder
brandevin and petrol-oyle, then fill upon the same to the quantity of a good
musket shot of the mixtures made for the artificial canes, and upon the same
a stoppel of cotton as before taught then amusket shot of powder, then fill
the rest of the cane or barell to the mouth of the mixtures made for the
artificial canes, and take heed that you do not beat them hard upon the
powder and see that thies mixtures be very dry, for being so required for
this execution, and observe the self same order for the fillinge of the rest
of the canes and all alonge the mouth of thies putt apeece of lininge full of
fine stamped powder wett in gineper-oyle and brandevin and see that it be very
well fastened just upon the mouth of thies canes, that no fire can touch the
same, but that which is ordained as before taught: so in givinge fire to the
first cane or barell, the rest in order one after another will dischardge,
and each of thies bareles or canes shall yealde two shotes and aflame, which
shall endure but very short, the mixtures required for this execution is of
that which is made for the artificial canes the draughte of this instrument
sheoweth the letter H. Advertisinge that thies mixtures are to by very dry and
apt to kindell fire, and in their putinge to the barrel to beat them very
soft for being so required.

H.


THE EIGHTE CHAP. To arm a rows with artificial Fire-wourckes.
AHies artificial arowes being shote out of great ordenance are good to
burn houses, or in ca^pain^a they are also good to burn the enemies
quarter, the manner who to arm them is to tacke apeece of strong canuas boiled
alitle in colofonia and to fill the same with the compositiones before thaughte
to arm haulfe pikes, and that it be well bound to the arowes with marlin
cord, for the due proportion lenghte and weighte of thies arowes is required
the asistance of acuriouse matematisian, or of one of good judgment in
givinge the necessary instructiones for the making of them, several man^er
of ways, some to pearche ships from side to side either above or under
water, otheres to be shote afar of to burn houses or quarteres, great
curiosity and perfect judgment is required for the several manner of ways
which thies arowes are to be handled and made acordinge to there several
executiones, some are made to burn the ammunition of powder in ships if they
chance hitt the same and which will pearche any ship from side to side and
are of far greater execution then your bulletes the draughe whereof the letter
I. sheoweth.

I.


THE NINTHE CHAP. To arm artificial instruments ordained in potes made of
metal filled with composisiones and mixtures of fire-wourcke, to burn of
asodaine ships gates bridges palisados or any other combustable thing apt
to kindel fire.
TAke four parts of rosen, one part of armoniak four parts of salpiter
three times refined, a haulfe part of bay saulte, all which cause to by beaten
into powder, then take one part of linsatt-oyle, of the fatt of a hoge one
part, then cause all thies composisiones to be mingled together and putt them
in apott made for that purpuse over asofte fire, and let them boil till they
corporate well, and then take them up, and put into them one part of camfire,
and three parts of musket powder and mingell them well together, and put them
over asofte fire till they corporate well, then take them up and put to them
small pices of gun-pounder match made of fine cotton and boiled in fine beaten
powder, strong brandevin and giniper oil or petroll-oyle, then take four
parts of colofonia and cause it to be beaten into powder, and let it be
mingled with the rest mixtures. Then cause the instrumente or pott made for
this purpose to be filled till you come to the third part of the pott or
instrumente, that don take of the other mixtures without colofonia, and fill
the rest of the instrumente with them, and on the upermoste part of all putt
of the drieste mixtures, and let them be so dry that they by apt to kindell
fire, and in the very mouth of the instrumente cause to be putt a quarter of
an ence of powder and of the best, and sticken to the same apeece of gunpouder
match some four inches deep into the instrumente and cause itt to be well
covered with apeece of canuas till time of execution, so that water nor fire
can touch the mixtures nor the powder. And when occasion shall ofrer to give
it fire, do but touch the gunpouder match with your ordinary match, and it
will presently kindell fire, yea and much sooner then powder, to which effect
this gunpouder match is made of purpose.

Thies instruments in times of execution they have their strong chains of
iron that they may by bound and fastened, to the place of their execution, so
that they do not fall, nor that the enemy may use any endustrie to cut or put
them of; so that the execution may take effect. It were very good, for the
security of their execution to arm two or three artificial canes on both
sides of them, which are to be rocomended to persons of brave spirits, and
of aproved valeor and determination.

Thies compositiones when they bigin with their execution their operation and
execution is most rare; Advertisinge that they must be putt in to iron or
brass pottes made for that purpose, as the figure folowinge sheoweth, and also
with their strong iron chains, for in putinge thies compositiones into
veseles of wood questionles the force of this fire will burn them at an
instante, which for curiosity, and also to know the operation of this fire,
y caused triales to by made, and found that thies instruments made of wood
did presently burn, and consume into aieshes, and was sooner consumed then
the matter that was putt into the same, be reason of the wonderful force of
the fire of the said compositiones, which rare and wonderful breef execution
is wourthie the admiringe, the orderinge and figure of the saiede instruments
you see hire under where the letteres K. L. M. sheoweth.

K.

L.

M.



The receites wherewith fire-wourck instruments are armed in findinge their
operation sloe, you are to augmente them with dry mixtures apt to kindel
fire, as powder, saltpeeter, brimstone, armoniake, and migell the^ well
together, and let them be corporated with the sloe mixtures in their due
proportion, Also the mixtures you find quick and apt to burn, and do not
endure, acordinge as their execution requires you are to augmente the^ with
a litel sloe mixtures, as linsat-oyle, turpintine, colofonia, rosen, and wax,
but great consideration, and curiosity is required in put them in their due
proportion.

An artificial baule of fire wourcke being dischardged out of a piece of
ordenance in a clear day can not by discerned nor seen till it declines to
the earth, But being shot out of a piece of ordenance at any marcke in a
darcke night, may by perceived, and specially when it begines to decline out
of his right course or line, and the more darcke the night is, when it is
dischardged out of a piece of ordenance the better you may discern it; but
in the begininge of the range or line you can not see it so perfect as when
it begines to decline to the earth, which i have tried at the leager of Breda,
the night a pointed for the triumph don for the regaininge of that place.

If for curiosity you would have a ball made with wild fire to burn within
the water, let the coat thereof first burn a little before you cast it into
the water, so that it gives fire to the compositiones there in ordained for
his execution, which being fired, (to wit) that part or parts where in the
vente is, being filled with air does cause the other parts of the same to
shume and burn a bove the water, with a wonderful noyce admirable to the
behoulderes.

The balls made for this purpose are light, and if you put them into a piece
of ordenance, being laden with the ordenary powder required for the execution
of the same, in their roaring and wrastlinge of this ball it will burste unto
pieces; So that for to shoute bulletes or balls out of great ordenance
armed with fire wourcke the cross bars now of late invented is the best,
the manner of arminge and coatinge thies bulletes and cross bars, i have set
down before, who and with whate compositiones, which are of rare executiones
by sea and land, being well ordered by one of perfect judgment in this
art.

I have also put down neowe invented cross bars to be shot out of great
ordenance, which being armed as before taught, are excelente to burn
towns, and the enemies quarteres, and iam well asured that no comprabell
device, for that purpose was as yet invented, neither to by shoot in the front
of a battle, i mean those cross bars invented with chains for being
dischardged out of a piece of ordenance in a reasonable near distance in the
front of a battle, or any order or array, y doupte not that it is the best
invention, that hase been divised as yet for that purpose, the enemy being a
reasonable distance of; But the enemy being very near at hand the cartadges
and bags filled with musket bulletes, nails pieces of brocken iron, pieces
of chains, which being shoot out of great ordenance are of wonderful
executiones, being handeled by prudente and curiouse gunneres of perfect
judgment, and long practice in this art.

The draught marked with the letter N. sheoweth how the said cross bar shall
be put into the piece; and the letter O. sheoweth how the same flies
violently trough the air, and how it spreads a sonder when it is shot out
of the piece, givinge a terrible noyce in his motion and range.

N.

O.



The draught marcked with the letter P. sheoweth how this other cross bar is
to be put into the piece, and when it is dischardged the letter Q. sheoweth
how it spreads a sonder, and flies with great violence in his line and
range.

P.

Q.



THE TENTHE CHAP. Treatinge of the confines of a Kingedome, as also of the
good laws to by observed in the same, and of many necessary instructiones
thereunto apertaininge, and who the same is to by fortified and strong by
art, or by nature, or by both.
SUch as are desirouse to be couriose and expert in warlike afaires it
imports that they be of good judgment in fortificasiones, as well to
offend as to defend; Notwithstanding that for this purpose in all kingdoms
and states are elected ingineres a luinge them a good pinsion: Yet such as
are of long practice in war, and do aplie them selves well in hope to by
advanced, by their a proved good parts and suficiencie ought to exercice
them selves in fortificationes, bienge very necessary in own who profesed to
be expert in this art of war, and know how to intrinch and fortify him
self in many ocurrantes in oppen filde, how to cut a trince to win a town
or any strong place: As also to know how to draw the plott of towns fortes
and castelles, and also in knowinge all necessaries for the defense thereof, and
to know how to prevente the stratagemes to be feared of his enemy.

Douptless thies things are of great consideration, for the strenghte of
akingdome consists much in being well fortified, together with the quantity
and quality of his subjects, and in the good quality of his dominion and
country: Those princes and Reepublikes are judged mighty and strong, which in
their kingdoms and states do montaine good religion, good laws and good
arms, and do exercice the same, and do enjoy holsom air, fertile ground and
natural strenghte, with such other conveniente commodities thereunto required;
To by understood that all countries are strong by nature or by art or by
both; By nature they are strong when they are inuiored with the sea round
about, or on part thereof, or backed with marrasses or riueres, and those to
be strong by art, and in their frontieres next adjoyninge and places most
conveniente to have towns castelles and fortresses fortified by art. All
confines are either maritime or mediterraneall or both the one and the other,
whether they are montanouse places or in plain campaina, or do participate of
the one and the other, if they by mediterraneall it must by viewed and
considered on whate part the enemy might come to offend the same, and where
he might most comodiouse come to atempte, And it is also to be considered on
whate parts he might make his inroades, and retire a gain with safety, and
whether their by any situation which being fortified by the enemy might
moleste or a noy the country next adioyninge: If the confines of the kingdom
by maritime or on the sea coaste, all the coaste and circuide of the same are
to by viewed and remarcked, that prevention might be taken in due time, in as
much as may posible to hinder the enemies imbarcasion, in the places most
fit for the same; Yea and in all places which might by suspected (if it be
posible) for the better security of the kingdom or state, but in some
kingdoms the circuide and places on the sea coaste are so great that hardly
all can be fortified, and so the enemy ariuinge with a mighty army, and might
be in a place little suspected, may put the kingdom and country in great peril
and danger, as was seen by the spanishe navy at the conqueste of portugal,
when they landed near cascales in a place never thought upon by the
portugeses, so that they found them selves deceived, thinckinge that the
disembarcation should have been betwexte the citti of Lisboa and Sangilians
castle, where they stoude fortified in their trinches, with determination to
hinder the dise^barcation of the spanish navy, but he landed in aplace far
better for his purpose, and of much lesh danger, which was on the other side
of cascales toward the north little toughte of by the portuges, so that it is
toughte that sea coasts are with great cost and dificulties defended, thouge
their be many places strong by nature or by art; And for as much as their
be diveres and variable qualities of confines, and hardly any rules to be
given for their proporsiones, nor whate distance from frontier to frontier, it
must be presumed that the confines of akingdom does houlde some corespondance
with the circuide of a citti, in fortifienge whereof the bulwarks are of the
most importante memberes, the which most comonlie are put in the places where
they can most offend the enemy, and defend them selves, and the place,
regardinge due distance in such sort, that the one may defend the other in
as much as may by with their artillery and small shot. And in like manner the
curtines and N. I.
flanks betwexte bulwarck and bulwarck, with other conciderationes thereunto
apertaininge, and even so the fortes to be made in the frontieres are to houlde
the like proportion and correspondance with the confines of the contry as do
the bulwark with the curtines of acitti or strong place, the one to be placed
so near and in due distance unto the other, that they may asiste and socour
one another, and in such parts that they may damnifie the enemy, and defend
them selves in as much as can be posible.

Number. I.
THe places bienge viewed and found apt to receive offense by the enemy, and
also to offend him, it is necessary to fortify the same as well upon the sea
coasts as the inlande with strong fortificationes, taking good advicement
and careful consideration in choisinge the situation thereof, whether it by on
plains or hills or marittim, or consistinge of all the three, understandinge
that the circuide of the place or fortification is to have aconveniente space
round about (neither to much nor to little for many respects.) The
situasiones in plains, are strong which are invioroned with deep lakes
great moors great riveres, and such as may by sonke under water in time of
necessity, as in Holande and Zelande, and such as have acampaina raza or
plain, sufficient distante from all things that might over comaunde the
same. The situation that is upon a hill, that is strong that stands on the
most higheste part thereof, and all vnderlaied with natural rocks round
about, not havinge near it any superior nor equal moante, as is the castle
of lisburne. For all situationes which have a dificulte access are strong when
they can not be offended from other adioyninge moantes and the much more
stronger when it is not minable. All strong places most comonlie are won
either be force of arms, battery, treason, surprice, or by long beseedginge,
or by assault, scalinge, or underminige: The maritime situationes are strong
when they are compased by the sea, or part thereof, and the rest divided from
the maine by great and deep ditches as is the castle of san Jean in
Portugal, who has on the shore side a deep ditch dug upon a rock, and
the maine sea on the other side, or buitlte upon the topp of some rock with
the said commodities, as is the penon of veles or the castle of cascales in
Portugal. Cities and towns are made strong by nature and industry of those
by nature we have all ready spoken in the strenght of situationes: Cities by
industry are strong by the form and by the matter, strong by the matter
when they have thick walls, great terraplenos, broad and deep ditches. By
the form they are strong when it is framed in such sort that the most
fardeste and all quarteres may have corespondance to offend the enemy with the
cannon and fyry shot. Of this sort are those which do most near a proach,
unto the sircular figure but with good regard of the due lardgnes and
proportion of the curtines, and equal distance from bulwark to bulwark.

Their intereth amongste thies all towns and strong fortes consistinge of
five, six seven, eighte, nine, or ten ravelinges, and curtines, by direct
line, and who many more angeles, so much the better the four anguled of all
is the weakeste. It is to be understood that small places of them selves are
weak because they can not so sufuciently resist any excessive battery, and
other offenses as great places may which have room capable enough to raise
defenses and necessary rampares and horn wourkes, a gainste any great force,
neither ought they to be so lardge that the circuide thereof would require
awhole army to defend itt.

Number. II.
THe fortificationes of cities and castelles is principally grounded a gainste
the offense of great ordenance, and also defended with the same and with
other fyrie weapon: It is to be considered that the artillery is divided and
differensed into greatness or Zices Royal, and into lesher zices.

Of the zice Royal is that piece that shoots of seavintine pound upwarde, as
is the culverrin the quarter cannon: the demi cannon, the cannon and double
cannon, the pedrero basalisco and such like. And for the lesser zice the
diference is to be understood that all pices that shoot bullet from
seavintine pound weighte downewardes as is the demiculverin, the saker, the
minnon, the falcon and falconett even to the rabinet and arcabuse de crocke.

The artillery from whence a city, forte or strong place may receive most
offense and domadge, is that of the greatest zice, for of the lesher zice there
is no great doupte to by had, since that the demiculverin can do no great
offense nor domadge, and also from that zice downewardes, and therefore, the
bulwarks terraplenos and parapetes are to be made in such sort and strenghte
as they may be able to resist and bear the blow and gulpe of the artillery,
of the greateste zice; mattokes shoules or spades are very necessary
instru^mentes, for the same. Relation being taken of the form of the city,
forte, or fortress, by it either of 5.6.7. or 8. angles, or ravelinges, or of
how many soever it is necessary to couple the same, with their convenient
members, to make it proportional in strenghte.

The bulwarks are upon the angles or corneres of the form of the city or
forte, and of such distance and due proportion, as shall seem to the skillful
Inginer, and they ought to by made optouse or blunte, and not sharp, for so
they are more strong and capable.

The parts of the bulwark are the travesses or flanks orechion, pum, guard,
or shoulder, the front or curtine, the conter-fronte or spurs, the pestilles
or parapettos, the place or room for the artillery. The bulwarks as i said
are placed within the angles where place is to be made reddy for the artillery,
and to mount the same in such a heighte, that it may discover the camp or
circuid on every where in at much as is posible.

It is to by considered that the curtines of the bulwark shall stand in such
sort that they may be touched or beaten from the first corner from whose
flank or traves it takes his defense, and the line or point is to be taken
some whate more from the flanker, and in such distance agreeable to the greatness
of the bulwark, so acordinge to the greatness of the same, the measures are to
by increased or deminised, observinge the due proportion required; It is
necessary to make in the bulwarks certain issues, the which are made in the
part that looks toward the flanker or travess, thies are most necessary
to put men out for the ditch. The conterfortes and apertenances of the
bulwarck, have also their measures and proportiones, the which i leave to
avoid prolixitie, and because that they may by more or lesh acordinge the
discresion and plates of the curiouse and perfect Inginer. The Cavallero
within side adjoyninge to the curtine in the mideste of them are builded, and
from such Cavalleros are the curtines or walls of the bulwark defended, and
also the field, and for this cause are the bulwarks wont to by made, and to
raise them so high, that they may discover well the places of their
executiones.

Number. III.
THe gates or ports of a town city or forte, are to by placed in parts,
most comodiouse for the service of the same, both in peace and war,
conveniente to receive in, or to put out people most safe and sure from all
offenses (in as much as can by) the gate must have his drawn bridge made of
strong timber and yrones necessary for the same, it is to be reasonable broad
for the comoditie of the wagones and artillery, and very strong, if their by
no more then one drawn bridge or gate let them not be direct. Necessary it
where that no high wales nor hedges of gardines, nor ochardes nor such like by
permited on the outewarde parts of the gates or walls of any city or place
of importance; and a distance of 600. pases, but all razed and made plain on
all the circuide round about, which do offten times serve for ashelter to the
enemy to aproache of asuddaine near the walls, that they can not by
discerned, till they com into the ditch, by reason that trees and hedges do
shelter them, by which means many places of importance are soon lost.

The terra plena is the only remedy against the fury and execution of the
artillery, and is to by made with in, and behind the wall close to the same;
and the cavallers and bulwarks ought to by made in such forte, that the wall
bienge fallen, the same might remain and stand like amightie mount against
the enemy, and should by made of such fast and massy earth (that it
cromble slipp nor roll not, and so fall down) as do many fortificationes made
of runinge sand; the heighte and bread thereof ought to by such as the
comoditie and seat will require: All thies things are the memberes of a
fortification, the which how much more fit and proporsionally they by placed
about the boddy of acitti or place of importance, so much does it make the
same more strong and beautiful.

It is also to by noted, that if a ny of thies situationes their by near
adioyninge any woods, vine yardes, orchardes, tries, houses, churches,
monesteries or other edificies, consideringe if they be such as might annoy
the enemy or render him any comoditie, whereby he may easily hinder the citti
castle or forte, prevension ought to by taken in due time; If the ceate of
the citti forth or fortress by marittime or sea coaste, there must by
considered the quality of that sea, and of the haven, and of whate depthe it
is, whether if it has any little Isle arrocke near unto itt the which; the
enemy inioyenge may offend and anoye you, and whether it has any shore bay
receptable, or place of refuge, or any river mouth where the enemy fleet
reedinge easily at an ancor, might hinder and empleache their socoure by
sea, and continually moleste them, and whether it be such that the enemy
might advantadge him self therewith. And all the aforesaid conciderationes
touching the situation of sea or land, to forecaste the same in due time with
great care and prudence, in as much as may posible. The same regard is to be
had within the place, and to recnoledge every part thereof, bigininge with the
form, and then the heighte and thicknes of the wall, and the quality thereof
Moreover it is to by viewed in whate part or parts it is most weak and
feoble, whate flanks it has, whate terraplena, how high and how thike, whate
space betwexte the same and the inhabitants, whate gates, how framed and
seated, whate ditch, how broad, and how deep, whether it be dry or with
water, whate intries or sallies without the place city or town, and whether
the habitasiones of the place be on high above the alture of the walls or
equal with them, or whether the walls do surmonte them, and finally all other
considerationes wourthie to be noted.

Number. IV.
THies conciderationes duly had, and resolusion taken, then Aploott must be
drawn with conveniente rules and measures to reduce the citti forte or place
to the best form that may by, with as little ruin or defeatinge of houses or
churches as can be, plasinge the bulwarks, and cavalleres and other edifices
conveniente to their seats and purpose in the place most fit for the same,
and that to be don with as little loss to the inhabitants as may be possible.
Resolution taken upon the design form and greatenes that the place or
fortress is to have, he is to fortify the feobleste part or parts thereof
first, and the apteste to by offended. The fortification well fortified and
finished, it is necessary that it be furnished with a conveniente garrison of
souldiores for the better security and defense thereof, for otherwise it were
like a boddy without a soul (and biside this) if it have not provision of all
sorts of vitualles, artillery and munitiones, and of all arms defencive and
offencive in good and sufficie^te store, and of shoules spades mattokes
pickaxes, sawes, hameres, iron, sledges, bars of iron, nails, ropes, etc.
And many other necessaire instruments to wourke in earth, or in walls or in
stones or in tember, and also in water, mandes, basketes, hand barrowes and
wheel barrowes, plankes, beams, stakes, watlinges gabiones, and other things
at batteries and beseedginge, without the which it is impossible to repair
and intrinche against batteries asaultes and other ofences of the enemy, all
which belonges to the office care and duty of the general of the artillery:
to see them provided in every town or place of any importance within the
realm, as also all other places which stands for the defense and safety of
the same.

Thies fortificationes we treat of are very costely, and hardly to by
performed but by a mighty Prince, and specially such as are made with brike
stone good earth and thurff, as is the castle and citti of Anwourpe, Gante,
and san Gilian in Portugal, and the castle of Millan, and sundry otheres the
lick, are hardly brought to perfection but with expense of millones, so now
adays all places are fortified with earth and thurff only, as is for the
most part the great town of Gante, Mastrick, Dam, Ostende, Hulste and many
more places in the low countries, as Sluse, Weasell and the town of Breda,
which have endured such gallante batteries, sufficient to wear out a great
and mighty prince, both in his power and purse, which was to be seen in the
famous siedge and regaininge of Breda, where all Kings and Princes in
Cristendom for the most part on both sides, sheowed their forces and might,
not withstandinge it was won by the invencible power of that mighty Monarke
the Catholic King of Spain, troughe his great might and power, acompanied
with the prudente brave conduction and military industry of his renoomed
General Marquis Spinola, and many brave Captains and souldiores, together
with the incomporable power love and unity of his faithful and renoomed
lubjectes of the united provinces of the low countries, to their great glory
and honor, and so spread abroad and related by many auctores to their and
predecessores great fame and renoome of perpetual memory to all posterity,
whereof to relate it were tediouse, and incredible to such as have not seen the
same, with so many thousands of wagones full of all sorts of vitualles and
amunisiones cominge every day, where might by perceived the love and great
encomparable might of his united subjetes of the united provinces. Al which i
have seen and this town of Breda inuiorened with adoble trince round about
some five leages with very many fortes and redutes, all which was finished in
very feowe days with earth and fagotes. In fine such fortificasiones may
serve to good purposes and endure sufficiently, being well and ingeniouslie
made and of good earth, and carefully remended in due time, and when anny
piece of the same should fall or decay, presently to be repaired and made upp.

Number. V.
AL strong places of importance are to be well fortified within as also on the
outewarde parts, and great consideration ought to by taken that the enemy
may not a proach to the walls or gates, without being discovered before they
may come to execute their intent, for which in all strong houldes and places
of importance, most comonlie, are placed on the outewarde parts roundes and
ce^teries, and places for their defense and retreat, with such consideration
and previntion, that the enemy do not a rive unknown to the desired place of
their execution as related by their spies, without first being spied out
in due time be the outewarde cinteries and roundes, so that all the rest may
have time to by all in arms, and each company to repair in time with speed,
with the first advice or alarm to their culoures, and there in all readdines
to repair where they shall be commanded by the Comaunder or Governor of the
place. Advertisinge that for many conciderationes no company ought to repair
or budge without order of the Governor or Sardgente-Mayor, for fear of
inconveniences and secret corespondance. To see thies and many more ocurrantes
in war prevented, it is most necessary that the Governor and Sardgente Mayor
do lodge as near possible to the place of arms or meaine guard, so that
urgent ocasiones may by prevented in due time, and with all speed as ocasion
shall require, the cintery perdue and outewarde roundes ought to be chosen of
vigilante and brave souldiores, advertisinge that the roundes ought still to
go forward, and very scilente, and to make no alto nor stays as some
careless roundes do, and that for the great trust and care refered to their
chardge; to see thies well ordered and fullfilled, the Governor and
Sardgente-Mayor by turns should go the round, and findinge the roundes and
cinteries not acomplishinge their obligationes to see them severely punished.

Such fortificationes as are planted on hills or high rokes, great
consideration ought to by taken for their due defense, though the asendinge
of such places by dificculte, yet it were good they should by compassed with
double palisados for their better security, and with a parapet made of thurff
or brick at the foot of each of them, and way for the round betwexte them and
the wall.

Number. VI.
FOr the more security of castelles and strong places are most commonly
planted in their front haulfe-mounes oppen on the inward side, in which for
their better security, is wont of right to be agarde every day and night,
under which shelter the gates of the town or castle are made for their better
security from the fury of the great ordenance, as also for other respects,
and that they may discover the enemy, and hinder their designs. It is very
requisite that the fosso or ditch be deep and broad enough, and that the
curtines be of good heighte that without great dificulte it can not be
scaled.

For the better asurance of all strong places, it is necessary that they by
well provided with strong and vigilante watches, and for many good respects
that no company which shall inter the watch shall know their a pointed place
till the very time that the watch is set (or alitle before) for fear of
treason by some provooked by interes, or proceedinge trough afrontes, or great
injuries received from the Governor touching their reputasion or honor or
means.

It also may proceed of some of bad govermente and inclinationes, for which
cause they are not prefered nor advanced, it may also by invented by burgeres,
who bienge overmuch opressed with tyranny, and findinge no conveniente remedy
nor justice executed for hainouse factes and disorderes committed, do procure
treasones and revoltes.

When any such ocasiones are suspected or feared the roundes are to be
doubled, and send contraroundes of Officeres and men of great trust, for the
vigilance care trust and fidelity hoped of them, for prudente and careful
souldiores makes easy materes of great N. VII.
dificultie, and by their care and vigilance do bring them to a good end to
their great honor and perpetual fame, resultinge of their brave and
prudente cariadge and good aplicationes, resolute valor and care: All brave
souldiores ought to be of full resolution to endure all travailes and hardness
when ocation shall require, and in thies extremities to sheowe them selves with
great couradge, fidelity and obedience, for an honorable souldioris to by
tried in time of most necessity; where in deed such as are of brave spirits
and generouse minds do manifest their affection and valor in ocasiones of
most extremity, as by daily experience we see in ocurrantes of war, of the
which many examples may be declared.

Number. VII.
THe security of strong houldes and fortresses depends of the good order
and vigilance of the Governores and rest ministres of the same, and that, as
well within as without side both by polecie and Military Discipline, in
ministringe good justice betwexte the inhabitants and souldiores, and in
ordaininge a good and vigilante watch, and to be well provided of all
necessaries in due time. And preventinge the stratagemes and plottes of the
enemy in as much as can be, havinge always an eye toward the burgeres and
souldiores, concideringe their humores condisiones and fidelity, their
should by always secret spies to learn of their estate and humores, and
whate they comunicate in secrett and public, and finally their actiones and
inclinasiones, and to have good regard of such strangeres as do arive into
such places, if they be people well known or not faithful or suspected.

In the ocurrantes and courses of war, great and many are the considerationes
required in the general of an army, and in his counsel of war, in prudently
preventinge manny materes of great importance, of present and future
ocationes (with aforcaste prudente prevention) which otherwise bienge induced
(do often fall out to the great discomodity of his Majesty's service) in
atemptes of manny honorable interprises and incounteres, to the great decay of
Military Discipline, which by daily experience we see, that for want of
prudente conductores of care trust and fidelity, many honorable interprises
are lost, resultinge of the little perfection of many Officeres.

A matter wourdie to be noted examined and prevented for the due orderinge of
future ocasiones, of whate resulteth that so many oulde and experimented
souldiores of the late reformasiones in germany and low country went on the
countrary side to the great discomoditie of the house of austria, sense which
time who many millones were consumed in raisinge of neowe levies and recrutes
for the furtherance of the wars of the low countries, yea to my judgemte as
much as might intertaine an invincible army of oulde and experimented
souldores, duly paid and satisfied. By daily experience we see that thies
neowe levies for the most part, in ocasiones of service feowe were found to
asiste; which i have noted and pitted often times, for bienge so great alet
to his Majesty's service: The Omnipotente inlighten his Majesty's faithful
ministeres in preventinge in due time the conveniente course of a matter of so
great importance: And agreate enemy for the unprofitable consuminge of his
Majesty's treasure and Indies. Let none think that i disalue recrutes and
reforsinge of companies in their due time and conveniente course, profitable
to his Majesty's service. Undeniable it is that an army well disciplined
ordered contended, and conducted with prudente and brave comaunderes, though
lesher in number are by all reason masteres of the victory, which all auctores
that wrote of this art do afirme, and by daily experience we find to be true.

The ropose and security of a Kingdom or state dependes for the most part in
observinge good laws, good wars, and continual practice of Military
Discipline, whereof their are very many probable examples, as plainly hapened
to Anibal that renoomed Captain of war, and to the invincibel Romans that
at lenghte in neglectinge Military Discipline and exercice of arms was cause
of their perdition; and when they least feared of any a tempes of their
enemy, and that resultinge for biengc wholly given to vice, regalitie and
repose, and forgetful of all Military exercice.

Happy is that Kingdomme where good laws and good discipline is in
continual use and exercice, and always ready for the prepared vice and malice
of their enemy, ready for the alarm when it shall present, which offten
happen when we least think upon. Happy is the Prince, and renoomed the
General who prudently does prevente the prepared malice and stratagemes of
their enemy and of future ocasiones.

I doupte not but those of perfection and deep judgment in the art of war
shall both admire and comende the extraordinary pains taken for the due
orderinge of this wourke and in explicatinge and putinge to light many deep
curiosities of rare importance in the office of the Sardgente-Mayor, and
ingienes of Fire-wourkes, as also the due and prudente orderinge of several
sorts of weapones manadged in war. All which with their neowe invented
impalinge of shot and wings, and their singular order to fight, as also
other deep curiosities of this art which were leifte in obscurity by many
auctores who wrote of this profession. And that to disperte the ingeniouse
wits of those inclined to learn the rare and deep curiosities of Military
science, that they may imitate them (in optaininge their desire) with long
and continual practice and good aplicationes, which now i reduced to light
in as much as military science, the rules of mathematicke and aritmeticke can
affourde, with their general rules proufes, proporsiones and tables, neowly
invented for that purpose, plainly sheowinge the reasones of each particular,
breefly declared in the tables of the battelles, and in several figures cut in
coper and wood plates: Not douptinge but those of perfect judgment in the
deep and rare curiosities of this art will comende the same, and a firm that
as yet no auctor did explicate more plain nor better of many particularities
leifte in obscurity in Fire-wourkes and specially in the office of a Sardgente
mayor, which now are redused into the perfect form ordained for their
executiones in as much as military science and the general rules of the same
can afourde. So that such as are couriouse and inclined to continual good
aplicasiones, and determined by virtue prude^te cariadge and perfection in
Military Discipline to by advanced may in short time learn all the
particularities in the office of a Sardgente Mayor, leifte in obscurity by
many auctores; Which now in this wourcke are plainly brought to light in
as much as military science can afourde or declare, which is not obtained by
vain glory nor here say.

But rather with long and continual practice and aplicationes in the theorick
and practice of war; with intent and desire to inlighten my beloved
countrymen and otheres, that they may know how to acomplishe their
obligationes with prudence and authority, and aplee them selves with care and
affection, in learning this noble art of war, and not to be inclined to i
delnes and bad examples, guarded with malice, inuy, puffinge pride and rude
ingnorance, overcaste with afaulse fisnomy and aneowe malisiouse conterfet
countenance, enemy to virtue, truth, plain dealinges and good examples. But
rather by virtue and good aplicasiones wound the hearts of raylinge spirits
full of ambision and changinge dispositiones, misled with blind malice,
venemouse and slanderouse tounges, harbored in their cancored hearts, full of
crucked dealinges and invy, subjecte to afrontes and vices, of bad life and bad
end, but honorably to imitate and follow the steps of those inclined to
virtue and continual good aplicationes.

THE CONCLUSION.
GEntle reader consider that virtue and continual good aplicationes and plain
dealinges is a presiouse guel, and most commonly are wont to have good
proceedinges, and finish with a happy end.

Suficiente examples our Irish nasion gave now of late for to imitate virtue
plain dealinges and good religion, By divine power bestowed, on that noble
and renoomed coronell Butler, in prudently preventinge the treachery and
prepared malice of Valstene and his Counseleres against the house of Austria.
Which the omnipotente bestowinge on him that special grace, and that to be
toughte resultinge of the undeniable truth, and plain dealinges of his, and
his predecessores, and of his renoomed Captains and souldiores that were with
him in that honorable interprice of perpetual memory.

Plainly might it by vnderstoude that thies Irish bienge so feowe in number,
that for the executinge of so great, so dangerouse, and almost vnespected and
impossible act of arms. (That it must by a gift bestwoed of the divine
power, for the benefit of truth and virtue of theires (and predecessores) still
groundinge and observinge true religion and vertouse life, so that they warded
this renoomed warrier Valstene with ablowe of his mortal end, with abucler
inuiorened with divine defense, and prosperity to the house of Austria, and of
perpetual renoome and glory to our Irish nasion. The omnipotente inlighten us
to imitate the undeniable true dealinges, virtue and resolute determination of
thies famous warrieres, and otheres of this nasion, inclined to virtue and
good examples. So that rooted rancor of inuy, slanderouse railinge tounges and
croucked maliciouse dealinges may not take place, in equallinge them selves
with the honorable observeres of truth, virtue, good aplicationes, and
Military Discipline. But rather banish those inclined to the wicked vice of
inny, moother of mischifes and base inclinationes, resultinge of barbarouse
proud blind ingnorance, enemy to virtue truth and good proceedinges,
subjecte to quarells, bakbitinge, murmuringe, disgraces, and bad examples, a
penetrater of ranckored hearts, of unconsiderate understandinge, little fearinge
God or man, of little conscience or reputation, daily decayenge and falinge unto
many odiouse crimes and disgraces, enemy to frindship and accord, subjecte to
afrontes and vices, of bad life and bad end; And which of all things is most
untollerable, and most odiouse in this noble profession of arms.

Gentle Reader you see who many good and probable examples set down in many
places of this wourcke, (for to imitate virtue) and follow the steps of the
renoomed, prudente, and valerouse Souldior, and that in many places you find
sufficient examples, how many borne of low degree, and bace linadge, have
atained unto great degries, dingnity, and fame of perpetual memory, and that
resultinge of their vertuse cariadge, renoomed acts, resolute
determinationes, and continual good aplicationes; And by daily experience we
see those inclined to vice, unruly factes, and bad examples do fall unto decay,
and many disgraces, and are hated by those inclined to virtue, and most
commonly such as do not amend do finish their lives with an unhappy and
miserable end. So i take leave besechinge the Omnipotente to give us the
grace, that we may live in his fear with unity and acorde, and finish with a
happy end. Amen.

The End of the third Book.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS VVourcke set down in brief.
IN the first Book are contained the military instructiones necessary to be
observed in the noble profession of arms a mongste the Infantery, from a
private Souldior, till the election and office of a Campe-master of a Regimente
of Infantery.

The second Book treatinge of the election of a Campe-master general, which
next to the Captain general is the chief conductor of an army, after
follows the election of the Captain general of the Artillery, and finishenge
with the office of a Captain general of an army.

The third Book treatinge of Fire-wourckes of rare executiones by sea and
land, and of the confines of a Kingdom, and the good laws to be observed in
the same, and how it is to be fortified by art or by nature, or by both, to
withstand the enemies a temptes, and the necessary courses convenente to be
taken.

A brife Table of the Chapteres, and most notableste things contained in this
wourcke.
THe I. Chapter declaringe the parts required in a private Souldior. fol. 1
The II. Chapter treatinge of the election and office of a Corporal of a
Company of Infantery. fo. 10 The III. Chapter declaringe the aproved parts,
and suficiencie of a Sardgente of a Company of Infantery, and how he is to be
elected. fo. 12 The IV. Chapter treatinge of the election and office of an
Ensign Bearer, or Alferis of a Company of Infantery, and the good parts
ordained in him. fo. 16 The V. Chapter treatinge of the election of a Captain
of a Company of Infantery, and many good parts and suficiency required in
him. fo. 20 The VI. Chapter treatinge of the office of a Sardgente mayor,
marchinge with his Regimente to garrison. fo. 29 The VII. Chapter treatinge of
the office of a Sardgent mayor, marchinge with his Regimente in campaina. fo.
51 A discourse of sundry and variable sorts of Squadrones of several sorts
of arms with their general rules and proufes with neowe invented
breviationes to that effect, in bringinge to light many deep curiosities of
importance leifte in obscurity by many Auctores; which now are reduced into
their perfection, as much as military science, and the rules of Mathematike
and Arithmeticke can a fourde, with neowe envented tables and brevasiones of
importance. fo. 61 The election and office of a Campe-master of a Regimente of
Infantery, with which finisheth the first Book of this wourcke. fo. 140


The Table of the second Book.
THe I. Chapter treatinge of the election and office of a Campe-master general
of an army. fo. 147 The II. Chapter declaringe the election, and suficiency
required in the Captain general of the artillery. fo. 151 The III. Chapter
mensioninge the Artillery conveniente to by conducted with an army, acordinge
the executiones to by pretended by the General. fo. 154 The IV. Chapter
sheowinge many reasones for the defense and security of a town, city, or
forte with necessary instructiones thereunto apertaininge. fo. 158 The V.
Chapter treatinge of many good parts required in a perfectc Souldior, how
would disire to have matteres of importance to by refered to his care and
chardge, and many good instructiones touching the same. fo. 163 The VI.
Chapter treatinge of the office of a Captain general of an army, and of many
good parts and rare suficiency required in a personadge of so high dingnitie
and degree. fo. 165


The Table of the third Book.
THe I. Chapter treatinge of patarres, and their several executiones, and
how they are manadged, and the compositiones and necessaries required for
them, and the stratagemes that are to by used for their executiones. fo. 175
The II. Chapter sheoweth how to make atorche to endure against the force of
wind and water with artificial compossiones, which will burn with great
vehemence and force, and strange to the behoulderes for the noyce and terror of
the slame. fo. 177 The III. Chapter sheowinge how to arm artificial canes
armed with Fire-wourcke, for several execusiones of importance be sea and
land. fo. 179 The IV. Chapter sheowinge how to arm tronckes or canes armed
with wild fire, another manner of way. fo. 180 The V. Chapter treatinge how to
arm artificial bulletes, and neowe invented cross bars armed with
Fire-wourkes, declaringe how they are to by manadged, and the composiones
required for their executiones, and how some are to by used and armed for
several execusiones of sea servises, as also by land, to burn towns, or the
enemies quarteres, as also neowe envented cross bars with long chains of
iron, to be shot in the front of a battle or any order or array, which bienge
prudently handeled are of rare execusiones, yea ten times more then your
ordinary bulletes. Concludinge with good instrucsiones to follow and imitate
the stepes of the vertuse, renoomed, prudente and valerouse souldior, and
abandon those tached with ugly crimes, and with the wicked rancored vice of
envy bad inclinasiones, and bad examples, and the necessary instructiones and
probable examples both of the one and the other. fo. 183


A TABLE OF THE NOTABLESTE THINGS contained in this Book.
A.
A Bad and covardly inclination to be givin to quarelles and disputes bienge on
the watch. Folio 6 Abase and odiouse act in the persuenge of a victory to fall
a spoylinge til the enemy by wholly yealded and license granted. Folio 7 Alferis
Oloa his valor and brave determination. Folio 17 Alferis or ensign bearer is
not to give license to any souldior to leave the company nor put any souldior
at liberty without the consent of his Captain or superior Officeres. Folio
16 An Alferis Tudesco his valor. Folio 17 A good Cristian of vertouse life
and good applicationes most commonly is wont to have good succeses. Folio 22
A necessary thing in war to have some horses in each company of foot for
many respects. Folio 22 Acomendable thing in war to see matteres prudently
prevented in due time. Folio 22 Asouldior ought to conform him self with his
host for bienge comendable. Folio 23. Agenerouse and louinge mind of an
officer in war, is highly to by commended. Folio 36 Alouinge prudente and
kind Officer causes alouinge and obediente souldior. Folio 37 Abad custom,
and not to by tolerated that souldiores do lend their arms. Folio 37 A
perfect Sardgente-Mayor is wourdie to by employed in any execusion in war.
Folio 40 Alarm bienge presented, the necessary instructiones. Folio 46 A
souldior of a prude^te cariadge is wourdie to by esteemed by his Captain.
Folio 60 A Sargente ought to by inclined to continual good aplicationes and
examples. Folio 133 Auditor his election and obligationes. Folio 141
Arcabusero, a Spanish wourd singnifiethe a souldoure which carries acaliver for
arms. Aguasiill, a Spanish wourde one tha^ does asiste the executiones of
justice. Ambuscado, a Spanish wourde signifienge an ambuish. Armada, a Spanish
wourde signifiethe anavall army of ships of war. Alerta, a Spanish wourde
singnifieth that when their is any suspicion of the enemy, the soldiers to by
presently reddy with their arms in hand. Artillery, a Spanish wourde which
we call in English great ordenance. Alferis, aspanish wourde singnifieth an
Ensign bearer. A dangerouse thing the manadging of powder. Folio 151
Amunitiones of powder led and match are to by put in secure places. Folio 152
Amater of great emportance to by well provided before hand of all sorts of
amunitiones for many respects. Folio 153 Artillery required for the executions
of an army in the filde. Folio 154 A Governor of any place of importance bienge
determined to yealde the same covardly, or by means of intereses, the
necessary prevention. Folio 158 A prudente conductor of aresolute determination
of his and his soldiores are wont to have good successes. Folio 161 A general
inclined to reward all brave actiones in war, agreate comfort to honorable
soldiores. Folio 161 Atilla King of the hunos a proud and cruel man overcomed
be Theodorico King of the Burgon^onos. Folio 162 Alexander Mangnus bienge
young of years begone to govern. Folio 166 Anibal after triumphinge so many
victories was overcomed by Scipio Africano. Folio 167 A rare invencion to
discover the enemy at night bienge resolved to fall on any piece of service.
Folio 178. Artificial canes or tronckes armed with Fire-wourck for many rare
executiones by sea and land. Folio 179 Artificial enstrumentes of Fire-wourk
armed. Folio 192 Artificial arowes. Folio 193 Artificial instruments to burn
any combustable thing. Folio 194
B.
BAse facsioneres are not to by permited amongst hon^orable souldiores. Folio
22 Barberes necessary instruments in acompani. Folio 26 Best ordered and
disciplined in war, are most commonly Masteres of the victory. Folio 30 Bad
customs prevented in due time. Folio 37 Barber his election and what
resulteth. Folio 142. Bagadge and the order given to march. Folio 54. Battelles
of several forms, and their general rules and proufes. Folio 61 Battle
square of men of 464. soldiers. Folio 69. Battle square of men of 361.
soldiers. Folio 71 Battle of 576. souldiores Folio 73 Battle or cross
battle of 1416. men. Folio 67 Battle square of men of several sorts of
arms proporsionally divided and guarnished by the rule of proporsion. Folio
79. Battle of so much and the one haulfe more in front then in flank. Folio
8^ Battles of proporsions of inequality, and the general rules for their
framinge. Folio 81. Battle of so much and the ^/3. part more in front then
in flank. Folio 84. Battle of two times more in front then in flank and the
general rule for their framinge in proporsion. Folio 87 Battle square of men.
Folio 88 Battle square of men with a center for hurt men and bagadge
guarnished proporsionally with dry pikes, corseletes, and musketes. Folio 93
Battle square of men of six nasiones aluenge by the rule of proportion to each
nasion his part of the vangarde. Folio 99. Battles of the said 6. nasiones
divided into 3. battelles. Folio 105 Battle square of ground. Folio 113
Battle square of ground. Folio 116 Battle square of ground divided into
five battelles. Folio 119 Battle or cross battle of broad front divided
into 4. battelles. Folio 123. Battle of broad front of 6000. Folio 129
Battle with a center of arcabuseros. Folio 139 Battelles or an army divided
into several battallones of broad front. Folio 123 Battle of 3000. men
divided into 6. battelles of broad front. Folio 124 Battle of the form of a
triangle. Folio 125 Battle or an army divided into five battelles square of
ground. Folio 138 Battle or an army divided into 7. battelles square of
ground by the rule of proportion. Folio 138 Boats necessary instruments for
an army. Folio 153 Better and more honorable to die in defense of a just and
honorable act then yealde to any base imaginasion. Folio 159. Brimstone and
how it is to be refined to give it more force. Folio 177 Bulletes or cross
bars armed with wild fire their rare execusiones. Folio 185. Balls of
wild fire and their rare execusiones. Folio 186 Balls of wild fire made to
burn with great vehemence within the water. Folio 195 Bisono a Spanish wourde
which singnifieth in English arawe souldior vnexperte in his arms and
Military Discipline.
C.
Corporal and the good parts and qualities in him required. Folio 11
Corporal is to instruct and give good examples to the souldiores of his
squadron. Folio 11 Captain de campaina is to observe. Folio 143 Captains, and
how they ought to by elected. Folio 20 Chaplen mayor his election and good
examples. Folio 142 Captains and expectasiones of their military prudence,
and good examples and aplicationes. Folio 20 Comessaries their instructiones
and privilege. Folio 47 Captains their sinister election to the great decay
of Military Discipline. Folio 20 Captains electinge corporales and devidinge
the company into squadrones and how. Folio 22 Captains and the Military
prudence and good parts ordained in them. Folio 24 Captains of prudente
cariadge and good examples are to by imitated. Folio 25 Captains to take
their turn in marchinge. Folio 53 Chaplenes necessary instruments in
acompany. Folio 26 Captains in march when they are to go ahorsbak. Folio 53
Captains in marchinge or in garrison and who they are to by imitated trough
their good examples. Folio 27 Captains marchinge troughe acountry and how
they are to behave them selves givinge good examples to dischardge them selves
and ministering justice. Folio 27 Cause of decay of Military Discipline. Folio
40 Centery perdue. Folio 43 Captains chosen to by employed in executions of
importance. Folio 57 Centery whate he is to do, the enemy aprochinge. Folio 64
Captains ought to asiste their soldiers in time that they are driven to
extreme necessity. Folio 59 Centery perdue, cauled the security of the camp.
Folio 60 Captain de campaina to cause the bagadge to by charged in due time in
ocasiones of marchinge. Folio 132 Camp Master general of an army his election
and office and the aproved parts and suficiency required in him. Folio 147
Convoyes and how they are to by employed. Folio 148 Convoyes to take a
convenient course for their good order and security. Folio 148 Ciro King of
Percia for revenge of the drowninge of adeere friend of his did overcom the
force of the great river of gange Folio 150. Compositiones and mixtures
required for the executiones of Fire-wourkes. Folio 152. Conductores of the
great ordenance. Folio 155. Generals to prevente many matteres in time. Folio
165 Careless officeres and soldiors are wont to by puzeled and amazed. Folio
156 Captain general bienge resolved to conker aforaigne country. Folio 168
Cause of discontentement of souldiores. Folio 170 Corporal or Cauo de esquadro
a Spanish wourde singifieth acomaunder under the Captain over 20. or 25.
souldiores. Camisada, a Spanish wourde signifieng the investinge or putinge on
a shurte over the souldior is armor or a parell which is used in night time in
ocasiones of soddaine exploites on the enemy. Campaina, a Spanish wourd which
signifiethe a filde. Campaina rasa, a Spanish wourde is to say an open filde
rased plain without any incombrance. Camp Master general a Spanish
derivative is to say the high marshal of the filde. Castallano, is the cheef
comaunder of a castle. Cannonnero, signifies a guner. Cavalleria, a Spanish
wourde singnifieth souldiores a horse bake. Cavallero a Spanish wourde
singnifieth a gentelman, in some places, it singnifieth a high mount of earth
wheruppon great ordenance is planted to discover the filde. Center is the
just midell of a battle or other thing. Cintinell, a Spanish wourde a
souldior standinge in post. Coronell or Collonell, singnifieth a Camp master
over a regimente. Colors a wourde in use in English for the ensign bie^ge of
variable coulores. Corselete, a Spanish wourde is the complet armor of a foot
souldior. Convoy, a Spanish wourde singnifienge a guard of souldiores sent for
the safe conducte of munision, or any other thing to be safe-conducted from
one place to another. Contra round, a Spanish wourd and is a number of
Officeres goinge to visit the corpse de guard, watches, cintineles, and also
the ordinary roundes, to see if they a complish their duty with vigilance and
care. Captain general inventinge neowe ocasiones in war to diverte the
enemy and corruptinge them with money. Folio 169. Compositiones ordained for
artificial canes. Folio 180.
D.
DIsobedience breeds many mischifes. Folio 4 Don Pedro Conde de Feria his
good examples in the expungnation of dura. Folio 7 Decay of Military
discipline and of which it does resulte. Folio 21 Ducke de Alua examples of
his administrasion of justice and severitie for disorderes committed. Folio 23
Doctor of fisicke his election. Folio 142 Drom mayor his election. Folio 142
Device or token amongste the souldiores of an army that they may know one
another, necessary to by prevented. Folio 159. Don Sebastian King of Portugal
the cause of his perdition. Folio 167 Decay of Military Discipline. Folio 170
Deposito or center is the middle of a batel or of any other thing a Spanish
vvourde.
E.
Ensigns at their first deliveringe to the Alferishes the seremonies used
Folio 22. Examples of punishmente resultinge of disobedience, and disorder, and
their due revvard. Folio 5 Examples of constancy, pascience, brave
determination and resolution of souldiores. Folio 4 Examples of the diference
betvvexte oulde experimented souldiores and ravve men. Folio 136. Executiones
of powder, no apelasion nor graoe to by expected. Folio 151 Envy daily
decaienge into many crimes and disgrases. Folio 163 Escalada, a Spanish vvourde
singnifiethe the scalinge of a wall with ladderes. Enginero, a Spanish
vvourde, it is one skillful in fortificasiones, and other stratagemes for
war.
F.
FUrieles, of companies are to by chosen of men of aproved fidelity and good
parts for many respects. Folio 25 Furieles, in the distributinge of
munitiones and making of quarteres their instructiones. Folio 25 Furieles,
sometimes do commit disorderes wourdie of severe punishmente. Folio 26 Furious
countenance of officeres some times are odiouse when it resulteth of a proud
inconciderate mind. Folio 27 Furieles marchinge their instructiones for to
make the quarter. Folio 54 Fidelity a precious thing in war. Folio 158. For
want of trustispies many good ocasiones and interprises are lost. Folio 169
Favor friendship and afection in Military electiones is cause of great decay of
Military Discipline. Folio 170 Fosso a Spanish wourde singnifieth the ditche of
a town or forte. Flank a frence wourde singnifiethe the side of a battle of
men. Front, a frence wourd is the face or foreparte of a battle, front is
also the fore part of a wall or bulwarcke. Furiel a Spanish wourde
singnifieth ac learke. Fortificasiones and confines of a Kingdom and necessary
instructiones. Folio 198 Fortificationes their memberes. Folio 201
Fortificasiones and the consideration to by taken for the placinge of the gates
of a city or any strong place. Fortificationes and prevention to be taken for
their better security. Folio 202 Fortificationes and the conveniente course to
by taken for their situasion. Folio 203. Fortification and several
necessaries for their defense and to be prevented in due time. Folio 203
G.
Good aplicationes furderethe the prosperity and good success of many
ocasiones. Folio 9 Great considerationes and military prudence is required for
several executions of Captains and brave comaunderes. Folio 24 Good examples
of Aniball and his Military prudence, and the cause of his decay and overtrowe.
Folio 38 Gardes or watches, are places of great respect. Folio 44 Gamesteres
their instructiones. Folio 47 Gastadores necessaire to prevente and remedy
dificulties in march. Folio 149 General aproachinge nere a place which he
determines to beleager. Folio 150 General of the artillery the care he is to
take in the election of his officeres and gentleman of the artillery. Folio 151
Great ordenance when it is planted to batter. Folio 152 Good and vigilante
watch is to by putt upon the storte houses and amunisiones. Folio 152 Great
store of powder and other necessaries required for an army. Folio 154 General
of the artillery very necessary he by acompanied with persons of perfection
in several sorts of Fire-wourkes. Folio 156 General of an army conquestinge
aforaigne contry necessary preventiones to by taken. Folio 160 General, in
chosinge persons for ocationes of importance and of whom. Folio 160 General,
ought never to by weery in toilinge after virtue. Folio 170 Garitas a Spanish
wourd singnifieth a centery house. General of an army the glorious issues of
his deep and prudente designs. Folio 170 General, in ocasiones of reforminge
of companies, to by well informed for bienge conveniente to his Majesty's
service. Folio 170
H.
HArd it is for a souldior to acomplish his obligationes with the punctualitie
and care required, if he by married. Folio 6 How a souldior is to serve in a
just war, and not to serve against gods true religion. Folio 7 Horse to
recnoledge pasadges and places to by suspected, to by prevented in due time.
Folio 54 Happy are those that do not intermidle in things out of scence. Folio
28 Horceses required for to carry several sorts of great ordenance. Folio 155
How a perfect souldior is to dischardge matteres of importance refered to his
care and trust. Folio 163 Hardly any master ca^ by had of such perfection but
some times he must err. Folio 166
I.
IMitate those of prudente and vertouse cariadge, and good aplicationes and
tacke notice of those decayinge trough their bad govermente. Folio 6 Julius
Caesar his examples in executinge justice for disorderes. Folio 23 In ocasiones
of marchinge prevensions to by taken against the enemies desingnes and
stratagemes. Folio 149 Instructiones for the defense of any place of importance
and how the same is to be honorably defended. Folio 158 Instructiones to give
ascallada or to scale any place of importance. Folio 160 Julius Caesar with his
generouse mind toward his souldiores a companied with his Military prudence
triumphs victori of 52. battelles. Folio 161 Julius Caesar pasinge over the
rhine his renoomed victories. Folio 161 Julius Caesar triumphs over Asia
Africa and Europa. Folio 162 In the profession of arms the wicked vice of invy
is most odiouse. Folio 163 Imitationes of the Greeckes and Romans
comendable. Folio 171
K.
Kings and Princes to asiste in person with their armies it imports much.
Folio 167 King Edward the third his happy sucess in France and overcomed
the whole power of France. Folio 167
L.
Long yrones are vsesed in the gardes or watches appointed on the gates of
towns, to visit wagones laden with hay straw, etc. for prevention of
fraud. Folio 35 Legion in time of the Romans was that which we call a
regimente, Tribunus was that which we call a Master de camp. Folio 141
Learning becomes none better then a souldior for many good reasones. Folio
163
M.
MAny good parts wished in a souldior. Folio 1 Many disgraces do resulte
troughe the filthy vice of drunkardes. Folio 3 Master de camp may march
where hi thincketh more conviente. Folio 61 Mutineres and revolteres of base
acts, and inclinationes their due reward. Folio 142 Marvelouse examples of
the resolution of experimented oulde souldiores in the sack of Anvvourpe and
other places. Folio 136 Marchinge trough an enemy contry necessary
instructiones to by observed. Folio 148 Many instruments necessary for the
great ordenance. Folio 157 Many matteres in war are discovered and prevented
without fact of arms. Folio 170
N.
NEcessaries required for manual fyry vveapones. Folio 41 Necessary
observationes the first night when the army is to pitche their camp. Folio
150 Necessary to know the quality and condisiones of the enemy is general,
and conductores. Folio 169
O.
OBedience duly observed amongste the professores of war, is laudable. Folio
1 Odiouse in a souldior to by inclined to the bace vice of dronknes. Folio 3 Of
great importance that officeres by exercised in war for many good respects.
Folio 28 Orderes of the proclamationes or vandos to by put in writhinge on the
watches or gardes. Folio 36 Observationes to by kept when the King or
General comes to vieow the army. Folio 42 Opiniones betwexte the infantery and
cavallery. Folio 134 Officeres of the general of the artillery. Folio 151.
Obedience and Military prudence. Folio 161 Ocurrantes of warlike affairs are
some times subjecte to disgraces and may by when we lesh fear. Folio 168
Ocasion of great repose to the general. Folio 169. Officeres reformed to
asiste next the general for many good respects. Folio 169
P.
Parts besitinge and ordained in a souldior. Folio 10 Prevention to by taken
for the overmuch liberty of stragleres. Folio 23 Prevension to be taken when
the enemy is superior on horse. Folio 149 Preventiones taken in narow pasadges
to by secure and prevented. Folio 149 Powder required for each piece of great
ordenance, is the parts of the weighte of the bullet of the piece and other
necessaires thereunto apertaininge. Folio 157 Powder rather to spare then to
want. Folio 157 Prevencion for the defense of a place of emportance. Folio 164
Prudente Captains, resolute and experimented soldiores bienge hit upon,
great expectasiones ought to by hoped of their prosperouse succeses in
ocationes of importance. Folio 169 Pattares their several executiones and
industry used for to efect the same. Folio 175 Prevensiones to by taken in due
time for the executiones of pattares. Folio 176 Pikes armed with artificial
Fire-Wourkes and their execusions. Folio 186
Q.
QUarter master to him belonges the recivinge of arms and munitiones. Folio 45
R.
REsoninge the cause that a souldior is to respect other officeres. Folio 8
Roundes, and how they are to by prudently ordered to acomplish. Folio 43
Roundes and how they shall acomplish their obligationes. Folio 43 Roundes and
the care and punctualitie they are to take in acomplishinge their obligationes.
Folio 49 Remedy for the preventinge of frauds used in deceivinge the
souldiores of their right. Folio 56 Resolution to by taken to conqueste a
foraigne country. Folio 157 Resolution taken for to remain in posession of
aforaigne contry preventiones to by taken. Folio 159
S.
SOuldiores to by reddi when alarm do present with speed. Folio 61
Souldiores stealinge at night to the enemy prevention for the same. Folio 62
Sardgente Mayor and other Officeres are to take great care that in ocasiones of
persuinge a victory the souldiores do not fall a spoylinge for bienge both
odiouse and dangerouse. Folio 64 Spies of doble dealinges very dangerouse.
Folio 169 Sardgente Mayor is to animate the souldiores in many ocasiones. Folio
61 Shot in ocasiones of skirmish. Folio 134 Sutleres and instructiones to by
observed with care and punctuality. Folio 141 Souldiores of virtues and
prudente cariadge are to by honored and rewarded. Folio 144 Sardgentes are not
to by elected by favor nor affection for many good respects. Folio 13
Souldiores missinge their ranks. Folio 133 Sardgentes to instruct and learn
the souldiores how to manadg their arms. Folio 133 Shot and opiniones for
their divisiones. Folio 133 Shot to observe good order, and how to serve
with their arms. Folio 13 Sardgent bienge well disciplined can redress and
remedy many disorderes. Folio 13 Sardgentes are to have the roale of the names
of the souldiores of his company about him. Folio 14 Sardgente Mayor is to
apointe the table ordained for gamesteres. Folio 50 Sardgente Mayor arivinge
near the quarter in ocasiones of marchinge. Folio 54 Soldiers ought to by
devoote. Folio 26 Sardgente Mayor how he is to be elected. Folio 29 Scipio
Africano with his sagacitie and extraordinary Military prudence did overcome
Aniball. Folio 30 Sardgente Mayor now and then is to visit the walls and
watches for good respects. Folio 45 Souldiores carefully exercised is
comendable. Folio 38 Sardgente Mayor ought to carefulli instruct the
soldiers in the exercice of arms. Folio 40 Sardgente Mayor is to take a
special care to see the souldiores provided with fire in the watches. Folio 42
Soldiers exercised. Folio 44 Souldiores bienge on the watch instructions.
Folio 46 Sardgent Mayor givinge many good instructions. Folio 51 Sardgente
Mayor in ocasiones to be provided with powder match led it imports. Folio 52
Souldiores to prevente their bad customs. Folio 53 Souldiores prevensiones of
false alarmes. Folio 57 Souldior how he is to govern him self standinge in
post or centery. Folio 57 Sardgente Mayor givinge instructiones to the
cinteryes when the enemy are aprochinge, for to be prevented. Folio 64
Souldiores breakinge order or array their due reprehinsion. Folio 149 Spinola
provided of boathes and other necessaries in taking Reinberk and Breda. Folio
153 Suitchers with 43000. men resolved to conquest France, Borgondy and
Flanderes defeated by Caesar. Folio 162 Singular virtue and constancy are
found but in feowe. Folio 166 Scaling of atowne or forte necessary
instructiones. Folio 168 Saltpeter reduced into water which is good to give
more force to many compossiones of Fire-vvourkes. Folio 177
T.
THe imitasion of the discipline of the Ianisaros Turks. Folio 9 The
professores of arms ought diligently to learn the art of war. Folio 10
Trough sinister election do resulte many disgraces and loshes. Folio 21 The
acomplishinge of orderes some times are hurtefull, for certain considerationes.
Folio 23 Thesarios their Military good instructiones. Folio 38 Table to by put
in memory for the framinge of battelles for such as are notable in
aritmeticke. Folio 70 To refresh or coule great ordenance when it is very
hot by overmuch shutinge. Folio 156 The order for the setinge of the great
ordenance belonges to the Camp master general and the executiones to the
general of the artillery. Folio 157 Torches to be artificially made with
compositiones of Fire-vvourke to endure against the force of vvinde and
water. Folio 177
V.
UN fit that a souldior by inclined to delicate meats. Folio 3 Un fittinge to
see a souldior leadon with much bagade or traish. Folio 5 Very many raised
into great dingnitie be their virtue. Folio 2 Vandos or proclamationes to by
duly observed for many respects. Folio 36 Very many instruments necessary for
the executiones of the artillery. Folio 154 Vigilante and good vvatch to by
apoincted on the powder for many good respects. Folio 157 Vando a Spanish
vvourde an act or law made by the General and Counsel of war and
published by sound of drum and trompet to the souldiores.
W.
VVAtch vvourd and conciderations touching the same. Folio 49 Watch vvourde in
campaina and conciderationes touching the same to by in due time prevented.
Folio 56 When the army shall encampe the first night the hour which is
appointed for the scoutes of horse to rerire. Folio 150
For the brief explicatinge of the divisiones of several sorts of arms and
of several sorts of battelles, i did put down amongste the chiferes of their
divisiones and tables the letteres followinge for their brief explicatinge.
THe letter A. amongste the chiferes of the divisiones signifies arcabuse.

The letter P. singnifieth dry pikes or unarmed pikes.

The letter C. men armed with complet corceletes.

The letter M. musketieres.

The letter R. ranckes.

The letteres Fr. front of the battle.

The letteres Fla. flancke of the battle.

The letter G. singnified gilted corseletes.

Errores in the printe.
Errores. Corected. Folio. Line. harely hardly 1 10 yerie very 3 5 hoth both 3
33 avartiones avaritiouse 7 6 toe two 8 4 Turkose Turckes 9 12 respeed
respected 10 27 lodgedh lodgheth 11 11 hut but 12 25 discomndiouse discomodious
15 17 Craptaine Captain 16 28 Oficerer Officeres 19 12 Sprine Spain 21 4
practe practice 21 18 coddi boddy 21 32 minth ninth 23 27 ot of 29 4 bridged
bridges 35 14 plainelle plainly 42 1 folowet follow 51 28 wolled would 121 6
weather weader 132 4 campiana campaina 132 23 this his 135 18 patre part 136
10 the he 141 34 7 6 105 23 foot forte 156 22 truth truth 163 12 part parts
178 1 doabe dob 179 13 eaches enches 181 31 27 72 138 9 smelted melted 188 25

Some letteres of small importance in the correction may be is forgotten, which
i refer to the judgment of the curiouse and gentle Reader.

APROBATION.
THIES Military instructiones of Captain GERAT BARRY bienge visited by order
of his Majesty's privy Counsel, by the Censor of Bruxeles, and aproved by the
Archbishop of Maklin the 9. of December, 1633. his said Majesty's privy
Counsel found it profitable and comodiouse for the advancemente of his
Majesty's service; wherefore they granted license for the printinge of the same,
as by the contents of their patente and broad zeal does a peer: Defendinge
that in pain of the penalties contained in the said patente, that no Printer,
or any other boddi, shall printe, conterfet, or sell the said Book within the
limits of their jurisdiction for the space of six years, next insuenge
without full consent and commission, in writing of the said Captain. Dated
at Bruxells the 15. of January, 1634.

HENRICUS CALENUS, sacrae Theologiae Licentiatus, Archipresbyter Bruxellensis,
Librorum Censor.

FIdem facimus positam Censuram esse legitimam, ab eo nimirum qui ad hoc a
nobis commissus est. Actum Bruxellae 9. Decembris 1634. JACOBUS Archiepiscopus
Mechliniensis. THE PRIVILEGE.
PHILIPPE by the grace of God King of Castille, Leon, Aragon, and of both the
Sicilles, of Jerusalem, Portugal, Navare, Granade, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia,
Mallorca, Sivilla, Sardena, Cordoua, Corsica, and Murcia, Jean Algarues,
Algesire and Gibraltar, of the Isles of the Canaries, east and Weste-Inges, of
the Isles and continente of the ocean sea. Archducke of Austria, Ducke of
Burgondie, Lothier, Brabante, Limburcke, Luxenburghe, Gildres, and Millan:
Earl of Habsburgh, Flandes, Artoies, Burgondie Thiroll, Palatin, Henawe,
Holande, Zelande, Namure, Zutphen: Prince of Suban, Marquis of the holly Impyre
of Rome, Lord of Friselande, of Salinas, Machlin, of the city and country of
Vtreghte, Over-yssel and Groninge, Dominator of Asia and Afric.

BE IT KNOWN TO ALL MEN to whom thies presents shall a peer that we have
received the homble suplication and peticion of our well beloved Captain GERAT
BARRY Irishman, our pensioner at the Zass of Gante, Specifienge that whereas he
is desirouse and willinge for the good and advancemente of our service; as
also for the good and general utility of his countrymen, and otheres who
follows the wars (to inlighten them and cause to by printed) a certain
book which he has written in Inglish, cauled and intitulated Military
Discipline, conteininge diveres obligationes, instructiones and directiones,
apertaininge to the Professores of this art, as also of fortificationes and
inventiones of Artificial Fire-wourkes, offencives, and defencives be sea and
land. And in respect that the said impressio^ can not be permited or
suffered without our special wara^te and permissio^; he ho^bly beseeches us
that we would by pleased to grante him the same for seave^ years.

BE IT KNOWN to all men that whereas we havinge considered the aforesaid, and
seen in our privy Conunsell the Aprobation of the censure done, and performed
be the Archbishop of Macklin in the revewe of the book above mentioned. And
our special favor inclininge to the suplication and petision of the said
Captain GERAD BARRY our petisioner. We have permited consented and
auctorised, and by thies presents out of our special grace (we do permit
consent and auctorise) givinge him full permission and power to cause printe
the said Book by any Printer dwellinge in our countries in thies parts;
whom he shall please to choose, and afterward to cause sell and distribute
them in and trough out our foresaied countries, prohibitinge, and defendinge
all other Printeres Book, seleres and other persons whosoever, not to
conterfett, printe, sell nor distribute the same duringe the time and term of
six years next insuenge; without permission and express consent of our
said petitioner, or of whom he has chosen and given authority for the said
impression; as also for the sellinge of them. And that in pain of
co^fiscation and loss of all that shall be printed, and moreover to incur
and pay the some, of six florince for every copy that shall be found to by
printed, soulde or distributeth, without the aforesaied commission and consent
of our petitioner Captain GERAT BARRY, and the one haulfe to be applied to
our profit, and comoditie; and the other to whom the said Captain has
chosen as before declared, and that in the manner, and acordindinge to their
agrimente and a cord paste betwexte them. To be vnsterstoode that the Printer
who is chosen shall be oblidged to conform him self with the proclamation
made and published upon the art of printinge. Besides that when the whole
impression shall be finished, he shall be obliged to deliver in the hands of
our Secretary havinge singned thies presents, two copies of the said books,
and that very netly bound; to be given for the augmentation of our library,
as it is appointed and ordained.

OUR WILL IS therefore and we comaunde our well beloved and trusty
Counselleres, our Presedentes, and all otheres of our privy and great
Counsel, and all other our Officeres, justises, and subjectes, that upon our
present grace, privilege, aprobation, permissio^ and consent. They do cause
suffer and permit, the aforesaied petisioner, as also whom he shall choose to
printe, fell and distribute the said books, to enjoy fully and peaceably, and
to use duringe the time, and acordinge as before declared and ordained,
without doing, givinge or suferinge, to be made don or offered any trouble,
hinderance, or wrong to the contrary. For such is our will and pleasure, in
witness whereof we have commanded our great zeal to be affixed and put to thies
presents. Given at our city of Bruxelles the twelfe of December one
thousander six hondereth thirty of three years and of our Regne thirtinth.

By the King in his Counsel G. Ottingnus.

POST TENEBRAS SPERO LUCEM.


