A RELATION OF The Conference BETWEEN WILLIAM LAWD, Then, Lrd. Bishop of St.
DAVID'S: NOW, Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRY: And Mr. Fisher the Jesuit, by the
Command of KING JAMES of ever Blessed Memory. With an Answer to such
Exceptions as A. C. takes against it.

By the said Most Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM, Lord Archbishop of
CANTERBURY.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger, Printer to the PRINCE HIS HIGHNESS.

MDCXXXIX.

TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc.
DREAD SOVEREIGN:
THIS Tract will need Patronage, as great as may be had, that is Yours. Yet,
when I first printed part of it, I presumed not to ask any, but thrust it out
at the end of another Labors, that it might seem, at least, to have the same
Patron, your Royal Father of Blessed Memory, as the other Work, on which this
attended, had. But now I humbly beg for it Your Majesty's Patronage; And leave
withal, that I may declare to Your most Excellent Majesty the Cause why this
Tract was then written: Why it stayed so long before it looked upon the light:
Why it was not then thought fit to go alone, but rather be led abroad by the
former Work: Why it comes now forth both with Alteration, and Addition: And
why this Addition made not more haste to the Press, then it has done.

The Cause why this Discourse was written, was this: I was, at the time of
these Conferences with Master Fisher, Bishop of S. David's; And not only
directed, but Commanded by my Blessed Master King James, to this Conference
with him. He, May 24. 1622
when we met, began with a great Protestation of seeking the Truth only, and
that for it self. And certainly, Truth, especially in Religion, is so to be
sought, or not to be found. He that seeks it with a Roman One of these (...) is
an (...) from all ^ch Truth as fittes not our Ends. And ^rsus a (...) etc
Bias, or any Aug. l. 2. cont. (...) (...) and Prophet. And it is an (...)
Transition, for a man that (...) Avers^ from, (...) become Ad. (...) to the
truth.
Other, will run Counter, when he comes near it, and not find it, though he
come within kenning of it. And therefore I did most heartily wish, I could have
found the Jesuit upon that fair way he protested to go. After the Conference
ended, I went, whither my duty called me, to my Diocese; not suspecting any
thing should be made Public, that was both Commanded, and acted in private.
For VV. I. the Publisher of the Relation of the first Conference with D. White
(the late Reverend and learned Bishop of Ely) In his Epistle (...) the Reader.
confesses plainly, That Master Fisher was straightly charged upon his
Allegiance, from his Majesty that then was, not to set out, or Publish what
passed in some of these Conferences, till He gave License, and until M. Fisher
and they might meet, and agree, and Confirm under their hands, what was said
on both sides. He says farther, that Ibid.
M. Fisher went to D. White's house, to know what he would say about the
Relation, which he had set out. So then, belike M. Fisher had set out the
Relation of that Conference, before he went to D. White, to speak about it;
And this notwithstanding the Kings restraint upon him, upon his Allegiance.
Yet, to D. White it is said he went, but to what other End, then to put a
Scorn upon him, I cannot see. For he went to his house to know, what he would
say about that Relation of the Conference, which he had set out before. In my
absence from London, M. Fisher used me as well. For with the same Care of his
Allegiance, and no more, These words were in my former Epistle, And A. C.
cheeks at them, in defense of the Jesuit, and says: That the Jesuit did not
at all so much as in Speech, and much less in Papers publish the, or either of
the other two Conferences with Dr. White, till he was forced unto it by false
reports given out to his private disgrace, and the prejudice of the Catholic
Cause. Nor then did he spread Papers abroad, but only delivered a very few
Copies to special friends, and this not with an intent to Calumniate the
Bishop. etc. A. C. in his Preface before his Relation of this Conference.
Truly, I knew of no Reports then given out to the prejudice of the Jesuite's
either Person, or Cause; I was in a Corner of the Kingdom, where I heard
little: But howsoever, here is a most plain Confession by A. C. of that which
he struggles to deny. He says he did not spread Papers. What then? What? Why
he did but deliver Copies. Why, but does not he that delivers Copies (for
Instance, of a Libell) spread it? Yea, but he delivered but a very few Copies.
Be it so: I do not say, How many he spread. He confesses the Jesuit delivered
some, though very few; And he that delivers any, spreads it abroad. For what
can he tell, when the Copies are once out of his power, how many may Copy them
out, and spread them farther? Yea, but he delivered them to special friends.
Be it so too: The more special friends they were to him, the less indifferent
would they be to me, perhaps my more special Enemies. Yea, but all this was
without an intent to Calumniate me. Well. Be that so too. But if I be
Calumniated thereby, his Intention will not help it. And whether the Copies,
which he delivered, have not in them Calumny against me, I leave to the
Indifferent Reader of this Discourse to Judge.
he spread abroad Papers of this Conference, full enough of partiality to his
Cause, and more full of Calumny against me. Hereupon I was in a manner forced
to give M. Fisher's Relation of the Conference an Answer, and to publish it.
Though for some Reasons, and those then approved by Authority, it was thought
fit I should set it out in my Chaplain's Name, R. B. and not in my own. To
which I readily submitted.

There was a Cause also, why at the first, the Discourse upon this Conference
stayed so long, before it could endure to be pressed. For the Conference was in
May, 1622. And M. Fisher's Paper was scattered and made common, so common, that
a Copy was brought to me (being none of his special friends) before
Michaelmas. And yet this Discourse was not printed till April, 1624. Now that
you may know how this happened, I shall say for my self, It was not my
Idleness, nor my Unwillingnesse to right both my self, and the Cause, against
the Jesuit, and the Paper, which he had spread, that occasioned this delay. For
I had then Most Honorable VVitnesses, and have some yet living, That this
Discourse (such as it was, when A. C. nibled at it) was finished long before I
could persuade my self to let it come into Public View. And this was caused
partly by my own Backwardness to deal with these men, whom I have ever
observed to be great Pretenders for Truth, and Unity, but yet such as will
admit neither, unless They and their Faction may prevail in all; As if no
Reformation had been necessary. And partly because there were about the same
time three Conferences held with Fisher. Of these this was the Third; And could
not therefore conveniently come abroad into the world, till the two former were
ready to lead the way, which till that time, they were not.

And this is in part the Reason also, why this Tract crept into the end of a
larger Work. For since that Work contained in a manner the substance of all
that passed in the two former Conferences: And that this Third in diverse points
concurred with them, and depended on them, I could not think it Substantive
enough, to stand alone. But besides this Affinity between the Conferences, I
was willing to have it pass as silently as it might, at the end of another
Work, and so perhaps little to be looked after, because I could not hold it
worthy, nor can I yet, of that Great Duty, and Service, which I owe to my Dear
Mother, the Church of England.

There is a cause also, why it looks now abroad again with Alteration and
Addition. And it is fit I should give your Majesty an Account of that too. This
Tract was first printed in the year 1624. And in the year 1626. another
Jesuit, or the same, under the name of A. C. printed a Relation of this
Conference, and therein took Exceptions to some Particulars, and endeavored
to Confute some Things delivered therein by me. Now being in years, and
unwilling to dye in the Jesuits debt, I have in this Second Edition done as
much for him, and somewhat more. For he did but skip up and down, and labor
to pick a hole, here, and there, where he thought he might fasten, and where it
was too hard for him, let it alone. But I have gone thorough with him; And I
hope, given him a full Confutation: or at least such a Bone to gnaw, as may
shake his teeth, if he look not to it. And of my Addition to this Discourse,
this is the Cause; But of my Alteration of some things in it, this. A. C. his
Curiosity to winnow me, made me in a more curious manner fall to sifting of my
self, and that which had formerly past my Pen. And though (I bless God for
it) I found no cause to alter anything that belonged either to the Substance,
or Course of the Conference: Yet somewhat I did find, which needed better, and
cleerer expression; And that I have altered, well knowing I must expect Curious
Observers on all hands.

Now, Why this Additionall Answer to the Relation of A. C. came no sooner
forth, has a Cause too, and I shall truly represent it. A. C. his Relation of
the Conference, was set out. 1626. I knew not of it in some years after. For
it was printed among diverse other things of like nature, either by M. Fisher
himself, or his friend A. C. When I saw it, I read it over carefully, and
found myself not a little wronged in it, but the Church of England, and indeed
the Cause of Religion much more. I was before this time by Your Majesty's Great
Grace, and undeserved favor made Deane of Your Majesty's Chapel Royal, and
a Counselor of State, and hereby, as the Occasions of those times were, made
too much a Stranger to my Books. Yet for all my Busy Employments, it was
still in my Thoughts to give A. C. an Answer. But then I fell into a most
dangerous Fever; And though it pleased God beyond all hope to restore me to
health, yet long I was before I recovered such strength as might enable me to
undertake such a Service. And since that time, how I have been detained, and
in a manner forced upon other many, various, and Great Occasions, your Majesty
knows best. And how of late I have been used by the Scandalous and Scurrilous
Pens of some bitter men (whom I heartily beseech God to forgive) the world
knows; Little Leisure, and less Encouragement given me to Answer a Jesuit,
or set upon other Services, while I am under the Prophets affliction. Psalm.
Psalm. 50. 19, 20
50. between the Mouth that speaks wickedness, and the tongue that sets
forth deceit, and slander me as thick, as if I were not their own Mothers
Son. In the midst of these Libellous outcries against me, some Divines of
great Note, and Worth in the Church came to me, One by One, and no One knowing
of the Others Coming (as to me they protested) and persuaded with me to
Reprint this Conference, in my own Name. This they thought would vindicate my
Reputation, were it generally known to be mine. I Confess I looked round
about these Men, and their Motion; And at last, my Thoughts working much upon
themselves, I began to persuade my self, that I had been too long diverted
from this necessary Work. And that perhaps there might be In voce hominum,
Tuba Dei, in the still voice of men, the Loud Trumpet of God, which sounds many
ways, sometimes to the ears, and sometimes to the hearts of men, and by
means which they think not of. And as S. Aug. Sermon. 63. De Diversis, c. 10.
He speaks of Christ disputing in the Temple with the Elders of the Jews. And
they heard Christ the Essential Word of the Father with admiration to
astonishment, yetbeleeved him not: S. Luke 2. 47. And the Word the^ spoke to
them by a means they thought not of, namely per Filium Dei in pucro, by the
Son of God himself under the Veil of our humane nature.
S. Augustine speaks, A Word of God there is, Quod nunquam tacet, sed non
semper auditur: which though it be never silent, yet is not always heard. That
it is never silent, is his great Mercy; and that it is not always heard, is
not the least of our Misery. Upon this Motion I took time to deliberate: And
had scarce time for that, much less for the Work. Yet at last to every of
these men I gave this Answer. That M. Fisher, or A. C. for him, had been busy
with my former Discourse, and that I would never reprint that, unless I might
gain time enough to. Answer that, which A. C. had charged a fresh both upon
me, and the Cause. While my Thoughts were thus at work, Your Majesty fell
upon the same Thing, and was graciously pleased not to Command, but to VVish me
to reprint this Conference, and in mine own Name; And this openly at the
Councel-Table in Michaelmas-Terme. 1637. I did not hold it fit to deny, having
in all the Course of my service obayed your Majesty's Honorable, and Just
Motions, as Commands: But Craved leave to show what little leisure I had to do
it, and what Inconveniences might attend upon it. When this did not serve to
excuse me, I humbly submitted to that, which I hope was Gods Motion in Your
Majesty's. And having thus laid all that Concerns this Discourse before your
Gracious and most Sacred Majesty, I most humbly present you with the Book it
self, which as I heartily pray You to protect, so do I wholly submit it to
the Church of England, with my Prayers for Her Prosperity, and my Wishes that I
were able to do Her better Service.

I have thus acquainted Your Majesty with all Occasions, which both formerly,
and now again have led this Tract into the light. In all which I am a
faithful Relater of all Passages, but am not very well satisfied, who is now
my Adversary. M. Fisher was at the Conference. Since that, I find A. C. at the
print. And whether These be two, or but One Jesuit, I know not; since scarce
One amongst them, goes under One Name. But for my own part (and the Error is
not great, if I mistake) I think they are One, and that One, M. Fisher. That
which induces me to think so, is First, the Great Inwardnesse of A. C. with M.
Fisher, which is so great, as may well be thought to neighbor upon Identity.
Secondly, the Style of A. C. is so like M. Fishers, that I doubt it was but one
and the same hand that moov'd the pen. Thirdly, A. C. says expressly That the
Jesuit himself made the Relation of the first A. C. p. 67.
Conference with D. White: And in the Title Page of the Work, That Relation
as well as This, is said to be made by A. C. and published by VV. I. Therefore
A. C. and the Jesuit are one and the same person, or else one of these places
has no Truth in it.

Now if it be M. Fisher himself, under the Name of A. C. then what needs these
Preface to the Relation of this Conference by A. C.
words: The Jesuit could be content to let pass the Chaplains Censure, as
one of his Ordinary persecutions for the Catholic Faith, but A. C. thought it
necessary for the Common Cause to defend the sincerity and Truth of his
Relation, and the Truth of some of the Chief Heads contained in it. In which
Speech give me leave to observe to your Sacred Majesty, how grievously you
suffer him, and his Fellows to he persecuted for the Catholic Faith, when
your poor Subject and Servant, cannot set out a true Copy of a Conference
held with the Jesuit, jussu Superiorum, but by and by the man is persecuted.
God forbid I should ever offer to persuade a Persecution in any kind, or
practice it in the least. For to my remembrance, I have not given him, or his,
so much as course Language. But on the other side, God forbid too, That your
Majesty should let both Laws and Discipline sleep for fear of the Name of
Persecution, and in the mean time let M. Fisher and his Fellows Angle in all
parts of your Dominions for your Subjects. If in your Grace and Goodness you
will spare their Persons: Yet I humbly beseech You see to it, That they be not
suffered to lay either their Weeles, or bait their Hooks, or cast their Nets
in every stream, lest that Tentation grow both too general, and too strong. I
know they have many Devices to work their Ends; But if they will needs be
fishing, let them use none, but And S. Aug. is very full against the use of
(...) reti^, unlawful Nets. And says the Fishermen theselves have greatest
cause to take heed of them. S. Aug. L. de Fide and Oper. c. 17.
Lawful Netts. Let Us have no dissolving of Oaths of Allegiance: No deposing,
no killing of Kings: No blowing up of States to settle Quod Volumus, that which
feign they would have in the Church: with many other Nets, as dangerous as
these. For if their Profession of Religion we^e as goood, as they pretend it
is, if they cannot Compass it by Good Means, I am sure they ought not to
atttempt it by Bad. For if they will do evil, that good may come thereof, the
Apostle tells me, Their Damnation's just, Romans 3. Romans 3. 8.


Now as I would humbly Beseech Your Majesty to keep a serious Watch upon these
Fishermen, which pretend S. Peter, but fish not with His Net: So would I not
have You neglect another sort of Anglers in a Shallower Water. For they have
some ill Nets too. And if they may spread them, when, and where they will, God
knows what may become of it. These have not so strong a Back abroad, as the
Romanists have, but that is no Argument to suffer them to increase. They may
grow to equal Strength with Number. And Factious People at home, of what Sect,
or fond Opinion soever they be, are not to be neglected. Partly, because they
are so Near. And it is ever a dangerous Fire, that begins in the Bed-straw. And
partly because all those Domesticke Evils, which threaten a Rent in Church, or
State are with far more safety prevented by VVisdome, then punished by Justice.
And would men consider it right, they are far more beholding to that man, that
keeps them from falling, then to him that takes them up, though it be to set
the Arm or the Leg that is broken in the Fall.

In this Discourse I have no aim to displease any, nor any hope to please all.
If I can help on to Truth in the Church, and the Peace of the Church together,
I shall be glad, be it in any measure. Nor shall I spare to speak Necessary
Truth, out of too much Love of Peace. Nor thrust on Unnecessary Truth to the
Breach of that Peace, which once broken is not so easily soder'd again. And if
for Necessary Truths sake only, any man will be offended, nay take, nay snatch
at that offense, which is not given, I know no fence for that. It Is Truth, and
I must tell it. It Is the Gospel, and I must preach it. 1 Cor. 9. And far safer
it is in this 1 Cor. 9. 16.
Case to bear Anger from men, then a VVoe from God. And where the Foundations
of Faith are shaken, be it by Superstition or Profaneness, he that puts not
to his hand, as firmly as he Can to support them, is too wary, and has more
Care of himself, then of the Cause of Christ. And it is a VVarinesse that
brings more danger in the end, then it shunnes. For the Angel of the Lord
issued out a Curse against the Inhabitants of Meroz, because they came not to
help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. Judge. 5. I know it is a
Great ease to let every Thing be as it will, and every Judge. 5. 23.
man believe, and do as he list. But whether Governors in State or Church do
their duty therewhile, is easily seen, since this is an effect of no King in
Israel. Judge. 17. Judge. 17. 6.


The Church of Christ upon Earth may be compared to a Hive of Bees, and that
can be no where so steddily placed in this world, but it will be in some
danger. And men that care neither for the Hive, nor the Bees, have yet a great
mind to the Honey. And having once tasted the sweet of the Churches
Maintenance swallow that for Honey, which one day will be more bitter then Gall
in their Bowels. Now the King and the Priest, more then any other, are bound
to look to the Integrity of the Church in Doctrine and Manners, and that in
the first place. For that is by far the Best Honey in the Hive. But in the
second place, They must be Careful of the Churches Maintenance too, else the
Bees shall make Honey for others, and have none left for their own necessary
sustenance, and then all is lost. For we see it in daily and common use, that
the Honey is not taken from the Bees, but they are destroyed first. Now in this
great and Busy Work, the King and the Priest must not fear to put their
hands to the Hive, though they be sure to be stung. And stung by the Bees,
whose Hive and House they preserve. It was King David's Case (God grant it be
never Yours.) They came about me (says the Psalm. 118. 12.
Psalm. 118.) Apum Similitudine ardorem not at vesanum; Non est enim in illis
multum roboris sed mira Excandescentia: Calv: in Psalm. 118.
like Bees, This was hard usage enough, yet some profit, some Honey might thus
be gotten in the End. And that is the Kings Case. But when it comes to the
Priest, the Case is altered, They come about him like VVaspes, or like Hornets
rather, all sting, and no Honey there. And all this many times for no offense,
nay sometimes for Service done them, would they see it. But you know who said:
Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man
according as his Works shall be. Revel. 22. And he himself is so Revel. 22.
12.
Gen (...).
exceeding great a Reward, as that the manifold stings which are in the World,
howsoever they smart here, are nothing when they are pressed out with that
exceeding weight of Glory, which shall be revealed: Romans 8. Romans 8. 18.


Now one Thing more let me be bold to Observe to Your Majesty in particular,
concerning Your Great Charge, the Church of England. It Is in an hard Condition.
She professes the Ancient Catholic Faith; And yet the Romanist condemns Her
of Novelty in her Doctrine. She practices Church Government, as it has been
in use in all Ages, and all Places, where the Church of Christ has taken any
Rooting, both in, and ever since the Apostles Times; And yet the Separatist
condemns Her for Antichristianisme in her Discipline. The plain truth is, She
is between these two Factions, as between two Milstones, and unless Your
Majesty look to it, to Whose Trust She is committed, She Will be grownd to
powder, to an irrepairable both Dishonor, and loss to this Kingdom. And it is
very Remarkable, that while both these press hard upon the Church of England,
both of them Cry out upon Persecution, like froward Children, which scratch,
and kick, and bite, and yet cry out all the while, as if themselves were
killed. Now to the Romanist I shall say this; The Errors of the Church of Rome
are grown now (many of them) very Old. And when Errors are grown by Age, and
Continuance to strength, they which speak for the Truth, though it be far
Older, are ordinarily challenged for the Bringers in of New Opinions. And there
is no Greater Absurdity stirring this day in Christendom, then that the
Reformation of an Old Corrupted Church, will we, nill we, must be taken for
the Building of a New. And were not this so, we should never be troubled with
that idle and impertinent Question of theirs: Where was your Church before
Luther? For it was just there, where their's is now. There is no other
difference between Us and Rome, then betwixt a Church miserably Corrupted, and
happily purged. etc. Ios. Hall. B. of Exon. In his Apologeticall Advertisement
to the Reader. p. 192. Approved by Tho. Morton. B. then of Cov. and Lich. now
of (...). in the Letters printed by the B. of Exeter. in his Treatise called,
The Reconciler. p. 68 And D. Field. in his Appen. to the third part. c. 2.
where he cites Calv. to the same purpose L. 4. Inst. c. 2.. 11.
One, and the same Church still, no doubt of that. One in Substance, but not
one in Condition of state and purity; Their part of the same Church remaining
in Corruption: and Our part of the same Church under Reformation. The same
Naaman, and he a Syrian still, but Leprous with them, and Cleansed with us; The
same man still. And for the Seperatist, and him that lays his Grounds for
Separation or Change of Discipline, though all he says, or can say, be in
Truth of Divinity, and among Learned Men little better then ridiculous: yet
since these fond Opinions have gained some ground among your people; to such
among them as are wilfully set to follow their blind Guides, thorough thick
and thin, till S. Matthew. 15. 14
they fall into the Ditch together, I shall say nothing. But for so many of
them, as mean well, and are only misled by Artifice and Cunning; Concerning
them, I shall say thus much only. They are Bells of passing good mettle and
tuneable enough of themselves, and in their own disposition; and a world of
pity it is, that they are Rung so miserably out of Tune, as they are, by them
which have gotten power in and over their Consciences. And for this there is
yet Remedy enough; but how long there will be, I know not.

Much talking there is (Bragging, Your Majesty may call it) on both sides. And
when they are in their ruff, they both exceed all Moderation, and Truth too;
So far till both Lips and Penns open for all the World like a Purse without
money; Nothing comes out of this, and that which is worth nothing out of them.
And yet this nothing is made so great, as if the Salvation of Souls, that
Great work of the Redeemer of the World, the Son of God, could not be
effected without it. And while the one faction cries up the Church above the
Scripture: and the other the Scripture to the neglect and Contempt of the
Church, which the Scripture it self teaches men both to honor, and obey: They
have so far endangered the Belief of the One, and the Authority of the
Other, as that neither has its Due from a great part of Men. Whereas according
to Christ's Institution, The Scripture, where it is plain, should guide the
Church: And the Church, where there is Doubt or Difficulty, should expound the
Scripture; Yet so, as neither the Scripture should be forced, nor the Church so
bound up, as that upon Just and farther Evidence, She may not revise that
which in any Case has slipped by Her. What Success this Great Distemper, caused
by the Collision of two such Factions, may have, I know not, I cannot
Prophecy. This I know, That the use which Wise men should make of other men's
falls, is not to fall with them; And the use, which Pious and Religious men
should make of these great Flawes in Christianity, is not to Join with them
that make them, nor to help to dislocate those maine Bones in the Body, which
being once put out of Joint, will not easily be set again. And though I cannot
Prophecy, yet I fear That Atheism, and Irreligion gather strength, while the
Truth is thus weakened by an Unworthy way of Contending for it. And while they
thus Contend, neither part Consider, that they are in a way, to induce upon
themselves, and others, that Contrary Extreme, which they seem most both to
fear, and oppose.

Besides: This I have ever Observed, That many Rigid Professors have turned
Roman Catholics, and in that Turn have been more Iesuited then any other:
And such Romanists as have changed from them, have for the most part quite
leaped over the Mean, and been as Rigid the other way, as Extremity it self.
And this, if there be not both Grace, and VVisdome to govern it, is a very
Natural Motion. For a Man is apt to think he can never run far enough
from that, which he once begins to hate; And does not Consider therewhile, That
where Religion Corrupted is the thing he hates, a Fallacy may easily be put
upon him. For he ought to hate the Corruption which depraves Religion, and to
run from it: but from no part of Religion it self, which he ought to Love,
and Reverence, ought he to depart. And this I have Observed farther: That no
One thing has made Conscientious men more wavering in their own minds, or
more apt, and easy to be drawn aside from the sincerity of Religion professed
in the Church of England, then the Want of Uniforme and Decent Order in too
many Churches of the Kingdom. And the Romanists have been apt to say, The
Houses of God could not be suffered to lie so Nastily (as in some places they
have done) were the True worship of God observed in them: Or did the People
think that such it were. It Is true, the Inward Worship of the Heart, is the
Great Service of God, and no Service acceptable without it: But the External
worship of God in his Church is the Great Witness to the World, that Our
heart stands right in that Service of God. Take this away, or bring it into
Contempt, and what Light is there left to shine before men, that they may see
our Devotion, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven? And to deal clearly
with Your Majesty, These Thoughts are they, and no other, which have made me
labor so much, as I have done, for Decency and an Orderly settlement of the
External Worship of God in the Church. For of that which is Inward there can
be no Witness among men, nor no Example for men. Now no External Action in
the world can be Uniforme without some Ceremonies. And these in Religion, the
Ancienter they be, the better, so they may fit Time and Place. Too many
Over-burden the Service of God; And too few leave it naked. And scarce any
Thing has hurt Religion more in these broken Times, then an Opinion in too
many men, That because Rome had thrust some Unnecessary, and many Superstitious
Ceremonies upon the Church, therefore the Reformation must have none at all;
Not considering therewhile, That Ceremonies are the Hedge that fence the
Substance of Religion from all the Indignities, which Profaneness and
Sacrilege too Commonly put upon it. And a Great Weakness it is, not to see
the strength which Ceremonies (Things weak enough in themselves, God knows)
add even to Religion it self; But a far greater to see it, and yet to Cry
Them down, all, and without Choice, by which their most hated Adversaries
climbed up, and could not cry up themselves, and their cause, as they do, but
by them. And Divines of all the rest might learn, and teach this VVisdome if
they would, since they see all other Professions, which help to bear down
their Ceremonies, keep up their own therewhile, and that to the highest.

I have been too bold to detain Your Majesty so long; But my Grief to see
Christendom bleeding in Dissension, and which is worse, triumphing in her own
Blood, and most angry with them, that would study her Peace, has thus
transported me. For truly it Cannot but grieve any man, that has Bowels, to
see All men seeking, but as S. Paul foretold, Phil. 2. Their own things, and
not the things which are Phil. 2. 21.
Jesus Christ's. Sua, Their own surely. For the Gospel of Christ has nothing
to do with them: And to see Religion so much, so Zealously pretended, and
called upon, made but the Stalking-Horse, to shoot at other Foul, upon which
their Aim is set; In the mean time, as if all were Truth and Holiness it
self, no Salvation must be possible, did it lie at their Mercy, but in the
Communion of the One, and in the Conventicles of the Other. As if either of
these now were, as the Donatists of old reputed themselves, the only men, in
whom Christ at his coming to Judgment, should find Faith. No (says S. Aug.
Epist. 48.
S. Augustine: and so say I with him) Da veniam, non Credimus. Pardon us, I
pray, we cannot believe it. The Catholic Church of Christ is neither Rome, nor
a Conventicle. Out of that there is no Salvation, I easily Confess it. But out
of Rome there is, and out of a Conventicle too; Salvation is not shut up into
such a narrow Conclave. In this ensuing Discourse therefore I have endeavored
to lay open those wider-Gates of the Catholic Church, confined to no Age,
Time, or Place; Nor knowing any Bounds, but That Faith, which was once (and but
once for all) delivered to the Saints. S. Jude 3. And in my pursuit of this
way, I have searched after, and delivered S. Iod. 3.
with a single heart, that Truth which I profess. In the publishing whereof, I
have obeyed Your Majesty, discharged my Duty, to my power, to the Church of
England, 1 S. Pet. 3. 15.
Given account of the Hope that is in me; And so testified to the world that
Faith in which I have lived, and by God's blessing and favor purpose to dye;
But till Death shall most unfainedly remain

Your Majesty's most faithful SUBJECT, and most Humble, and Obliged SERVANT,
W. CANT.

A RELATION Of the Conference between WILLIAM LAWD, Then L. Bishop of S.
David's; now Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY; AND M. Fisher the Jesuit, by the
command of KING JAMES Of ever Blessed Memory: With an Answer to such
Ecceptions as A. C. takes against it.
F The Occasion of this Conference was.


B THe Occasion of this Third Conference you should know fufficiently. You were
an Actor in it, as well as in two other. Whether you have related the two
former truly, appears by D. White the late Reverend L. Bishop of Ely his
Relation, or Exposition of them. I was present at none, but this Third; of
which I here give the Church an Account. But of this Third, whether that were
the Cause which you allege, I cannot tell. You say,


F. It was observed, That in the second Conference all the Speech was about
particular matters; little or none about a continual, infallible, visible
Church, which was the chief and only Point, in which a certain Lady required
satisfaction; as having formerly settled in her mind, That it was not for her,
or any other unlearned Persons, to take up on them to judge of Particulars,
without depending upon the Judgment of the true Church.


B. The Opinion of that Honorable Person in Church, before they be too busy
with Particulars. But yet neither 1 Cor. 10. 15.
Scripture, nor any good Authority denies them some moderate use of their own
understanding, and Judgment, especially in things familiar and evident; which
even Quis non sine ullo Magistro, aut interpret ex se facile cognoscat etc.
Novat. de Trin. c. 23. Et loquitur de Mysterio Passion is Christi. Dijudicare
est Mensurare etc. Unde and Men's dicitur a Metiendo. Tho. p. 1. q. 79. A. 9. ad
4. To what end then is a m nde, and an understanding given a Man, if he may not
apply it to measure Truth? Et (...). i. ab eo quod confiderat, and discernit.
Quiadecernit inter verum and falsum. Damasc. l. 2. Fid. Orth. c. 22.

And A. C. himself, p. 41. denies not all Judgment to private men; but says
they are not so to rely absolutely upon their private Judgment, as to
adventure salvation upon it alone, or chiefly, which no man will deny.


ordinary Capacities may as easily understand, as read. And therefore some
Particulars a Christian may judge without depending.


F. This Lady therefore having heard it granted in the first Conference, That
there must be a continual visible Company ever since Christ, teaching
unchanged Doctrine in all Fundamental Points; that is, Points necessary to
salvation, desired to hear this confirmed, and proof brought, which was that
continual, infallible, visible Church, in which one may, and out of which one
cannot attain salvation. And therefore having appointed a time of Meeting
between a B. and me, and thereupon having sent for the B. and me, before the
B. came, the Lady and a friend of hers came first to the room where I was, and
debated before me the aforesaid Question, and not doubting of the first part,
to wit, That there must be a continual visible Church, as they had heard
granted by D. White, and L. K. etc.


B. What D. White, and L. K. granted, I heard continual, and a visible Church;
neither of them an infallible, at least in your sense. And your self in this
Relation speak distractedly: For in these few lines from the beginning hither,
twice you add infallible between continual and visible, and twice you leave
it out. But this concerns D. W. and he has answered it.

Here A. C. steps in, and says, The Jesuit did A. C. p. 40.
where he relates, what D. White, or L. K. granted, he leaves out the word
Infallible, because they granted it not; But where he speaks of the Lady,
there he adds it, because the Jesuit knew, it was an infallible Church, which
she sought to rely upon. How far the Catholic Militant Church of Christ is
infallible, is no Dispute for this Place, though you shall find it after. But
sure the Jesuit did not speak most advisedly, nor A. C. neither, nor the Lady
her self, if she said she desired to rely upon an Infallible Church. For an
Infallible Church denotes a Particular Church, in that it is set in opposition
to some other Particular Church, that is not infallible. Now I for my part, do
not know what that Lady desired to rely upon. This I know, if she desired such
a Particular Church, neither this Jesuit, nor any other is able to show it
her: No not Bellarmine himself, though of very great ability to make good any
Truth, which he undertakes for the Church of Rome. Feritas vincat necesse est.
sive Negantem, sive confitentem etc. S. Aug. Epist. 174.

Oc^ultari potest ad tempus veritas, vinci non potest. S. Aug. in Psalm. 61.


But no strength can uphold an Error against Truth, where Truth has an able
Defendant. Now where Bellarmine sets himself purposely to make Lib. 4. De Romans
Pont. Cap. 4.. 1. Romana particularis Ecclesta non potest errare in Fide.
this good, That the Particular Church of Rome cannot err in matter of Faith;
Out of which it follows, That there may be found a Particular infallible
Church, you shall see what he is able to perform.

1. First then, after he has Distinguished, to express his meaning, in what
sense the Particular Church of Rome cannot err in things which are de Fide of
the Faith; he tells us, this Firmitude is, because the Sea Apostolic is fixed
there. And this he says is most true. Ibid.. 2.
And for proof of it, he brings three Fathers to justify it.

1. The first S. Cyprian, Navigare audent ad Petri Cathodram, and Ecclesiam
principalem etc. Nec cogitare eos esse Romanos, ad quos Perfidia habere non
potest accessum. Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 3.
whose words are, That the Romans are such, as to whom Perfidia cannot have
access. Now Perfidia can hardly stand for Error in Faith, or for Misbeliefe:
But it properly signifies malicious Falsehood in matter of Trust, and Action:
not error in faith, but in fact against the Discipline, and Government of the
Church. And why may it not here have this meaning in S. Cyprian?

For the Story there it is this. Bin. Council. To. 1. p. 152. Edit. Paris. 1636.
Baron. Annal. an. 253. 254. 255.
In the Council in Carthage in the cause of two Schismatiks Felicissimus, and
Novatian, about restoring of them to the Communion of the Church, which had
lapsed in time of danger from Christianity to Idolatry. Felicissimus would
admit all even without penance; and Novatian would admit none, no not after
penance. The Fathers forty two in number went, as the Truth led them, between
both Extremes. To this Council came Privatus a known Heretic, but was not
admitted, because he was formerly Excommunicated, and often condemned. Hereupon
he gathers his Complicies together, and chooses one Fortunatus (who was
formerly condemned as well as himself) Bishop of Carthage, and set him up
against S. Cyprian. This done, Felicissimus and his Fellows haste to Rome with
Letters Testimonial from their own party, and pretend that Twenty five
Bishops concurred with them: and their desire was to be received into the
Communion of the Roman Church, and to have their new Bishop acknowledged.
Cornelius then Pope, though their have had now prevented S. Cyprian's Letters,
having formerly heard from him, both of them, and their Schism in Afric,
would neither hear them, nor receive their Letters. They grew insolent and
furious (the ordinary way that Schismatics take.) Upon this Cornelius writes
to S. Cyprian; and S. Cyprian in this Epistle gives Cornelius thanks, for
refusing these African fugitives, declares their Schism and wickedness at
large, and encourages him, and all Bishops to maintain the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and Censures against any the boldest threatenings of wicked
Schismatics. This is the Story, and in this is the Passage here urged by
Bellarmine. Now I would feign know why Perfidia (all Circumstances considered)
may not stand here in its proper sense for cunning and perfidious dealing,
which these men, having practiced at Carthage, thought now to obtrude upon the
Bishop of Rome also, but that he was wary enough not to be overreach'd by
Busy Schismatics?

2. Secondly, let it be granted that Perfidia does Error in faith and doctrine.
For I will not deny, but that among the African Writers (and especially S.
Cyprian) it is sometimes so used; and therefore here perhaps. But then this
Privilege of not erring dangerously in the Faith, was not made over absolutely
to the Romans, that are such by birth, and dwelling only; but to the Romans,
qua tales, as they were such as those first were, whose faith was famous
through the world, and as long as they continued such; which at that time it
seems they did. And so S. Cyprian's words seem to import, eos esse Romanos,
that the Romans then under Pope Cornelius, were such as the Romans 1. 8.
Apostle spoke of, and therefore to whom at that time (or any time, they still
remaining such) perfidious Misbeliefe could not be welcome, Or rather indeed
perfidious Misbelievers or Schismatics could not be welcome. For this very
phrase Perfidia non potest habere accessum, directs us to understand the word
in a Concrete sense. Perfidiousnesse could not get access, that is, such
perfidious persons, Excommunicated out of other Churches, were not likely to
get access at Rome: Or to find Admittance into their Communion. It is but a
Metonymie of speech, the Adjunct for the Subject, A thing very usual even in
elegant Ego tibi istam scelestam, Scelus, ^inguam abscindam: Plaut, Amphit. Ex
hac enim part pudor pugnat illinc petulantia etc. Cic. -- Latuit plebeio
tectus amictu Omnis Honos. Nullos commit at a est purpura fasces. Lucan. l. 2.
Authors, and much more in later times, as in S. Cyprian's, when the Latin
Language was grown rougher. Now if it be thus understood (I say in the
Concrete) then it is plain, that S. Cyprian did not intend by these words to
exempt the Romans from possibility of Error, but to brand his Adversaries
with a Title due to their Merit, calling them perfidious, that is, such as had
betrayed, or perverted the Faith. Neither can we loose by this Construction,
as will appear at after.

3. But thirdly, when all is done, what if it be no Perfidia non potest, for
non facile potest, It cannot, that is, it cannot easily; Or what if S. Cyprian
do but Laudando praecipere, by commending Nec cogitare eos esse Romanos,
quorum fides Apostolo praedicante, etc.
them to be such, instruct them, that such indeed they ought to be, to whom
Perfidiousnesse should not get access. Men are very bountiful of their
Complements sometimes. Epist. 67.
Synesius writing to Theophilus of Alexandria, begins thus. (...), etc. I both
will, and a Divine Necessity lies upon me, to esteem it a Law, whatsoever
that Throne (meaning his of Alexandria) shall Determine. Nay the Word is (...)
and that signifies to determine like an Oracle, or as in Gods stead. Now, I
hope you will say, This is not to be taken Dogmatically, it is but the
Epistolers Courtesy only. And why not the like here? For the haste which
these Schismatics made to Rome, prevented Saint Cyprians Letters: yet
Cornelius very careful of both the Truth and Peace of the Church, would
neither hear them, nor receive their Letters, till Eor so S. Cyprian begins
his Epistle to Cornelius. Legi literas tuas frater, etc.

And after: Sed enim lecta alia Epistola tua frater, etc. S. Cypr. L. 1. Epist.
3.


he had written to S. Cyprian. Now this Epistle is S. Cyprian's answer to
Cornelius, in which he informs him of the whole truth, and withal gives him
thanks for refusing to hear these African Fugitives. In which fair way of
returning his thanks, if he make an honorable mention of the Romans and
their Faith, with a little dash of Rhetoric, even to a Non potest, for a Non
facile potest, it is no great wonder.

But take which Answer you will of the three; S. Cyprian had no meaning to
assert the unerring Infallibility of either Pope, or Church of Rome. For this
is more then manifest, by the Contestation, which after happened between S.
Cyprian, and Pope Stephen, about the Rebaptization of those, that were Baptized
by Haereticks, For he Stephanus Frater noster Haereticorum causam contra
Christianos, and contra Ecclesiam Dei asserere conatur. Cypr. ad Pompeium
contra Epist, Stephani Edit. per Erasmum Basil. p. 327.
says expressly, that Pope Stephen did then not only maintain an error, but
the very Cause of Haereticks, and that against Christians, and the very Church
of God. Stephanus fratris nostri obstinatio dura: Ibid: p. 329. And it would be
marked by the Jesuit and his A. C. that still it is Stephani fratris nostri,
and not Capitis, or summi Pastoris nostri.
And after this he charge him with Obstinacy and Presumption. I hope this is
plain enough to show, that S. Cyprian had no great Opinion of the Roman
Infallibility. Or if he had it, when he writ to Cornelius; certainly he had
changed it, when he wrote against Stephen. But I think it was no change, and
that when he wrote to Cornelius, it was Rhetoric, and no more.

Now if any man shall say, that in this Point of Rebaptization, S. Cyprian
himself was in the wrong Opinion, and Pope Stephen in the right, I easily
grant that; But yet that Error of his takes not off his judgment, what he
thought of the Papal or Roman Infallibility in those times. For though
afterward Caranza in Council. Carthag. sub Cornel. fine.
S. Cyprian's Opinion was condemned in a Council at Rome under Cornelius, and
after that by Pope Stephen; and after both in the first Can. 1.
Council of Carthage: yet no one word is there in that Council, which
mentions this as an Error, That he thought Pope Stephen might err in the
faith, while he proclaimed he did so. In which, though the particular Censure,
which he passed on Pope Stephen, was erroneous (for Stephen erred not in that)
yet the General which results from it (namely, That for all his being in the
Popedom, he might err) is most true.

2. The second Father which Bellarmine cites, is Jerome: Attamen scito Romanam
sidem Apostolica vove laudatam ejusmodi praestigias non recipere, etiamsi
Angelus aliter annunciet, quam semel praedicatum est, Pauli authoritate munitam
non posse mutari. S. Hicron. L. 3. Apol. contra Ruffinum. Tom. 2. Edit. Paris.
1534. sol. 84. K. Peradventure it is here to be read (and jam si) For so the
place is more plain, and more strong, but the Answer is the same.
His words are: The Roman Faith commended by the Apostle, admits not such
praestigia's, deceits, and delusions into it, though an Angel should preach it
otherwise, than it was preached at first (and) being armed and fenced by S.
Paul's authority, cannot be changed. Where first, I will not doubt, but that S.
Jerome speaks here of the Faith; For the Praestigiae here mentioned, are
afterward more plainly expressed; For he tells us after, Deinde ut Epistolas
contra te ad Orientem mitteret, and cauterium tibi Haereseos inureret.
Diceretque libros Origenis (...), a te translatos, and simplici Ecclesiae
Romanae plebi traditos, ut fidei veritatem quam ab Apostolo didicerant, per te
perderent. S. Hicron. ibid. fol. 85. K.
That the Bishop of Rome had sent Letters into the East, and charged Heresy
upon Ruffinus: And farther, that Origen's Books (...) were translated by him,
and delivered to the simple people of the Church of Rome, that by his means
they might loose the verity of the Faith, which they had learned from the
Apostle. Therefore the Praestigiae before mentioned were the Cunning Illusions
of Ruffinus, putting Origen's Book under the Martyr Pamphilus his name, that so
he might bring in Heresy the more cunningly under a name of Credit, and the
more easily pervert the Peoples Faith. So, of the Faith he speaks. And
secondly, I shall as easily confess that S. Ierome's speech is most true, but
I cannot admit the Cardinal's sense of it. For he imposes upon the word Fides.
For by Romana Fides, the Roman Faith, he will understand the Particular Church
of Rome. Which is as much as to say, Romanos Fideles, the Faithful of that
Church: And that no wily Delusions, or Cousenage in matter of Faith can be
imposed upon them. Now hereupon I return to that of S. Cyprian: If Fides
Romana must signify Fideles Romanos, why may not Perfidia before signify
Perfidos? Especially since these two words are commonly used by these Writers,
as Terms Qui cum Fidei dux esse non potuit, perfidiae existat. S. Cyprian. L.
1. Epist. 7. Fidem perfidi etc. Ibid. Facti sunt ex Ovibus Vulpes, ex fidelibus
perfidi. Optatus. L. 7. Quomodo iis prosit quum baptizantur Parentum Fides,
quorum iis non potest obesse perfidia. S. Aug. Epist. 23. Quanto potius Fides
aliena potest consulere parvulo, cui sua perfidia, etc. S. Aug. L. 3. de lib.
Arbit. c. 23.
Opposite. And therefore by the Law of Opposition may interpret each other
proportionably. So with these great Masters, with whom it is almost grown to
be, Quod volumus, rectum est, what we please, shall be the Authors meaning:
Perfidia must signify absolutely Error in Faith, or Misbeliefe: But Fides
must relate to the Persons, and signify the Faithful of the Roman Church.
And now I conceive my Answer will proceed with a great deal of Reason. For
Romana Fides, the Roman Faith, as it was commended by the Apostle (of which S.
Jerome speaks) is one thing, and the Particular Roman Church, of which the
Cardinal speaks, is another. The Faith indeed admits not Praestigias, wily
delusions into it; if it did, it could not be the Whole and Undefiled Faith of
Christ, which they learned from the Apostle. And which is so fenced by
Apostolical Authority, as that it cannot be changed, though an Angel should
preach the contrary. But the Particular Church of Rome has admitted
Praestigias, diverse crafty Conveyances into the Faith, and is not fenced, as
the Faith it self is. And therefore though an Angel cannot contrary that, yet
the bad Angel has sowed tares in this. By which means Romana Fides, though
it be now the same it was for the words of the Creed; yet it is not the same
for the sense of it: Nor for the super and praeter-structures built upon it, or
joined unto it. So the Roman Faith, that is, the Faith which S. Paul taught
the Romans, and after commended in them, was all one with the Catholic Faith
of Christ. For S. Paul taught no other than that One. And this one can never be
changed in, or from it self by Angel or Devil. But in men's hearts it may
receive a change; And in particular Churches it may receive a change; And in
the particular Church of Rome it has received a change. And ye see S. Hierome
himself confesses, that the Pope himself was afraid Ne fidei veritatem quam
ab Apostolo didicerant, per te perderent, ut supra.
ne perderent, least by this Art of Ruffinus, the People might loose the verity
of the Faith. Now that which can be lost, can be changed. For usually Habits
begin to alter, before they be quite lost. And that which may be lost among the
People, may be lost among the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy too, if they
look not to it, as it seems they after did not at Rome, though then they did
Nay at this time the whole Roman Church was in danger enough to swallow
Origen's Book, and all the Errors in it coming under the Name of Pamphilus;
and so S. Jerome himself expressly, and close upon the Place cited by
Bellarmine. For he desires Muta titulum, and Romanam simplicitatem tanto
periculo libera. ibid. fol. 84. K.
Ruffinus to change the Title of the Book (that Error may not be spread under
the specious Name of Pamphilus) and so to free from danger the Roman
simplicity. Where, by the way, Roman unerring Power now challenged, and Roman
simplicity then feared, agree not very well together.

3. The third Father alleged by Bellarmine is Uetus Roma ab antiquis
temporibus habet rectam Fidem, and semper eam retinet, sicut decet Urbem, quae
toti Orbt pr^sidet, semper de Deo integram fidem habere. Greg. Naz. in Carmine
de vita sua. Ante medium. p. 9. Edit. Paris. 1609.
S. Gregory Nazianzen. And his words are, that Ancient Rome from of old has
the right Faith, and always holds it, as becomes the City; which is Governesse
over the whole World to have an entire faith in, and concerning God. Now
certainly it became that City very well, to keep the Faith sound, and entire.
And having the Government of a great part of the World then in her power, it
became her so much the more, as her Example thereby was the greater. And in S.
Gregory Nazianzen's time, Rome did certainly hold both rectam and integram
fidem, the right, and the whole entire Faith of Christ. But there is nor
Promise, nor Prophecy in S. Gregory, that Rome shall ever so do. For his words
are plain semper decet, it always becomes that great City to have, and to
hold too integram Fidem the entire Faith. But at the other semper, it is The
words in the Greek, are (...). Haec quidem fuit diu, and nunc adhuc est recti
grada. (...), Est; So S. Gregory says, but of an (...) or a retinebit, he
says nothing.
retinet, that City from of old holds the right faith yet; but he says not
retinebit semper, that the City of Rome shall retain it ever, no more then it
shall ever retain the Empire of the World. Now it must be assured, that it
shall ever hold the entire faith of Christ, before we can be assured, That that
Particular Church can never err, or be Infallible.

Besides these, the Cardinal Cyrillus, and Ruffinus, but he neither tells us
where, nor cites their words. Yet I think I have found the most pregnant place
in S Petram opinor per agnominationem nihil aliud, quam inconcustam and
firmissimam Discipuli fidem vocavit. In qua, Ecclesia Christi ita fundata and
firmata esset, ut non laberetur, and esset inexpugnabilis inferorum portis, in
perpetuu^ manens. S. Cyril. Alex. Dial. de Trin. l. 4. p. 278. Parisiis, An.
1604.
Cyril, and that makes clearly against him. For I find expressly these three
things. First, that the Church is Inexpugnable, and that the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it, but that it shall in perpetuum manner remain
for ever. And this all Protestants grant. But this, That it shall not fall
away, does not secure it fromall kinds oferror. Secondly, Bellarmine quotes S.
Cyril for the Particular Roman Church; and S. Cyril speaks not of the Roman
at all, but of the Church of Christ, that is, the Catholic Church. Thirdly,
that the Foundation and firmness, which the Church of Christ has, is placed
not in, or upon the Et ego dico tibi) i. tuae Confessioni, qua mihi di^isti, Tu
es Christus etc. Dion. Carthus. in S. Mat. 16. 18. Et super hanc Petram) i.
Fidei hujus sirmitatem and fundamentum. Vel super hanc Petram quam confessus
es, i. super Meipsum Lapidem Angularem etc. Ibid.
Person, much less the Successor of S. Peter; but upon the * faith, which by
Gods Spirit in him he so firmly professed: which is the Common received
Opinion both of the Ancient Fathers, and the Protestants. Upon this Rock, that
is, upon this faith will I build my Church. S. Matthew. 16. So here is all the
Good he has gotten S. Matt. 16. 18.
by S. Cyril, unless he can cite some other place of S. Cyril, which I believe
he cannot.

And for Ruffinus, the Bellarmine aims at, is in his Exposition upon the
Creed: and is quoted in part the Bellar. L. 4. de Romans Pont. Cap. 3.. penult.
Chapter before. But when all his words shall be laid together, they will make
no more for Bellarmine and his Cause, then the former Places have done. Illud
non importune commonendum puto, quod in diversis Ecclesiis aliqua in his verbis
inveniunt ur adjecta. In Ecclesia tamen Vrbis Romae hoc non deprehenditur
factum. Pro eo arbritror, quod neque Haeresis ulla illic sumpsit exordium, and
mos ibi servatur antiquus, eos qui gratiam Baptismi suscepturi sunt, publico,
id est, Fidelium populo audiente, Symbolum reddere: Et utique adjectionem unius
saltem Sermonis, eorum qui praecesserunt in Fide, non admittit auditus. In
caeteris autem Locis, quantum intelligi datur, propter nonnullos Haereticos
addita quaedam videntur, per quae novellae Doctrinae sensus crederetur excludi.
etc. Ruffin. in Exposit. Symbol. (ut habetur inter Opera S. Cypriani) Praefat.
Expos.
Ruffinus his words then run thus: Before I come to the Words of the Creed,
this I think fit to warn you of. That in diverse Churches some things are
found added to the words (of the Creed.) But in the Church of the City of Rome,
this is not found done. And as I think, it is, for that no Haeresie did take
its rise or beginning there: And for that the old Custom is there observed,
Namely, that they which are to receive the grace of Baptism, do publicly
repeat the Creed in the hearing of the People, who would not admit such
Additions. But in other places (as far as I can understand) by reason of some
Heretics, some things were added, but such as were to exclude the sense of
their Novell Doctrine. Now these words make little for Bellarmine who cites
them, and much against Ruffinus that uttered them. They make little for
Bellarmine. First, because suppose Ruffinus his speech to be true, yet this
will never follow: In Ruffinus his time no Haeresie had taken its beginning at
Rome: therefore no Haeresie has had rooting there so many hundred years
since. Secondly, Bellarmine takes upon him there to prove That the particular
Church of Rome cannot err. Now neither can this be concluded out of Ruffinus
his words. First, because (as I said before) to argue from Non sumpsit to Ergo
sumere non potest: No Haeresie has yet begun there; therefore none can begin
there, or spring thence, is an Argument drawn Ab actu ad Potentiam negative,
from the Act to the Power of Being, which every Novice in Learning can tell
proceeds not Negatively. And Common Reason tells every man, it is no
Consequence to say, Such a thing is not, or has not been, Therefore it cannot
be. Secondly, because though it were true, that no Haeresie at all did ever
take its beginning at Rome, yet that can never prove that the particular
Church of Rome can never err (which is the thing in Question.) For suppose
that no Haeresie did ever begin there, yet if any, that began elsewhere, were
admitted into that Church, it is as full a proof, That that Church can err,
as if the Haeresie had been hatched in that Nest. For that Church erres, which
admits an Haeresie into it, as well as that which broaches it. Now Ruffinus
says no more of the Roman Church, then non sumpsit exordium no Heresy took
its beginning there; but that denies not, but that some Haereticall taint might
get in there. And it is more then manifest, that the most famous Haeresies in
their several Times made their aboade even at Rome. And it is observable too,
that Bellarmine cites no more of Ruffinus his words then these (In Ecclesia
urbis Romae neque Haeresis ulla sumpsit exordium, and mos ibi servatur
antiquus) as if this were an entire speech, whereas it comes in but as a Reason
given of the speech precedent, and as if Ruffinus made the Church of Rome the
great observer of the Customs of the Church, whereas he speaks but of one
Particular Custom of Reciting the Creed before Baptism. But after all this, I
pray did no Heresy ever begin at Rome? where did Novatianisme begin? At Rome
sure. For Baron. To. 2. An. 254. Number. 62.
Baronius, Pamel. in Cyprian. Epist. 41. and 73.
Pamelius, and Petavius in Epiphan. Haeres 59.
Petavius do all dispute the Point, whether that sect was denominated from
Novatianus the Roman Priest, or Novatus the African Bishop; And they Conclude
for Novatian. He then that gave that Name, is in all right the Founder, and
Rome the nest of that Heresy. And there it Continued with a succession Onuph.
in Notis ad Plat. in vita Cornelii.
of Bishops from Cornelius to Caelestine, which is near upon two hundred
years. Nay could Ruffinus himself be ignorant that some Haeresie began at
Rome? No sure. For in this I must challenge him either for his weak memory, or
his wilful error. For Ruffinus had not only read Eusebius his History, but had
been at the pains to translate him. Now Haeretici alii in morem venenatorum
serpentum in Asiam, and Phrygiam irrepserunt, (...), quorum Dux Florinus.
Eusebius. L. 5. cap. 14. And in Ruffinus his Translation, c. 15. And then
afterward c. 19. and 20. (...). etc. Now this Blastus taught that God was the
Author of sin.
Eusebius says plainly, that some Heretics spread their venom in Asia, some
in Phrygia, and others grew at Rome, and Florinus was the Ringleader of them.
And more clearly after. Irenaeus (says he) directed diverse Epistles against
this Florinus, and his fellow Blastus, and condemns them of such Heresies, as
threw them and their Followers into great Impiety, etc. Those at Rome
corrupting the sound Doctrine of the Church. Therefore most manifest it is,
that some Heresy had its rise and beginning at Rome. But to leave this slip of
Ruffinus, most evident it is, that Ruffinus neither did, nor could account the
Particular Church of Rome infallible. For if he had esteemed so of it, he would
not have dissented from it in so maine a Point, as is the Canon of the
Scripture, as he plainly does. Ruff. in Exposit. Symb. p. 188. In which
reckoning heplainly agrees with the Church of England. Art. 6.
For reckoning up the Canonical Books, he most manifestly dissents from the
Roman Church. Therefore either Ruffinus did not think the Church of Rome was
infallible, or else the Church of Rome at this day reckons up more Books within
the Canon, than heretofore she did. If she do, then she is changed in a maine
Point of Faith, the Canon of Scripture, and is absolutely convinced not to be
infallible; For if she were right in her reckoning then, she is wrong now; And
if she be right now, she was wrong then; And if she do not reckon more now than
she did, when Ruffinus lived, then he reckons fewer than she, and so dissents
from her; which doubtless he durst not have done, had he thought her judgment
infallible. Yea, and he sets this mark upon his Dissent besides, Novi, and
Veteris Testamenti Volumina etc. sicut ex Patrum Monumentis accepimus. Ruff. in
Symb. p. 188. Et haec sunt quae Patres intra canonem concluserunt. Et ex quibus
Fidei nostrae Assertiones constare voluerunt. Ib. p. 189.
That he reckons up the Books of the Canon just so, and no otherwise, than as
he received them out of the Monuments of the Forefathers; And out of which the
Assertions of our Faith are to be taken. Last of all, had this place of
Ruffinus any strength for the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, yet there is
very little reason, that the Pope, and his Clergy should take any Benefit by
it. For S. Si Episcopi Romani est, stulte facis ab eo Exemplar Epistolae
petere, cui missa non est, etc. Vade potius Roman, and praesens ap^ eum
expostula, cur tibi and absenti and innocenti fecerit injuria^. Primum, ut non
reciper^t Expositionem Fidei tuae, quam omnis (ut scribis) Italia comprobav^,
etc. Deinde, ut Cauterium tibi Haerescos, dum nescis, inureret. S. Hicron.
Apol. 3. advers. Ruffin. fol. 85. K.
Jerome tells us, That when Ruffinus was angry with him for an Epistle which he
writ not, he plainly sent him to the Bishop of Rome, and bid him expostulate
with him for the Contumely put upon him, in that he received not his exposition
of the Faith, which, said He, all Italy approved: and in that he branded him
also, dum nesciret (behind his back) with Heresy. Now if the Pope which then
was, rejected this Exposition of the Creed made by Ruffinus, and branded him
besides with Haeresie; his sentence against Ruffinus was Just, or Unjust. If
Unjust, then the Pope erred about a matter of Faith, and so neither He, nor the
Church of Rome, infallible. If Just, then the Church of Rome labors to defend
herself by his pen, which is judged Haereticall by her self. So whether it were
Just, or Unjust, the Church of Rome is driven to a hard strait, when she must
beg help of him, whom she branded with Haeresie, and out of that Tract, which
she her self rejected; And so uphold her Infallibility by the Judgment of a
man, who in her Judgment had erred so foully: Nor may she by any Quum quis se
vell^ persona^ t^stium post publicationem repellere fuerit protestatus. Si quid
pro ipso dixerint, iis non creditur. Extra. Tex. and ibi Gloss. c. Praesentium
31. de Testibus.
Law take benefit of a Testimony, which her self has defamed, and protested
against.

With these Bellarmine is pleased to name Six Popes, which, he says, are all
of this Opinion. But he Bellar. L. 4. de Ro^. Pont. c. 4.. Addo etiam, Quae
e^si ab Haereticis contemnentur, etc.
adds, That these Testimonies will be contemned by the Haereticks. Good words I
pray. I know whom the Cardinal means by Heretics very well. But the best is,
His Call cannot make them so. Nor shall I easily contemn Six ancient Bishops
of Rome concurring in Opinion, if apparent verity in the thing it self do not
force me to dissent. And in that Case I shall do it without Contempt too. This
only I will say, Nemini in sua causa eredendum, nisi conformitter ad Legem
Divinam, Naturalem and Canouicam loquatur. So Io. Gerson, and the Doctors of
Paris cited in Lib. Anon. de Ecclesiastica and Politica Potestate. c. 16. Ed.
Paris. 1612. Now these Popes do not speak here conformably to these Laws.
That Six Popes concurring in opinion shall have less weight with me in their
own Cause, than any other Six of the more Ancient Fathers. Indeed could I
swallow L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3.
Bellarmines Opinion, That the Popes Judgment is Infallible, I would then
submit without any more ado. But that will never down with me, unless I live
till I doat, which I hope in God I shall not.

Other Proofs than these Bellarmine brings not Particular Church of Rome
cannot err in, or from the Faith. And of what force these are to sway any
Judgment, I submit to all indifferent Readers. And having thus examined
Bellarmines Proofs, That the Particular Church of Rome cannot err in Faith; I
now return to A. C. and the A. C. p. 42.
Jesuit, and tell them, that no Jesuit, or any other, is ever able to prove
any Particular Church Infallible.

But for the Particular Church of Rome, and the Pope with it, erred it has.
And therefore may err. Erred I say it has, in the Worship of Images, and in
altering Christ's Institution in the blessed Sacrament, by taking away the Cup
from the People, and diverse other particulars, as shall appear at. 33.
Consid. 7. Number. 5. and 12
after. And as for the Ground, which is presumed to secure this Church from
Error, it is very remarkable How the Romanae Ecclesia Particularis non potest
errare, persistente Romae Apostolica sede. Propositio haec est verissima, and
fortasse tam vera quam illa prima de Pontifice. L. 4 de Romans Pont. c. 4.. 2.
And that first proposition is this: Summus Pontifex cum totam Ecclesiam docet,
in his quae ad fidem pertinent nullo casu errare potest, Ibid. c. 3.. 1.
Learned Cardinal speaks in this Case. For he tells us, that this Proposition
[So long as S. Peter's Chair is at Rome, that Particular Church cannot err in
the Faith] is verissima, most true; and yet in the very next words, it is
Fortasse tam vera, peradventure as true as the former (that is) That the Pope
when he teaches the whole Church in those things which belong to the faith,
cannot err in any case, What? is that Proposition most true? And yet is it but
at a peradventure it is as true as this? Is it possible any thing should be
absolutely most true; and yet under a Peradventure that it is but as true as
another truth? But here without all Peradventure neither Proposition is true.
And then indeed Bellarmine may say without a Fortasse, That this proposition:
The Particular Church of Rome cannot err, so long as the Sea Apostolic is
there, is as true as this: The Pope cannot err, while he teaches the whole
Church in those things which belong to the Faith. For neither of them is true.
But he cannot say that either of them is verissima, most true, when neither of
them has Truth.

2. Secondly, if the Particular Church of Rome Infallible, and can neither err
in the Faith, nor fall from it, then it is because the Sea Apostolic cannot be
transferred from Rome, but must ever to the consummation of the World, remain
there, and keep that Particular Church from erring. Now to this what says
Bellarmine? what? why he tells us, Pia and probabilissima Sententia est,
Cathedram Petri non posse separari a Roma, and proinde Romanam Ecclesiam
absolute non posse errare, vel deficere. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 4.. Quod
nihilominus.
That it is a pious, and most probable Opinion to think so. And he reckons
four Probabilities, that it shall never be removed from Rome. And I will not
deny, but some of them are fair Probabilities; But yet they are but
Probabilities, and so unable to convince any man. Why but then, what if a man
cannot think as Bellarmine does, but that enforced by the light of his
understanding, he must think the quite contrary to this, which Bellarmine
thinks pious, and so probable? What then? Why, then Contraria sententia nee est
Haeretica, nee manifest erronea. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 4.. At socundum.
Bellarmine himself tells you, that the quite contrary Proposition to this,
namely, That S. Peter's Chair may be severed from Rome, and that the^ that
Particular Church may err, is neither Haereticall, nor manifestly erroneous.
So then, by Bellarmines own Confession, I am no Haereticke, nor in any
manifest error, if I say (as indeed I do, and think it too) that it is
possible for S. Peter's Chair to be carried from Rome, and that then at least,
by his own argument, that Church may err.

Now then upon the whole matter, and to return A. C. If that Lady desired to
rely upon a A. C. p. 42.
particular infallible Church, it is not to be found on earth. Rome has not
that gift, nor her Bishop neither. And Bellarmine (who I think was as able as
any Champion that Church has) dares not say, it is either Haeresie, or a
manifest error, to say, That the Apostolic Sea may be removed thence, and That
Church not only err in Faith, but also fall quite away from it. Now I for my
part have not ignorance enough in me to believe, That that Church which may
Apostatize at some one time, may not err at another. Especially since both her
erring, and failing may arise from other Causes, besides that, which is
mentioned by the Cardinal. And if it may err, it is not Infallible.


F. The Question was, Which was that Church? A friend of the Ladies would needs
defend, That not only the Roman; but also the Greek Church was right:


B. When that Honorable Personage answered, only the Roman Church was right,
as that He did not grant it right: And that He took on him no other Defense of
the poor Greek Church, then was according to truth.


F. I told him, That the Greek Church had plainly changed, and taught false in
a Point of Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost; and That I had heard say, that
even His Majesty should say, That the Greek Church having erred against the
Holy Ghost, had lost the Holy Ghost.


B. You are very bold with His Majesty, to His Majesty said: But if he said it
not, you have been too credulous to believe, and too sudden to report it.
Princes deserve, and were wont to have, more respect than so. If His Majesty
did say it, there is Truth in the speech; The error is yours only, by mistaking
what is meant by Loosing the Holy Ghost. For a Particular Church may be said to
loose the Holy Ghost two ways, or in two Degrees. 1. The one, when it looses
such special assistance of that Blessed Spirit, as preserves it from all
dangerous Errors, and sins, and the temporal punishment, which is due unto
them: And in this sense the Greek Church did perhaps loose the Holy Ghost: for
they erred against Him, they sinned against God, And for this, or other sins,
they were delivered into another Babylonish Captivity under the Turk, in which
they yet are; and from which, God in his mercy deliver them. But this is rather
to be called an Error circa Spiritum Sanctum, about the Doctrine concerning the
Holy Ghost, then an error against the Holy Ghost. 2. The other is, when it
looses not only this assistance, but all assistance ad hoc, to this, that they
may remain any longer a true Church; and so, Corinth and Ephesus, and diverse
other Churches have lost the Holy Ghost. But in this sense the whole Greek
Church lost not the Holy Ghost. For they continue a true Church in the maine
substance, to and at this day, though erroneous in this Point, which you
mention, and perhaps in some other too.


F. The Ladies friend, not knowing what to answer, called in the Bishop, who
sitting down first, excused himself as one unprovided, and not much studied
in Controversies; and desiring that in Case he should fail; yet the Protestant
Cause might not be thought ill of.


B. This is most true. For I did indeed excuse Modesty for the most part,
there I leave it. Yet this it may be fit, others should know, that I had no
information where the other Conferences brake off; no instruction at all what
should be the ground of this third Conference; nor the full time of four and
twenty hour^s to bethink my self. And this I take upon my Credit is most
true: whereas you make the sifting of these, and the like Questions to the very
Branne your daily work, and came thoroughly furnished to the business, and
might so lead on the Controversy to what your self pleased, and I was to
follow as I could. De util. Credendi c. 2.
S. Augustine said once, Scio me invalidum esse, I know I am weak, and yet he
made good his Cause. And so perhaps may I against you. And in that I preferred
the Cause before my particular credit, that which I did, was with modesty, and
according to Reason. For there is no Reason the weight of this whole Cause
should rest upon any one particular man. And great Reason, that the personal
Defects of any man should press himself, but not the Cause. Neither did I
enter upon this Service, out of any forwardness of my own, but commanded to
it by Supreme Authority.


F. It having an hundred better Scholars to maintain it than he. To which I
said, there were a thousand better Scholars than I to maintain the Catholic
Cause.


B. In this I had never so poor a Conceit of the Protestants Cause, as to
think, that they had Church of England (which, at this time, if my memory
reflect not amiss, I named) may have far more able Defendants, than my
self. I shall never envy them, but rejoice for Her. And I make no Question,
but that if I had named a thousand, you would have multiplied yours into ten
Thousand, for the Catholic Cause (as you call it.) And this Confidence of
yours has ever been fuller of noise than Proof. But you proceed.


F. Then the Question about the Greek Church being proposed, I said as before,
That it had erred.


B. Then I think the Question about the Greek Church was proposed. But after
you had with confidence enough not spared to say, That what I would not
acknowledge in this Cause, you would wring, and extort from me; then indeed you
said as before; that it had erred: And this no man denied. But every Error
denies not Christ, the Foundation; or makes Christ deny it, or thrust it from
the Foundation.


F. The Bishop said, That the Error was not in Point Fundamental.


B. I was not so peremptory. My speech (as the Greeks expressed themselves) it
was a Question not simply Fundamental. I know, and acknowledge that Error of
denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, to be a grievous
error in Divinity. And sure, it would have grated the Foundation, if they had
so denied the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as that they had
made an inequality between the Persons. But since their form of speech is,
Non ex Filio, sed Spiritum Filii esse di^imus. Damascon. L. 1. Fid. Orth. c.
11. Et Patris per filium. Ibid.
That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, and is the Spirit
of the Son, without making any difference in the Consubstantiality of the
Persons; I dare not deny them to be a true Church for this; though I confess
them an Erroneous Church in this Particular.

Now that diverse learned men were of Opinion, a Filio, and per Filium, in the
sense of the Greek Church, was but a Question in modo loquendi, in manner of
Pluralitas in Uoce, salvat a unitate in re, non repugnat uni^ati Fidei. Durand.
Lib. 3. d. 25. q. 2.
speech, and therefore not Fundamental, is evident. Magist. 1. Sent. d. 11. D.
Sane sciendum est, quod licet in praesenti Articulo a nobis Graeci verbo
discordent, tamen sensu non differunt, etc. Bandinus L. 1. de Trin. d. 11 and
Bonavent. in 1 Sent. d. 11. A. 1. q. 1.. 12. Licet Graecis infensissimus, quum
dixit Graeces objicere curi^sitatem Romany, addendo (I ilioque) Quia sine
hujus Articuli professione salus er at; non Respondet negando salutem esse, sed
dicit tantum opportunam fuisse Determinationem propter periculum. Et postea,.
15. Sunt qui volunt sustinere opinionem Graecorum, and Latinorum, distinguendo
duplicem modum Procedendi.

Sed forte si duo sapientes, unus Graecus, alter Latinus, uterque verus amator
Veritatis, and non propriae dictionis etc. de hac visa contrarietate
disquirerent, pateret utique tandem ips^m Contrarietatem non esse veraciter
realem, sicut est Vocalis. Scotus in 1. Sent. d. 11. q. 1. Antiquorum Graecorum
a Latinis diserepantia in voce potius est, and modo explicandi Emanationem Sp.
S. quam in ipsa re. etc. Iodocus Clictoveus in Damase. L 1. Fid Orth. c. 11. Et
quidam ex Graecis concedunt, quod sit a Filio, vel ab eo prostuat. Thom. p. 1.
q. 36. A. 2. C. Et Thomas ipse dicit, Sp. S. procedere mediate a Filio. ib. A.
3. ad 1. sal^em ratione Personarum Spirantium.

Respondeo cum Bessarione, and Gennadio, Damascenum non negasse Sp. S.
procedere ex Filio, quod ad rem attinet, quum dixerit Spiritum esse Imaginem
Filii, and per Filium, sed existimasse tutius dici per Filium, quam ex Filio,
quantum ad modum loquendi, etc. Bellarm. L. 2. de. Christo c. 27.. Respondeo
igitur. Et Tollet. in S. John 15. Ar. 25. and Lutheran. Resp. ad Resp. 2.
Ieremiae Patriarchae.


The Master, and his Scholars agree upon it. The Greeks (says he) confess
the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the Son, with the Apostle, Galath. 4. and
the Spirit of truth, S. John 16. And since Non est aliud, it is not another
thing to say; The Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Father, and the Son, then
that He is, or proceeds from the Father, and the Son, in this They seem to
agree with us in candem Fidei sententiam, upon the same Sentence of Faith,
though they differ in words. Now in this cause, where the words differ, but the
Sentence of Faith is the same, Eadem penitus Sententia, ubi supra, Clictov.
penitus eadem, even altogether the same, Can the Point be fundamental? You
may make them no Church (as Bellarm. 4. de Notis Eccl. cap. 8.. Quod autem apud
Graecos.
Bellarmine does) and so deny them salvation; which cannot be had out of the
true Church; but I for my part dare not so do. And Rome in this Particular
should be more moderate, if it be but because this Article (Filioque) was added
to the Creed, by her self. And it is hard to add, and Anathematize too.

It ought to be no easy thing, to condemn a Heresy, in foundation of faith;
much less, a Church; least of all, so ample and large a Churchas the Greek,
especially so, as to make them no Church. Heaven Gates were not so easily shut
against multitudes, when S. Peter wore the Keys at his own girdle. And it is
good counsel, which Lib. 3. cont. Hares. fol. 93. A. (...) vidcant ht, qui
famile de haerest pronumiant, qua^ facile etiam ipsi errent: Et intelligant,
non esse tam leviter de Haeresi censendu^. etc. In verbo (Beatitudo.)
Alphonsus a castro, one of your own, gives; Let them consider that pronounce
easily of Heresy, how easy it is for themselves to err. Or if you will
pronounce, consider what it is that separates from the Church simply, and not
in part only. I must needs profess, that I wish heartily, (as well as Iunius
Animad. in Bellar. cont. 2. L. 3. c. 23.
others,) that those distressed men, whose Cross is heavy already, had been
more plainly, and moderately dealt withal, though they think a diverse thing
from us, then they have been by the Church of Rome. But hereupon you say you
were forced,


F. Whereupon I was forced to repeat what I had formerly brought against D.
White, concerning Points Fundamental.


B. Hereupon it is true, that you read a large White, they are by him formerly
answered. The first thing you did, was the P. First righting the Sentence of S.
Austine: Ferendus est Disputator errans. etc. Here A. C. p. 44. tells us very
learnedly, that my corrupt Copy has righting instead of reading the Sentence
of S. Austine. Whereas I here use the word righting, not as it is opposed to
reading (as any man may discern A. C. palpably mistakes) but for doing right
to S. Austine, And if I had meant it for writing, I should not have spelled it
so.
righting of S. Augustine: which Sentence I do not at all remember was so much
as named in the Conference, much less was it stood upon, and then righted by
you. Another place of S. Augustine indeed was (which you omit;) But it comes
after, about Tradition, to which I remit it. But now you tell us of a great
Proof made out of this By which is proved, That all points Defined by the
Church are Fundamental.
Place: For these words of yours contain two Propositions. One, That all
Points defined by the Church are Fundamental; The other, That this is proved
out of this Place of S. Augustine.

1. For the first, That all Points defined by the Church are fundamental: It
was not the least means, by which Rome grew to her Greatness, to blast every
Opposer she had with the name of Heretic, or Schismaticke; for this served to
shrivel the credit of the Persons. And the Persons once brought into contempt,
and ignominy, all the good they desired in the Church, fell to dust, for want
of creditable Persons to back, and support it. To make this Proceeding good in
these later years, this Course (it seems) was taken. The School, that must
maintain (and so they do) That all Points Defined by the Church, are thereby
Your own word.
Fundamental Inconcussa fide ab omnibus. Thom. 2. 2ae. q. 1. Art. 10. C.
necessary to be believed, Sco us 1. Sent. d. 11. q. 1.
of the substance of the Faith, and that, though it be determined quite
Ecclesiae Voces etiam extra Scripturam. Stap. Relect. Con. 4. q. 1. Ar. 3. Quae
maturo judicio definivit etc. Solidum est, and etiamsi nullo Scripturarum, aut
evidenti, aut probabili testimonio confirmaretur, bid.
Extra Scripturam. And then Et penes Cercopes Victoria sit, Greg. Naz. de
Differen. vitae. Cercopes. 1. Astutos, and veteratoriae improbitat is
Episcopos, qui artibus suis ac dolis omnia Concilia perturbabant. Schol. ib.
leave the wise, and active Heads to take order, that there be strength enough
ready to determine what is fittest for them.

But since these men distinguish not, nor you, between Church in general, and
a General Council, which is but her Representation, for Determinations of the
Faith, though I be very slow in sifting, or opposing what is concluded by
Lawful, General, and consenting Authority, though I give as much as can
justly be given to the Definitions of Councels truly General: nay, suppose I
should grant (which I do not) That General Counsels cannot err; yet this
cannot down with me, That all Points even so defined are Fundamental. For
Deductions are not prime, and native Principles; nor are Superstructures,
Foundations. That which is a Foundation for all, cannot be one, and another, to
different Christians in regard of it self; for then it could be no common Rule
for any, nor could the souls of men rest upon a shaking foundation. No: If it
be a true Foundation, it must be common to all, and firm under all; in which
sense the Articles of Christian Faith are Fundamental. And Quum exim una and
cadem sides sit, neque is qui multum de ipsa dicere potest, plusquam oportet,
dicit; neque qui parum, ipsam imminuit. Iren. L. 1. advers. haeres. c. 3.
Ireneus lays this for a ground, That the whole Church (howsoever dispersed in
place) speaks this with one mouth He, which among the Guides of the Church is
best able to speak, utters no more then this; and less then this, the most
simple does not utter. Therefore the Creed (of which he speaks) is a common, is
a constant Foundation. And an Explicit faith must be of this, in them which
have the use of Reason; for both Guides and simple people, All the Church utter
this.

Now many things are defined by the Church, which Deductions out of this: which,
(suppose them deduced right) move far from the Foundation; without which
Deductions explicitly believed, many millions of Christians go to Heaven; and
cannot therefore be Fundamental in the faith. True Deductions from the Article
may require necessary belief, in them which are able, and do go along with
them from the Principle to the Conclusion. But I do not see, either that the
Learned do make them necessary to all, or any reason, why they should. Therefore
they cannot be Fundame^tall; and yet to some men's Salvation they are necessary.

Besides, that which is Fundamental in the Faith Rock immovable, and can
never be varied. Never Resolutio Occhami est, quod n^ tota Ecclesia, nec
Concilium Generale, nec summus Pontifex potest facere Articulum, quod non suit
Articulus. Sed in dubiis propositionibus potest Ecclesia determinare, an sint
Cathilicae, etc. Tamen sic determinando non facit quod sint Catholicae, quum
prius essent ante Ecclesiae Determinationem, etc. Almain. in 3. D. 25. Q. 1.
. Therefore, if it be Fundamental after the Church has defined it, it was
Fundamental before the Definition; else it is mooveable; and then no Christian
has where to rest. And if it be immooveable, as Regula Fidei una omnino est,
solailla immobilis, and irreformabilis. Tertul. de Virg. vel. cap. 1. In hac
fide, etc. Nihil transmutare, etc. Athan. Epist. ad Iovin. de side.
indeed it is, no Decree of a Council, be it never so General, can alter
immooveable Verities, no more than it can change immooveable Natures. Therefore
if the Church in a Council define any thing, the thing defined is not
Fundamental, because the Church has defined it; nor can be made so by the
Definition of the Church, if it be not so in it self. For if the Church had
this power, she might make a New Article of the Faith, Occham. Almain. in 3.
Sent. D. 25. q. 1.
which the Learned among your selves deny: For the Articles of the Faith cannot
increase in substance, but only in Explication Thom. 2. 2. q. 1. Ar. 7. C.
. And for this, I Will be judged by Bellarmine, Fides Divina non ideo habet
certitudinem, quia toti Ecclesiae communis est: sed quia nititur Authoritate
Dei, qui nec falli, nec fallere potest, quum sit ipsa Veritas. L. 3. de Justif.
c. 3.. Quod vero Concilium.

Probatio Ecclesiae facit ut omnibus innotescat Objectum (Fidei Divinae) esse
revelatum a Deo, and propter hoc certum and indubitatum; non autem tribuit
firmitatem verbo Dei aliquid revelantis. Ibid.. At inqust.


who disputing against Amb. Catharinus about the certainty of Faith, tells us,
That Divine Faith has not its certainty, because it is Catholic,.i. common to
the whole Church; but because it builds on the Authority of God, who is Truth
it self, and can neither deceive, nor be deceived. And he adds, That the
Probation of the Church can make it known to all, that the Object of Divine
Faith is revealed from God, and therefore certain, and not to be doubted; but
the Church can add no certainty, no firmness to the word of God revealing it.

Nor is this hard to be farther proved out of your School; For Scotus in 1.
Sent. D. 11. q. 1.
Scotus professes it in this very particular of the Greek Church: If there be
(says he) a true real difference between the Greeks and the Latins, about
the Point of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, then either they, or we be vere
Haeretici, truly and indeed Heretics. And he speaks this of the old Greeks,
long before any Decision of the Church in this Controversy: For his instance
is in S. Basil, and Greg. Nazianz. on the one side, and S Jerome, Augustine,
and Ambrose, on the other. And who dares call any of these Heretics? is his
challenge. I deny not, but that Scotus adds there, That howsoever this was
before, yet ex quo, from the time that the Catholic Church declared it, it is
to be held, as of the substance of Faith. But this cannot stand with his former
Principle, if he intend by it, That whatsoever the Church defines, shall be
ipso ficto, and for that Determination's sake Fundamental. For if before the
Determination (supposing the Difference real) some of those Worthies were
truly Heretics, (as he confesses) then somewhat made them so. And that could
not be the Decree of the Church, which then was not: Therefore it must be
somewhat really false, that made them so, and fundamentally false, if it made
them Heretics against the Foundation. But Scotus was wiser, than to intend
this. It may be, he saw the stream too strong for him to swim against,
therefore he went on with the doctrine of the Time, That the Churches Sentence
is of the substance of Faith; But meant not to betray the truth: For he goes no
further than Ecclesia declaravit, since the Church has declared it, which is
the word that is used by diverse Bellarm. L. 2. de Conc. Auth. c. 12. Concilia
cum definiunt, non faciunt aliquid esse infallibilis veritatis sed declarant.
Explicare, Bonavent. in 1. d. 11. A. 1. q. 1. ad sinem Explanare, declarare.
Tho 1. q. 36. A. 2. ad. 2. and 2. 2. q. 1 A. 10. ad. 1.

Quid unquam aliud (Ecclesia) C^ ili rum Decretis enisa est, nisi ut quod anica
simpliciter credebatur hoc idem postea diligentius crederetur. Vin. Lyr. cont.
(...). c. 32


.

Now the Sent. 1. D. 11
Master teaches, and the Alb. Mag. in 1. Sent. D. 11 Art. 7.
Scholars too, intus est, is not another contrary thing, but is contained
within the Bowels, and nature of that which is interpreted: from which, if the
Declaration depart, it is faulty and erroneous, because instead of Declaring,
it gives another, and contrary Hoc semper, nec quicquam praeterea. Vin. Lyr. c.
32.
sense. Therefore, when the Church declares any thing in a Council, either
that which she declares, was intus, or extra, in the Nature and verity of the
thing, or out of it. If it were extra, without the nature of the thing
declared, then the Declaration of the thing is false, and so, far from being
Fundamental in the Faith In nova Haeresi Veritas prius erat de Fide, et si non
ita de^ rata. Scotus in 1. D. 11. q. (...) fine. Haeretici multa quae er^
implicita sidei nostra, comp^ runt explicare. Bonavent. in (...) D. 11. A. 1.
Q. 1. ad finem Tho. 1. q. 36. A. 2. ad. 2. Quamvis Apostolica Seeds, aut
Generale Concilium de Haeresi censere possit, non tamen ideo Assertio aliqua
erit Haeresis, qui. Ecclesia definivit, sed quia (...) dei Catholica repugnat.
Ecclesia siquidem sua definitione (...) facit talem Assertionem esse Haeresin,
quum etiamsi ipsa non definivisset, esset Haeresis; sed id efficit ut paeteat,
etc. Alphon a Castro L. 1. Advers. Haeres. c. 8. fol. 21. D.
. If it were intus, within the Compass and nature of the thing, though not
open and apparent to every eye; then the Declaration is true, but not otherwise
Fundamental, than the thing is, which is declared: for that which is intus,
cannot be larger or deeper than that in which it is; if it were, it could not
be intus. Therefore nothing is simply Fundamental, because the Church declares
it, but because it is so in the nature of the thing, which the Church declares.

And it is a slight, and poor Evasion that is commonly used, that the
Declaration of the Church quoad nos, in respect of us; for it does not that
neither: For no respect to us can vary the Foundation. The Churches
Declaration can bind us to peace; and external Obedience, where there is not
express Letter of Scripture, and sense agreed on; but it cannot make any thing
Fundamental to us, that is not so in its own nature. For if the Church can so
add, that it can by a Declaration make a thing to be Fundamental in the
faith, that was not, then it can take a thing away from the Foundation, and
make it by Declaring, not to be Fundamental; which all men grant, no power of
the Church can do. Ecclesia non amputat necessaria, non apponit super^ua. Vin.
Lir. c. 32. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
For the power of adding any thing contrary, and of detracting any thing
necessary, are alike forbidden, Thom. Supp. q. 6. A. 6. C.
and alike denied Now nothing is more apparent, then this, to the eye of all
men, That the Church of Rome has determined, or declared, or defined (call it
what you will) very many things, that are not in their own nature
Fundamental; and therefore neither are, nor can be made so by her adjudging
them. Now to all this Discourse, That the Church has not power to make any
thing Fundamental in the Faith, that intrinsecally, and in its own nature is
not such, A. C. is content to say nothing.

2. For the second, That it is prooved by this place of S. Augustine, That all
Points defined by the Church are Fundamental. You might have given me that
Place cited in the Margin, and eased my pains to seek it; but it may be there
was somewhat in concealing it. For you do so extraordinarily right this Place,
that you were loath (I think) any body should see, how you wrong it. The place
of S. Augustine is this, against the Pelagians, about Remission of Original
sin in Infants: August. Sermon. 14. de verb. Apost. c. 12. Fundata res est. In
aliis Quastionibus non diligenter digestis, nondum plena Ecclesiae Authoritate
sirmatis ferendus est Disputator errans: ibi ferendus est error; non tantum
progredi debet, ut etiam Fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae quatere moli^.
This is a thing founded; An erring Disputer is to be borne with in other
Questions not diligently digested, not yet made firm by full Authority of the
Church, there, error is to be borne with: but it ought not to go so far,
that it should labor to shake the Foundation it self of the Church. This is
the Place: but it can never follow out of this Place (I think) That every
thing defined by the Church is Fundamental.

For first, he speaks of a Foundation of Doctrine in Scripture, not a Church
definition. This appears: for, few lines before, he tells us, Ibid. cap. 20.
There was a Question moved to S. Cyprian, Whether Baptism was concluded to
the eight Day, as well as Circumcision? And no doubt was made then of the
Origin Peccati.
beginning of sin, and that Ex ea re, unde nulla erat Quaestio, soluta est
exorta Quaestio.
out of this thing, about which no Question was moved, that Question that was
made, was Answered. And Hoc de Fundamento Ecclesiae sumpsit ad confirmandum
Lapidem nut antem.
again, That S. Cypryan took that which he gave in answer from the Foundation
of the Church, to confirm a stone that was shaking. Now S. Cyprian in all the
Answer that he gives, has not one word of any Definition of the Church:
therefore ea res, That thing by which he answered, was a Foundation of prime,
and settled Scripture-Doctrine, not any Definition of the Church: Therefore,
that which he took out of the Foundation of the Church, to fasten the stone
that shook, was not a Definition of the Church, but the Foundation of the
Church it self, the Scripture, upon which it is builded: as appears in the
Council. Milevit. c. 2.
Milevitane Council; where the Rule, by which Pelagius was condemned, is the
Rule of Romans 5. 15.
Scripture; Therefore Saint Augustine goes on in the same sense, That the
Disputer is not to be borne any longer, that shall Vt Fundamentum ipsum
Ecclesiae quatere moliatur.
endeavor to shake the Foundation it self, upon which the whole Church is
grounded.

Secondly, if S. Augustine did mean by Founded, and Foundation, the definition
of the Church, because of these This thing is Founded, this is made firm by
full Authority of the Church; and the words following these, to shake the
foundation of the Church; yet it can never follow out of any, or all these
Circumstances (and these are all) That all Points defined by the Church, are
Fundamental in the faith. For first, no man denies, but the Church is a 1 Timothy
3. 15.
Foundation; That things defined by it, are founded upon it: And yet hence it
cannot follow, That the thing, that is so founded, is Fundamental in the
Faith: For things may be Mos fundatissimus. S. Aug. Ep. 28.
founded upon Humane Authority, and be very certain, yet not Fundamental in
the Faith. Nor yet can it follow, This thing is founded, therefore every thing
determined by the Church, is founded. Again that which follows, That those
things are not to be opposed, which are made firm by full Authority of the
Church, cannot conclude, they are therefore Fundamental in the Faith. For full
Church Authority (always the time that included the Holy Apostles being past
by, and not comprehended in it) is but Church Authority; and Church Authority,
when it is at full sea is not simply Staple. Rebect. cont. 4. q. 3. A. 1.
Divine, therefore the Sentence of it not fundamental in the Faith. And yet no
erring Disputer may be endured to shake the foundation, which the Church in
Council lays. But plain Scripture with evident sense, or a full
Demonstrative Argument must have Room, where a wrangling and erring Disputer
may not be allowed it. And there is Quae quidem, si tam manifesta monstratur, ut
in dubium venire non possit, praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus, quibus in
Catholica teneor. Ita si aliquid apertissimum in Evangelio. S. Aug. contra
Fund. c. 4.
neither of these, but may Convince the Definition of the Council, if it be
ill founded. And the Articles of the faith may easily prove it is not
Fundamental, if indeed, and verily it be not so.

And I have read some body that says (is it not That things are fundamental
in the Faith two ways: One, in their Matter, such as are all things which be
so in themselves; The other, in the Manner, such as are all things, that the
Church has Defined, and determined to be of Faith: And that so, some things
that are de modo, of the manner of being, arc of Faith. But in plain truth,
this is no more, then if you should say, some things are Fundamental in the
faith, and some are not. For wrangle while you will, you shall never be able to
prove, that any thing, which is but de modo, a consideration of the manner of
being only, can possibly be Fundamental in the faith.

And since you make such a Foundation of this Ezekiel. 13. 11.
untempered. Your Assertion is: All points defined by the Church, are
Fundamental. Your proof, this Place: Because that is not to be shaken, which
is settled by Plena Ecclesiae Authoritate.
full Authority of the Church. Then (it seems) your meaning is, that this
point there spoken of, The remission of Original sin in Baptism of Infants,
was defined, when S. Augustine wrote this, by a full Sentence of a General
Council. First if you say it was; 1. 2. de Author. Council. c. 5.. A solis
particularibus.
Bellarmine will tell you, it is false; and that the Pelagian Heresy was never
condemned in an Oecumenicall Council, but only in Nationalls. But Bellarmine
is deceived: For while the Pelagians stood out impudently against National
Councels, some of them defended Nestorius, which gave occasion to the first
Can. 1. and 4.
Ephesine Council to Excommunicate, and depose them. And yet this will not
serve your turn for this Place. For S. Augustine was then dead; and therefore
could not mean the Sentence of that Council in this place. Secondly, if you
say, it was not then Defined in an Oecumenicall Synod, Plena authoritas
Ecclesiae, the full Authority of the Church there mentioned, does not stand
properly for the Decree of an Oecumenicall Council; but for some National; as
this was condemned in a Council. Milevit. Can. 2,
National Council: And then the full Authority of the Church here, is no more
then the full Authority of this Church of Nay, if your own Capellus be true,
De Appell. Eccl, Afric. c. 2. n. 5. It was ^ut a Provincial of Numidia, not a
Plenary of Africa.
Africa. And I hope that Authority does not make all Points defined by it to be
Fundamental. You will say, yes: if that Council be confirmed by the Pope. And
then I must ever wonder, why S. Augustine should say The full Authority of the
Church, and not bestow one word upon the Pope, by whose Authority only that
Council, as all other, have their fullness of Authority in your Judgment. An
inexpiable Omission; if this Doctrine concerning the Pope were true.

But here A. C. steps in again to help the Jesuit, That all A. C. p. 45.
points made firm by full Authority of the Church, are Fundamental, so, firm
he will have them, and therefore fundamental. But I must tell him: That first,
it is one thing in Nature, and Religion too, to be firm; and another thing to
be fundamental. These two are not Convertible: It Is true, that every thing that
is fundamental, is firm: But it does not follow, that every thing that is
firm, is fundamental. For many a Superstructure is exceeding firm, being
fast, and close joined to a sure foundation, which, yet no man will grant, is
fundamental. Besides, what soever is fundamental in the faith, is
fundamental to the Church, which is one by the unity Almain. in 3. Sent. Dis.
25. q. 2. A Fide enim una Ecclesia dicitur una.
of faith. Therefore if every thing Defined by the Church be fundamental in
the faith; then the Churches Definition is the Churches Foundation. And so,
upon the matter, the Church can lay her own foundation, and then, the Church
must be in absolute and perfect Being, before so much as her Foundation is
laid. Now this is so absurd for any man of learning to say, that by and by
after, A. C. is content to affirm, not only, that the prima Credibilia, the
Articles of Faith but all which so pertaines to Supernatural, Divine, and
Infallible Christian Faith, as that thereby Christ does dwell in our hearts,
etc. is the Foundation of the Church under Christ the Prime Foundation. And
here he is out again. For first, all which pertaines to Supernatural, Divine,
and Infallible Christian Faith, is not by and by Aliquid pertinet ad Fidem
dupliciter. Uno modo direct, sicut ea quae nobis sunt principaliter divinitus
tradita, ut Deum esse Trinum, etc. Et circa haec opinari falsum hoc ipso
inducit Haeresin, etc. Alio modo indirecte. Ex quibus consequitur aliquid
contrarium Fidei, etc. Et in his aliquis potest falsum opinari absque periculo
Haeresis, donec Sequela illa ei innotescat, etc. Tho. p. 1. q. 32. A. 4. C.
There are things Necessary to the Faith: and things which are but Accessory,
etc. Hooker L. 3. Eccl. Pol.. 3.
Fundamental in the Faith to all men. And secondly, the whole Discourse here
is concerning Faith, as it is taken Objective, for the Object of Faith, and
thing to be Believed; but that Faith by which Christ is said to dwell in our
hearts, is taken Subjective, for the Habit and Act of Faith. Now to confound
both these in one period of speech, can have no other aim, than to confound
the Reader. But to come closer both to the Jesuit, and his Defender A. C. If
all Points made firm by full Authority of the Church be Fundamental, then
they must grant, that every thing determined by the Council of Trent, is
Fundamental in the Faith. For with them it is firm and Catholic, which that
Council Decrees. Now that Council decrees; Si quis dixerit Ordines ab
Episcopis collatos sine populi vel potestatis saecularis consensu aut vocatione
irritos esse, Anathema sit. Con. Trid. Sess. 23. Can. 7.
That Orders collated by the Bishop are not void, though they be given without
the Consent or calling of the People, or of any secular Power. And yet they can
produce no Author that ever acknowledged this Definition of the Council
Fundamental in the Faith. It Is true, I do not grant, that the Decrees of this
Council are made by full Authority of the Church: but they do both grant and
maintain it; And therefore it is Argumentum ad hominem, a good Argument against
them, that a thing so defined may be sirme, for so this is; and yet not
Fundamental, for so this is not.

But A. C. tells us further, That if one may deny, or doubtfully dispute against
any one Determination of the A. C. p. 45.
Church, then he may against another, and another, and so against all; since
all are made firm to us by one and the same Divine Revelation, sufficiently
applied by one and the same full Authority of the Church; which being weakened
in any one, cannot be firm in any other. First A. C. might have acknowledged
that he borrowed the former part of this out of Cont. Haer. c. 31. Abdicata
enim qualibet part Catholici Dogmatis, alia quoque at que item alia, etc. Quid
aliud ad extremum sequetur, nisi ut totum pariter repudictur?
Vin. Lir. And as that Learned Father uses it, I subscribe to it, but not as A.
C. applies it. For Vincentius speaks there de Catholico Dogmate, of Catholic
Maxims: and A. C. will force it to every Determination of the Church. Now
Catholic Maxims,. 30. N. 21.
which are properly Fundamental, are certain Prime Truths deposited with the
Church, and not so much determined by the Church, as published and manifested,
and so made firm by her to us. For so Ecclesia De^sitorum apud se Dogmatum
Custos, etc. Denique quid unquam Conciliorum Decretis enisa est, nisi, ut quod
antea simpliciter credebatur, hoc idem postea diligentius crederetur, etc. Vin.
Lir. cont. Harcs. c. 32.
Vincentius expressly. Where, all that the Church does, is but, ut hoc idem quod
antea, that the same thing may be believed, which was before Believed, but with
more light, and cleerenesse, and (in that sense) with more firmness, than
before. Now in this sense, give way to a Disputator errans, every cavilling
Disputer to deny, or quarrel at the Maxims of Christian Religion, any one, or
any part of any one of them; and why may he not then take liberty to do the
like of any other, till he have shaken all? But this hinders not the Church her
self, nor any appointed by the Church to examine her own Decrees, and to see
that she keep Dogmata deposita, the Principles of Faith unblemished, and
uncorrupted. For if she do not so, but that Vin. Lir. cont. haer. c. 31.
Impiorum and turpium Errorum Lupanar: ubi erat ante castae and incorrupt^
Sacrarium Veritatis.
Novitia veteribus; new Doctrines be added to the old; the Church, which is
Sacrarium, Veritatis, the Repository of Verity, may be changed in lupanar
errorum, I am loath to English it. By the Church then this may, nay it ought to
be done, however, every wrangling Disputer may neither deny, nor doubtfully
dispute, much less obstinately oppose the Determinations of the Church, no not
where they are not Dogmata Deposita, these deposited Principles. But if he will
be so bold to deny or dispute the Determinations of the Church; yet that may be
done without shaking the Foundation, where the Determinations themselves belong
but to the Fabric, and not to the Foundation. For a whole Frame of Building
may be shaken, and yet the Foundation, where it is well laid, remain firm.
And therefore after all, A. C. dares not say, the Foundation is shaken, but
only in a sort. And then it is as true, that in a sort A. C. p. 46.
it is not shaken.

2. For the second part of his Argument, A. C. must pardon me, if I dissent
from him. For first, all Determinations of the Church are not made firm to us
by one and the same Divine Revelation. For some Determinations of the Church
are made firm to us, per Vin. Lir. cont. Haer. c. 32.
chirographum Scripturae, by the Handwriting of the Scripture, and that is
Authentical indeed. Some other Decisions, yea and of the Church too, are made,
or may be (if Relect. cont. 4. q. 1. Art. 3. Etiamsi nullo Scripturarum, aut
evidenti, aut probabili Testimonio, etc.
Stapleton inform us right) without an evident, nay without so much as a
probable Testimony of Holy-Writ. But Non potest aliquid certum esse certitudine
fidei, nisi, aut immediate contineatur in Uerbo Dei, aut ex Uerbo Dei per
evidentem consequentiam deducatur. Bellar. L. 3. de Justifica: c. 8.. 2.
Bellarmine falls quite off in this, and confesses in express terms, That
nothing can be certain by Certainty of Faith, unless it be contained
immediately in the Word of God: Or be deduced out of the Word of God by evident
Consequence. And if nothing can be so certain, then certainly no Determination
of the Church it self, if that Determination be not grounded upon one of
these: either express Word of God, or evident Consequence out of it. So here is
little Agreement in this great Point between Stapleton and Bellarmine. Nor can
this be shifted off, as if Stapleton spoke of the Word of God written, and
Bellarmine of the Word of God unwritten (as he calls Tradition.) For Bellarmine
treats there of the knowledge which a man has of the Certainty of his own
Salvation. And I hope A. C. will not tell us, There Is any Tradition extant
unwritten, by which particular men may have assurance of their several
Salvations. Therefore Bellarmine's whole Disputation there is quite beside the
matter: Or else he must speak of the Written Word, and so lie cross to
Stapleton, as is mentioned. But to return. If A. C. will, he may, but I cannot
believe, That a Definition of the Church, which is made by the express Word of
God, and another which is made without so much, as a probable Testimony of it,
or a clear Deduction from it, are made firm to us, by one and the same Divine
Revelation. Nay I must say in this case, that the one Determination is firm by
Divine Revelation, but the other has no Divine Revelation at all, but the
Churches Authority only.

2. Secondly, I cannot believe neither, That all Determinations of the Church
are sufficiently applied by one and the same full Authority of the Church. For
the Authority of the Church, though it be of the same fullness in regard of it
self, and of the Power, which it commits to General Councels lawfully called:
yet it is not always of the same fullness of knowledge, and sufficiency: nor
of the same fullness of Conscience, and integrity to apply Dogmata Fidei, that
which is Dogmaticall in the Faith. For instance, I think you dare not deny but
the Council of Trent was lawfully called, and yet I am of opinion, that few,
even of your selves, believe that the Council of Trent has the same fullness
with the Council of Nice, in all the forenamed kinds, or degrees of fullness.
Thirdly, suppose That all Determinations of the Church are made firm to us by
one and the same Divine Revelation, and sufficiently applied by one and the
same full Authority; yet it will not follow, that they are all alike
Fundamental in the Faith. For I hope A. C. himself will not say, that the
Definitions of the Church are in better condition, than the Propositions of
Canonical Scripture. Now all Propositions of Canonical Scripture are alike
firm, because they all alike proceed from Divine Revelation: but they are not
all alike Fundamental in the Faith. For this Proposition of Christ to S.
Peter, and S. Andrew, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men S. Matthew.
4. 19
, is as firm a Truth, as that which he delivered to his Disciples, That he must
die, and rise againse the third day S. Matthew. 16. 21
. For both proceed from the same Divine Revelation, out of the mouth of our
Savior, and both are sufficiently applied by one and the same full Authority
of the Church, which receives the whole Gospel of S. Matthew to be Canonical
and infallible Scripture. And yet both these Propositions of Christ are not
alike Fundamental in the Faith. For I dare say, No man shall be saved (in the
ordinary way of salvation) that believes not the Death and the Resurrection of
Christ. And I believe A. C. dares not say, that No man shall be saved, into
whose Capacity it never came, that Christ made S. Peter and Andrew fishers of
men. And yet should he say it, nay should he show it sub annulo Piscatoris, no
man will believe it, that has not made shipwreck of his Common Notions. Now if
it be thus between Proposition and Proposition issuing out of Christ's own
Mouth; I hope it may well be so also between even Just and True Determinations
of the Church, that supposing them alike true and firm; yet they shall not be
alike Fundamental to all men's belief.


F. Secondly, I required to know, what Points the Bishop would account
Fundamental. He said, all the Points of the Creed were such.


B. Against this I hope you except not. For Tertull. Apol. contra Gentes, c.
47. de veland. virg. c. 1. S. August. Sermon. 15. de Temp. cap. 2. Ruffin. in
Symb. apud Cyprian. p. 357.
Fathers make the Creed the Rule of Faith; Alb. Mag. in 1. Sent. D. 11. A. 7.
since the agreeing sense of Scripture with those Articles are the two Regular
Precepts, by which a Divine is governed about the Faith; since your own
Council of Council. Trident. Sess. 3.
Trent decrees, That it is that Principle of Faith, in which all that profess
Christ, do necessarily agree, and Fundamentum firmum and unicum, not the firm
alone, but the only Foundation; since it is Excommunication Bonavent. ibid.
Dub. 2. and 3. in literam.
ipso jure, for any man to contradict the Articles contained in that Creed;
since the whole Body of the Faith is so contained in the Creed, as that the
Thom. 2. 2ae. q. 1. Art. 7. c.
substance of it was believed even before the coming of Christ, though not so
expressly as since in the number of the Articles, since Bellar. L. 4. de Verb.
Dei non Script. c. 11.. Primum est.
Bellarmine confesses, That all things simply necessary for all men's salvation
are in the Creed, and the Decalogue; what reason can you have to except? And
yet for all this, everything Fundamental is not of a like nearenesse to the
Foundation, nor of equal Primenesse in the Faith. And my granting the Creed to
be Fundamental, does not deny, but that there are Tho. 2. 2ae. q. 1. A. 7. C.
quaedam prima Credibilia, certain prime Principles of Faith, in the bosom
whereof all other Articles lay wrapped and folded up: One of which since
Christ, is that of S. 1. S. John 4. 2.
John. Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is of God.
And one, both before the coming of Christ, and since, is that of S. Paul, Heb.
11. 6.
He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that seek him.

Here A. C. tells you, That either I must mean that those Points are only
Fundamental, which are expressed A. C. p. 46.
in the Creed; or those also which are infolded. If I say, those only which
are expressed, then (says he) to believe the Scriptures is not Fundamental,
because it is not expressed. If I say, those which are infolded in the Articles,
then some unwritten Church Traditions may be accounted Fundamental. The truth
is, I said, and say still, that all the Points of the Apostles Creed, as they
are there expressed, are Fundamental. And therein I say no more, than some of
your best Learned have said before me. But I never either said, or meant, That
they only are Fundamental; That they are Conc. Trident. Sess. 3.
Fundamentum unicum, the only Foundation, is the Council of Trent's; it is not
mine. Mine is, That the Belief of Scripture to be the Word of God, and
infallible, is an equal, or rather a preceding Prime Principle of Faith, with,
or to the whole Body of the Creed. And this agrees (as before I told the
Jesuit) with one of your own great Masters, Albertus Magnus In 1. Sent. D.
11. A. 7. Regula Fidei est concors Scriptururum sensus cum Articulis Fidei:
Quia illis duobus regularibus Praeceptis regitur Theologus.
, who is not far from that Proposition in terminis. So here the very
Foundation of A. C's. Dilemma falls off. For I say not, That only the Points of
the Creed are Fundamental, whether expressed, or not expressed. That all of
them are, that I say. And yet though the Foundation of his Dilemma be fallen
away, I will take the boldness to tell A. C. That if I had said, That those
Articles only which are expressed in the Creed, are Fundamental, it would
have been hard to have excluded the Scripture, upon which the Creed it self
in every Point is grounded. For nothing is supposed to shut out its own
Foundation. And if I should now say, that some Articles are Fundamental which
are infolded in the Creed, it would not follow, that therefore some unwritten
Traditions were Fundamental. Some Traditions I deny not true and firm, and of
great, both Authority, and Use in the Church, as being Apostolical, but yet
not Fundamental in the Faith. And it would be a mighty large fold, which
should lap up Traditions within the Creed. As for that Tradition, That the
Books of holy Scriptures are Divine, and Infallible in every part, I will
handle that when I come to the proper place. 16. N. 1.
for it.


F. I asked how then it happened (as M. Rogers says) that the English Church
is not yet resolved, what is the right sense of the Article of Christ's
Descending into Hell.


B. The English Church never made doubt (that that Article. The Art. 3.
Article among those, to which she requires Subscription, not as doubting of
the sense, but to prevent the Cavils of some, who had been too busy in
Crucifying that Article, and in making it all one with the Article of the
Cross, or but an Exposition of it.

And surely for my part, I think the Church of England is better resolved of
the right sense of this Article, then the Church of Rome, especially if she
must be tried by her Writers, as you try the Church of England by M. Rogers.
For, you cannot agree, whether this Article be a mere Tradition, or whether it
has any Place of Scripture to vvarrant it. Scotus in 1. D. 11. q. 1.
Scotus, and Stapleton Relect. Con. 5. q. 5. Art. 1.
Stapleton allow it no footing in Scripture, but Bellarm, 4. de Christo. c. 6.
and 12. Scripturae passim hoc docent.
Bellarmine is resolute, that this Article is every where in Scripture, and
Thom. 2. ^ae. q. 1. A, 9, ad 1.
Thomas grants as much for the whole Creed. The Church of England never doubted
it, and S. S. Aug. Ep. 99.
Augustine prooves it.

And yet again, you are different for the sense. in triduo mortis, in the time
of his Death, did go down into Hell really, and was present there; or
vertually and by effects only. For Tho. p. 3. q. 52. A. 2. c. per suam
essentiam.
Thomas holds the first, and Dur in 3. d. 22. q. 3.
Durand the later. Then you agree not, Whether the Soul of Christ did descend
really and in essence into the lowest pit of Hell, and Place of the Damned, as
Bellar. L. 4. do Christo. c. 16.
Bellarmine once held probable, and prooved it; or really only into that place,
or Region of Hell, which you call Limbum Patrum, and then, but vertually from
thence into the Lower Hell: to which Bellar. Recog. p. 11.
Bellarmine reduces himself, and gives his reason, because it is the Sequuntur
enim. Tho. p. 3. Q. 52. A. 2.
common Opinion of the School. Now, the Church of England takes the words, as
they are in the Creed, and believes them without farther Dispute, and in that
sense which the ancient Primitive Fathers of the Church agreed in. And yet if
any in the Church of England should not be thoroughly resolved in the sense of
this Article; Is it not as lawful for them to say (I conceive thus, or thus of
it; yet if any other way of his Descent be found truer then this, I deny it
not, but as yet I know no other) as it was for Non est pertinaciter asserendum,
quin Anima Christi per alium modum nobis ignotum potuerit descendere ad
Infernum: Nec nos negamus alium modum esse for sit an veriorem; sed fatemur nos
illum ignor arc. Durand. in 3. sent. Did. 22. q. 3. Nu. 9.
Durand to say it, and yet not impeach the Foundation of the Faith.


F. The Bishop said, That M. Rogers was but a private man. But (said I) if M.
Rogers (writing as he did by public Authority) be accounted only a private
man, etc.


B. I said truth, when I said M. Rogers was a private Church of Rome. And this
was an Ancient fault too, for S. Augustine checks at it in his time. Noli
colligere calumnias ex Episcoporum scriptis, sive Hillarii, sive Cypriani and
Agrippini. Primo, quia hoc genus literarum ab Authoritate Canonis distinguendum
est. Non enim sic leguntur tanquam it a ex iis testimonium proferatur, ut
contra sentire non liceat, sicubi forte aliter sentirent, quam veritas
postulat. S. Aug. Ep. 48. etc. And yet these were far greater men in their
generations, then M. Rogers was.
This has been often complained of on both sides: The imposing particular men's
assertions upon the Church: yet I see you mean not to leave it. And surely as
Controversies are now handled (by some of your party) at this day, I may not
say, it is the sense of the Article in hand, but I have long thought it a kind
os descent into Hell, to be conversant in them. I would the Authors would take
heed in time, and not seek to blind the People, or cast a mist before evident
Truth, least it cause a final descent to that place of Torment. But since you
will hold this course, Stapleton was of greater note with you, then M. Rogers
his exposition of Notes upon the Articles of the Church of England is with us.
And as he, so his Relection. And is it the Doctrine of the Church of Rome which
Stapleton affirms, Stapl. Cont. 5. q. 5. A. 1.
The Scripture is silent, that Christ descended into Hell, and that there is a
Catholic, and an Apostolic Church? If it be, then what will become of the
Popes Supremacy over the whole Church? Shall he have his Power over the
Catholic Church given him expressly in Scripture, in the S. Mat. 16. 19.
Keys, to enter, and in S. Ioh. 21. 15.
Pasce, to feed when he is in, and when he had fed, to S. Luke 22. 35.
Confirm; and in all these not to err and fail in his Ministration: And is
the Catholic Church, in and over which he is to do all these great things,
quite left out of the Scripture? Belike the Holy Ghost was careful to give him
his power; Yes in any case; but left the assigning of his great Cure, the
Catholic Church, to Tradition. And it were well for him, if he could so
prescribe for what he now Claymes.

But what if after all this, M. Rogers there says Rogers in Art. Eccle. Angl.
Art. 3.
All Christians acknowledge, He descended; but in the interpretation of the
Article, there is not that consent, that were to be wished. What is this to the
Church of England, more then others? And again Ibid.
Till we know the native and undoubted sense of this Article, is M. Rogers (We)
the Church of England? or rather his, and some others Judgment, in the Church
of England?

Now here A. C. will have somewhat again to A. C. p. 47.
that the Jesuit urged M. Roger's Book, because it was set out by Public
Authority: And because the Book bears the Title of the Catholic Doctrine of
the Church of England. A. C. may undoubtedly urge M. Rogers, if he please; But
he ought not to say, that his Opinion is the Doctrine of the Church of England
for neither of the Reasons by him expressed. First, not because his Book was
publicly allowed. For many Books among them, as well as among us, have been
Printed by public Authority, as containing nothing in them contrary to Faith
and good manners, and yet containing many things in them of Opinion only, or
private Judgment, which yet is far from the avowed Positive Doctrine of the
Church, the Church having as yet determined neither way by open Declaration
upon the words, or things controverted. And this is more frequent among their
Schoolmen, then among any of our Controversers, as is well known. Nor,
secondly, because his Book bears the Title of the Catholic Doctrine of the
Church of England. For suppose the worst, and say, M. Rogers thought a little
too well of his own pains, and gave his Book too high a Title, is his
private Judgment therefore to be accounted the Catholic Doctrine of the
Church of England? Surely no: No more then I should say, every thing said by
Angelici D. S. Tho. Summa.
Thomas, or Celebratissimi Patris Dom. Bonaventurae Doctoris Seraphici in 3. L.
Sent. Disputata.
Bonaventure, is Angelical, or Seraphicall Doctrine, because one of these is
styled in the Church of Rome, Seraphicall, and the other, Angelical Doctor.
And yet their works are Printed by Public Authority, and that Title given
them.

Yea but our private Authors (says A. C.) are not allowed (for ought I know)
in such a like sort to express A. C. p. 47.
our Catholic Doctrine in any matter subject to Question. Here are two
Limitations, which will go far to bring A. C. off, whatsoever I shall say
against him: For first, let me instance in any private man, that takes as much
upon him as M. Rogers does, he will say, he knew it not, his Assertion here
being no other, then for ought he knows. Secondly, If he be unwilling to
acknowledge so much, yet he will answer, it is not just in such a like sort as
M. Rogers does it, that is, perhaps, it is not the very Title of his Book. But
well then: Is there never a Private man allowed in the Church of Rome to
express your Catholic Doctrine in any matter subject to question? What? not
in any matter? Were not Vega, and Soto two private men? Is it not a m^tter
subject to Question, to great Question in these Days, Whether a man may be
certain of his Salvation, c^rtitudine fidei, by the certainty of Faith? Does
not Bellar. Lib. 3. de Justificat. c. 1. and 14.
Bellarmine make it a Controversy? And is it not a part of your Catholic
Faith, if it be determined in the Huic Concilio Catholici omnes ingenia sua,
and judicia sponte subjiciunt. Bellar. 3. de Justif. c. 3.. Sed Concilii Trid^i.
Council of Trent? And yet these two great Friars of their time, Dominicus
Soto, and Andreas Vega Hist. Council. Trident. Lib. 2. p. 245. Edit. Lat.
Leidae. 1622.
were of contrary Opinions; and both of them challenged the Decree of the
Council; and so consequently your Catholic Faith to be as each of them
concluded; and both of them wrote Books to maintain their Opinions, and both
of their Books were published by Authority. And therefore I think it is allowed
in the Church of Rome to private men to express your Catholic Doctrine, and
in a matter subject to Question. And therefore also, if another man in the
Church of England, should be of a contrary Opinion to M. Rogers, and declare it
under the Title of the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England, this were
no more then Soto, and Vega did in the Church of Rome. And I, for my part,
cannot but wonder A. C. should not know it. A. C. p. 47.
For he says, that for ought he knows, Private men are not allowed so to
express their Catholic Doctrine. And in the same Question both Catharinus,
and Bellarmine Bellar. L. 3. de Iustif. c. 3.
take on them, to express your Catholic Faith, the one differing from the
other, almost as much as Soto, and Vega, and perhaps in some respect more.


F. But if M. Rogers be only a private man; in what Book may we find the
Protestants public Doctrine? The Bishop answered, That to the Book of
Articles they were all sworn.


B. What? Was I so ignorant to say, The Articles of the Church of England were
the Public Doctrine of all the Protestants? Or, that all Protestants were
sworn to the Articles of England, as this speech seems to imply? Sure I was
not. Was not the immediate speech before, of the Church of England? And how
comes the Subject of the Speech to be varied in the next lines? Nor yet speak
I this, as if other Protestants did not agree with the Church of England in the
chiefest Doctrines, and in the maine Exceptions, which they jointly take
against the Roman Church, as appears by their several Confessions. But if A.
C. will say (as he does) that because there was speech before of the Church of
A. C. p. 47.
England, the Jesuit understood me in a limited sense, and meant only the
Protestants of the English Church; Be it so; there is no great harm done And
therefore A. C. needs not make such a Noise about it, as he does. p. 48
but this, that the Jesuit offers to enclose me too much. For I did not say,
that the Book of Articles only was the Continent of the Church of Englands
public Doctrine: She is not so narrow, nor has she purpose to exclude any
thing, which she acknowledges hers, nor does she wittingly permit any Crossing
of her public Declarations; yet she is not such a shrew to her Children, as to
deny her Blessing, or Denounce an Anathema against them, if some peaceably
dissent in some Particulars remoter from the Foundation, as your own School
men differ. And if the Church of Rome, since she grew to her greatness, had
not been so fierce in this Course, and too particular in Determining too many
things, and making them matters of Necessary Belief, which had gone for many
hundreds of years before, only for things of Pious Opinion. Christendom (I
persuade my self) had been in happier peace at this Day, then I doubt, we
shall ever live to see it.

Well, but A. C. will prove the Church of England Shrew, and such a Shrew. For
in her Book Can. 5.
of Canons A. C. p. 48.
She Excommunicates every man, who shall hold any thing contrary to any part of
the said Articles. So A. C. But surely these are not the very words of the
Canon, nor perhaps the sense. Not the Words; for they are: Whosoever shall
affirm that the Articles are in any part superstitious, or erroneous, etc. And
perhaps not the sense. For it is one thing for a man to hold an Opinion
privately within himself; and another thing boldly and publicly to affirm
it. And again, it is one thing to hold contrary to some part of an Article,
which perhaps may be but in the manner of Expression; and another thing
positively to affirm, that the Articles in any part of them are superstitious,
and erroneous. But this is not the Maine of the Business: For though the
Church of England Denounce Excommunication, as is Can. 5.
before expressed; Yet She comes far short of the Church of Rome's severity,
whose Anathema's are not only for 39. Articles, but for very many more, Council.
Trident.
above one hundred in matter of Doctrine; and that in many Points as far
remote from the Foundation, though to the far greater Rack of men's
Consciences, they must be all made Fundamental, if that Church have once
Determined them: whereas the Church A. C. p. 45.
of England never declared, That every one of her Articles are Fundamental in
the Faith. For it is one thing to say: No one of them is superstitious or
erroneous: And quite another to say: Every one of them is fundamental and that
in every part of it, to all men's Belief. Besides, the Church of England
prescribes only to her own Children, and by those Articles provides but for
her own peaceable Consent in those Doctrines of Truth. But the Church of Rome
severely imposes her Doctrine upon the whole World under pain of Damnation.


F. And that the Scriptures only, not any unwritten Tradition, was the
Foundation of their Faith.


B. The Church of England grounded her Positive Articles upon Scripture, and
her Negative do refute Church of England only, but all Protestants, agree most
truly, and most strongly in this, That the Scripture is sufficient to
salvation, and contains in it all things necessary to it. The Fathers S.
Basil. de vera and pia fide. Manifesta defectio Fidei est, importare quicquam
eorum quae scripta non sunt. S. Hilar. L. 2. ad. Constable. Aug. Fidem tantum
secundum ca quae scripta sunt desider autem, and hoc qui repudiat Antichristus
est, and qui simulat, Anathema est. S. Aug. L. 2. de Doctr. Christian. c. 9. In
iis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent
sidem, m^resque vivendi. And to this place Bellarm L. 4. de verbo Dei non
scripto. c. 11. says, that S. Augustine speaks, de illis Dogmatibus quae
necestaria sunt omnibus simpliciter, of those Points of faith, which are
necessary simply for all men. So far then he grants the question. And that
you may know, it fell not from him on the sudden, he had said as much before,
in the beginning of the same Chapter, and here he confirms it again.
are plain, the S^tus Proleg. in sent. q. 2. Scriptura sufficienter continet
Doctrinam necessariam Uiatori. Thom. 2. 2ae. q. 1. A. 10. ad 1. In Doctrina
Christi and Apostolorum, veritas fidei est suffi ienter explicata. And he
speaks there of the written Word.
Schoolmen not strangers in it. And have not we reason then to account it, as
it is, The Foundation of our Faith? And Scripturam Fundamentum esse, and
columnam Fidei fatemur in suo genere, i. can genere Testimoniorum. and in
materia Credendorum. Relect. Con. 4. q. 1. Ar. 3. in fine.
Stapleton himself, though an angry Opposite, confesses, That the Scripture is
in some sort the Foundation of Faith, that is, in the nature of Testimony, and
in the matter, or thing to be believed. And if the Scripture be the Foundation,
to which we are to go for witness, if there be Doubt about the Faith; and in
which we are to find the thing that is to be believed, as necessary in the
Faith; we never did, nor never will refuse any Tradition that is Universal,
and Apostolic, for the better Exposition of the Scripture; nor any Definition
of the Church, in which she goes to the Scripture, for what she teaches, and
thrusts nothing as Fundamental in the Faith upon the world, but what the
Scripture fundamentally makes materiam Credendorum, the substance of that which
is so to be believed, whether immediately and expressly in words, or more
remotely, till a clear, and full Deduction draw it out.

Against the beginning of this Paragraph A. C. excepts. And first he says;
It Is true, that the Church of England grounded her Positive Articles upon
Scripture: A. C. p. 48.
That is, it is true, if themselves may be competent Judges in their own Cause.
But this by the leave of A. C. is true, without making our selves Judges in our
own Cause. For that all the Positive Articles of the present Church of England
are grounded upon Scripture, we are content to be judged by the joint and
constant Belief of the Fathers, which lived within the first four or five
hundred years after Christ, when the Church was at the best; and by the
Councels held within those times; and to submit to them in all those Points of
Doctrine. Therefore we desire not to be Judges in our own Cause. And if any
whom A. C. calls a Novellist, can truly say, and maintain this, he will quickly
prove himself no Novellist. And for the Negative Articles, they refute, where
the thing affirmed by you, is either not affirmed in Scripture, or not directly
to be concluded out of it: Upon this Negative ground A. C. inferres again,
That the Baptism of Infants is not expressly (at least not evidently) affirmed
in Scripture, nor directly (at least not A. C. p. 49.
demonstratively) concluded out of it. In which case he professes, he would
gladly know, what can be answered to defend this doctrine, to be a Point of
Faith necessary for the salvation of Infants. And in Conclusion, professes he
cannot easily guess what Answer can be made, unless we will acknowledge,
Authority of Church-Tradition necessary in this Case.

And truly since A. C. is so desirous of an Answer, A. C. his Addition (not
expressly, at least not evidently) what means he? If he speak of the Letter of
the Scripture, then, whatsoever is expressly, is evidently in the Scripture; and
so his Addition is vain. If he speak of the Meaning of the Scripture, then
his Addition is cunning. For many things are Expressly in Scripture, which yet
in their Meaning are not evidently there. And what e're he mean, my words
are, That our Negative Articles refute that which is not affirmed in Scripture,
without any Addition of Expressly, or Evidently. And he should have taken my
words, as I used them. I like nor change, nor Addition, nor am I bound to
either of A. Cs. making. And I am as little satisfied with his next Addition
(nor directly, at least not demonstratively concluded out of it.) For are there
not many things in Good Logic concluded, directly, which yet are not
concluded Demonstratively? Surely there are. For to be directly or indirectly
concluded flows from the Mood or Form of the Syllogism: To be
demonstratively concluded flows from the Matter or Nature of the Propositions.
If the Propositions be Prime and necessary Truths, the Syllogism is
demonstrative and scientificall, because the Propositions are such. If the
Propositions be probable only, though the Syllogism be made in the clearest
Mood, yet is the Conclusion no more. The Inference, or Consequence indeed is
clear and necessary, but the Consequent is but probable, or topicall, as the
Propositions were. Now my words were only for a Direct Conclusion, and no
more: though in this case I might give A. C. his Caution. For Scripture here is
the thing spoken of. And Scripture being a Principle, and every Text of
Scripture confessedly a Principle among all Christians, whereof no man Habitus
enim Pid^i (...) se habet in ordine ad Theologiam, si^ut se habit Habitus
intelleclus ad Sc^s humnas. M. Canus. L, 2. de Loc. c. 8.
desires any farther proof: I would feign know, why that which is plainly and
apparently, that is, by direct Consequence, proved out of Scripture, is not
Demonstratively or Scientifically proved? If at least he think there can be any
Demonstration in Divinity: and if there can be none, why did he add
Demonstratively?

Next in Particular; I answer to the Instance A. C. p. 49.
which A. C. makes, concerning the Baptism of Infants, That it may be
concluded directly (and let A. C. judge, whether not demonstratively?) out of
Scripture; both that Infants ought to be baptized; and that Baptism is
necessary to their Salvation. And first, that Baptism is necessary to the
Salvation of Infants (in the ordinary way of the Church, without binding God to
the use and means of that Sacrament, to which he has bound us) S. Aug.
expressly of the Baptism of Infants. l. 1. de Pec^ato. Me^. and R^ss c. 30. Et
(...). 2. c 27. Et L. 3. de A^ and ejus Origin. c 13. Nay they of the Roman
Party which urge the Baptism of Infants, as a matter of Faith, and yet not to
be concluded out of Scripture; when they are not in eager pursuit of this
controversy, but look upon truth with a more indifferent eye, confess as much
(even the Learned st of them) as we ask. Ad^ ^dum autem Salvato, em dum d^cit
[Nisi quis renatus, etc.] ne^ssitatem (...) omnibus, at pr^de Parvulos debere
renas^i ex aqu^ and Spiritu. Iansen. Harm. in Euang. c. 20. So here is Baptismo
Necessary for Infants, and that Necessity imposed by our Savior, and not by
the Church only. H^ n^llo alio quam hoc Scripturae testimonio probare possunt,
Infantes esse baptizandos. Mald. in S. Ioh. 3. 5. So Maldonat confesses that
the Heretics (we know whom he means) can prove the Baptism of Infants by no
Testimony of Scripture but this: which speech implies, That by this Testimony
of Scripture it is, and can be proved, and therefore not by Church-Tradition
only. And I would feign know, why Bell^. L. 1. de Baptism. C. 8.. 5. should
bring three Arguments out of Scripture to prove the Baptism of Infants
[Habemus in Scripturis tria argumenta, etc.] if Baptism cannot be proved at
all out of Scripture, but only by the Tradition of the Church. And yet, this is
not Bellarmine's way alone, but Sua^ in Tho. p. 3 q 68. Disput. 25. Sect. 1..
2. Ex Scriptura possunt va^ Argumenta sumi ad consirmandum Paed (...). Et fi^,
etc And G^g. de (...) L. de Bapt s. Par^um c. 2.. 1. And the Pope himself,
Innocent. 3. L. 3 D^ (...) it. 42. Cap Majores. And they all jump with S. Amb.
L. 10. Epist. 84. ad Dem^dem ^nem: who expressly assirmes it, Paedobaptismum
esse Constitutionem Salvator is: And proves it out of S. Joh. 3. 5.
is express in S. John 3. Except a man be borne again of water, and the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. So, no Baptism, no Entrance.
Nor can Infants creep in, any other ordinary way. And this is the received
Opinion of all the Ancient Church of Christ Infan^s ^os esse Originalis
peccati, and i^o baptizandos esse, Antiquam Fidei Regulam vocat. S. Aug. Ser.
8. de ver. Apos. c. 8. Et n^mo vobis susurret doctrinas ali^nas, ho^ Ecclesia
semper habuit, semper t^nuit, hoc a majorum side recepit, etc. S. Aug. Ser. 10.
de verb. Apost. c. 2. and S. Amb^os. L. 10. Ep. 84. cir^a medium. Et S.
Chrysostom. Hom. d^ Adam and Eva. Hoc praedicat Ecclesia Catholica ubique dissusa.
. And secondly, That Infants ought to be baptized, is first plain by evident
and Direct Consequence out of Scripture. For if there be no Salvation for
Infants in the ordinary way of the Church, but by Baptism, and this appear in
Scripture, as it does, then out of all Doubt, the Consequence is most evident
out of that Scripture, That Infants are to be baptized, that their Salvation
may be certain. For they which cannot Egi causam little qui pro se loqui non
possunt, etc. S. Aug. Sermon. 8. de verb. Apost. c. 8.
help themselves, must not be left only to Extraordinary Helps, of which we
have no assurance, and for which we have no warrant at all in Scripture, while
we in the mean time neglect the ordinary way, and means commanded by Christ.
Secondly, it is very near an Expression in Scripture it self. For when S.
Peter had ended that great Sermon of his, Act. 2. he Act. 2. 38, 39.
applies two comforts unto them, Verse. 38. Amend your lives, and be baptized,
and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. And then, Verse 39. he
inferres, For the promise is made to you, and to your children. The Promise;
what Promise? What? Why the Promise of Sanctification by the Holy Ghost. By
what means? Why, by Baptism. For it is expressly, Be baptized, and ye shall
receive. And as expressly, This promise is made to you, and to your children.
And therefore A. C. may find it, if he will, That the Baptism of Infants may
be directly concluded out of Scripture. For some of his own Party, Nullum
excipit, non Iudaeum, non Gentilem, non Adultum, non Puerum etc. Ferus in Act.
2. 39.
Ferus and Et ad Filios vestros: quare debent consentire, quum ad usum rationis
perveniunt, ad implenda promissa in Baptismo, etc. Salm. Tract. 14. upon the
place.
Salmeron, could both find it there. And so (if it will do him any pleasure)
he has my Answer, which he says, he would be glad to know.

It Is true, Bellar. L. 4. de Verbo Dei c. 9.. 5.
Bellarmine presses a maine Place out of Augustine, and he urges it hard. S. S.
Aug. Genesis ad Lit. c. 23. Consuetudo Matris Ecclesia in Baptizandis parvulis
nequaquam spernenda est, nec omnino credenda, nisi Apostolica esset Traditio.
Augustine's words are, The Custom of our Mother the Church in Baptizing
Infants, is by no means to be contemned, or thought superfluous; nor yet at
all to be believed, unless it were an Apostolical Tradition. The Place is
truly cited, but seems a great deal stronger, than indeed it is. For first,
it is not denied, That this is an Apostolical Tradition, and therefore to be
believed. But secondly, not therefore only. Nor does S. Augustine say so, nor
does Bellarmine press it that way. The truth is, it would have been somewhat
difficult to find the Collection out of Scripture only for the Baptism of
Infants, since they do not actually believe. And therefore S. Augustine is at
nec credenda nisi, that this Custom of the Church had not been to be believed,
had it not been an Apostolical Tradition. But the Tradition being
Apostolical, led on the Church easily to see the necessary Deduction out of
Scripture. And this is not the least use of Tradition, to lead the Church into
the true meaning of those things which are found in Scripture, though not
obvious to every eye there. And that this is S. Augustine's meaning, is
manifest by himself, who best knew it. For when he had said, Cur Antiquam fidei
Regulam frangere conaris? S. Aug. Ser. 8. de ver. Apos. c. 8. Hoc Ecclesia
semper tenuit. Ib. Ser. 10. c. 2.
as he does, That to baptize children, is Antiqua fidei Regula, the Ancient
Rule of Faith, and the constant Tenet of the Church, yet he doubts not to
collect and deduce it out of Scripture also. For when Pelagius urged, That
Infants needed not to be baptized, because they had no Original Sin: S.
Augustine relies not upon the Tenet of the Church only, but argues from the
Text thus. Quid necessarium habuit Infans Christum, si non aegrotat? S. Matthew.
9. 12.

Quid est quod dicis, nisi ut non accedant ad Iesum? Sed tibi clamat Jesus.
Sine Parvulos venire ad me. S. Aug. in the forecited places.


What need have Infants of Christ, if they be not sick? For the sound need not
the Physician, S. Mat. 9. And again, is not this said by Pelagius, ut non
accedant ad Iesum? That Infants may not come to their Savior? Sed clamat
Jesus, but Jesus cries out, Suffer Little ones to come unto me, S. Marc. 10. 14.
S. Mar. 10. And all this is fully acknowledged by Nullus est Scriptor tam
vetustus, qui non ejus Originem ad Apostolorum seculum pro certo referat. Calv.
4. Inst. c. 16. 8.
Calvine, Namely, That all men acknowledge the Baptism of Infants to descend
from Apostolical Tradition. Miserrimum alylum foret, si pro Defensione
Paedubaptismi ad nudam Ecclesiae authoritatem fugere cogeremur. Calv. 4. Inst.
c. 8.. 16.
And yet that it does not depend upon the bare and naked Authority of the
Church. Which he speaks not in regard of Tradition, but in relation to such
proof, as is to be made by necessary Consequence out of Scripture over and
above Tradition.

As for Tradition,. 15. Number. 1. A. C. p. 49.
I have said enough for that, and A. C. where it is truly Apostolical. And yet
if any thing will please him, I will add this concerning this particular, The
Baptizing of Infants. That the Church received this by Orig in Rom 6 6. tom. 2
p. 543. Pro hoc Ecclesia ab Ap^stolis Traditionem suscepit, etia^ parvulis
Baptismu^ dare. Et S. Aug. Ser. 10. de verb. Apos. c. 2. Hoc Ecclesia a Majoru^
side percepit. And it is to be observed, that neither of these Fathers (nor i
believe any other) say that the Church received it a Traditione sola, or a
Majorum side sola: as if Tradition (...) exclude collection of it out of
Scripture.
Tradition from the Apostles. By Tradition And what then? May it not directly
be concluded out of Scripture, because it was delivered to the Church by way of
Tradition? I hope A. C. will never say so. For certainly in Doctrinall things,
nothing so likely to be a Tradition Apostolical, as that which has a Yea, and
Bellarmine himself avers, Omnes Traditiones etc. contineri in Scripturis in
universali. L. 4. de verb. Det non scripto. c. 10.. Sic etiam. And S. Basil.
Sermon. de fide approves only those Agrapha, quae non sunt aliena a pia secundu^
Scriptura^ Sententid.
root and a Foundation in Scripture. For Apostles cannot write, or deliver
contrary, but subordinate, and subservient things.


F. I asked how he knew Scripture to be Scripture, and in particular, Genesis,
Exodus, etc. These are believed to be Scripture, yet not proved out of any
Place of Scripture. The Bishop said, That the Books of Scripture are Principles
to be supposed, and needed not to be proved.


B. I did never love too curious a search into Scripture by Tradition, and
Tradition by Scripture, till the Devil find a means to dispute him into
Infidelity, and make him believe neither. I hope this is no part of your
meaning. Yet I doubt this Qui conantur sidem destruere sub specie Questionis
difficilis, aut forte indissolubilis, etc. Orig. Q. 35. in S. Matthew.
Question, How do you know Scripture to be Scripture? has done more harm,
than you will be ever able to help by Tradition. But I must follow that way
which you draw me. And because it is so much insisted upon by you, and is in it
self a To know that Scriptures are Divine, and infallible in every part, is a
Foundation so necessary, as if it be doubtfully questioned, all the Faith
built upon Scripture falls to the ground. A. C. p. 47. Necesse est nosse extare
Libros aliquos vere Divinos. Bellarm. L. 4. de verb. Dei non scripto. c. 4..
Quarto necesse. Et etiam libros qui sunt in manibus esse illos. Ibid.. Sexto
oportet.
matter of such Consequence, I will sift it a little farther.

Many men laboring to settle this great Principle Faith of the Scriptures,
being the Word of God, into only Tradition. For only, and no other proof are
equal. To prove the Scripture therefore (so called by way of Excellence) to be
the Word of God, there are several Offers at diverse proofs. For first, some
fly to the Testimony and witness of the Church, and (1.)
her Tradition, which constantly believes, and unanimously delivers it.
Secondly, some to the Light (2.)
and the Testimony which the Scripture gives to it self; with other internal
proofs which are observed in it, and to be found in no other Writing
whatsoever. Thirdly, some to the Testimony of the Holy (3.)
Ghost, which cleares up the light that is in Scripture, and seals this Faith
to the souls of men, that it is Gods Word. Fourthly, all that have not
imbrutished (4.)
themselves, and sunk below their species, and order of Nature, give even
Natural Reason leave to come in, and make some proof, and give some
approbation upon the weighing, and the consideration of other Arguments. And
this must be admitted, if it be but for Pagans and Infidels, who either
consider not, or value not any one of the other three: yet must some way or
other be converted, or left without excuse, Romans 1. and that is Romans 1. 20.
done by this very evidence.

1. For the first: The Tradition of the Church, only, that it cannot be a
sufficient Proof to believe by Divine Faith, that Scripture is the Word of
God. For that which is a full and sufficient proof, is able of it self to
settle the soul of man concerning it. Now the Tradition of the Church is not
able to do this. For it may be further asked, why we should believe the
Churches Tradition? And if it be answered, we may believe, Because the Church
is infallibly governed by the Holy Ghost; it may yet be demanded of you, How
that may appear? And if this be demanded, either you must say; you have it by
special Revelation, which is the private Spirit you object to other men; or
else you must attempt to prove it by Scripture Esse aliquas veras Traditiones
demonstratur ex Scripturis. Bellar. L. 4 de verbo Dei non Scripto. c. 5. and A.
C p. 50. proves Tradition out of 2 These. 2.
, as all of you do. And that very offer, to prove it out of Scripture is a
sufficient acknowledgement, that the Scripture, is a higher Proof, then the
Churches Tradition, which (in your own Grounds) is, or may be Questionable, till
you come thither. Besides, this is an Inviolable ground of Reason: Arist. 1.
Post. c. 2. T. 16. Per Pacium. Quocirca si (...), propter prima scimus and
credimus, illa quoque scimus and credimus (...) magis, quia per illa scimus,
and credimus etiam posteriora.
That the Principles of any Conclusion must be of more credit, then the
conclusion it self. Therefore if the Articles of Faith, The Trinity, the
Resurrection, and the rest, be the Conclusions, and the Principles by which
they are prooved, be only Ecclesiastical Tradition, it must needs follow, That
the Tradition of the Church is more infallible then the Articles of the Faith,
if the Faith which we have of the Articles should be finally Resolved into the
Veracity of the Churches Testimony. But this Eorum errorem dissimulare non
possum, qui asserunt fidern Nostram, co tanquam in ultimam credendi causam
reducendam esse. Vt Credamus Ecclesiam esse Veracem etc. M. Canus. L. 2. de
Locis. c. 8.. Cui, and tertium,
your Learned and wary men deny. And therefore I hope your self dare not
affirm.

Again, if the Voice of the Church (saying the Books of Scripture commonly
received, are the Word of God) be the formal Object of Faith, upon which alone
absolutely I may resolve my self, then every man not only may, but ought to
resolve his Faith into the Voice or Tradition of the Church: for every man is
bound to rest upon the proper and formal Object of the Faith. But nothing can
be more evident then this, That a man ought not to resolve his Faith of this
Principle into the sole Testimony of the Church. Therefore neither is that
Testimony, or Tradition alone the formal Object of Faith. Uox Ecclesiae non
est formale Obiectum Fidei. Stapl. Relect. Cont: 4. q. 3. A. 2. Licet in
Articulo Fidei [Credo Ecclesiam] forte contineatur hoc totum, Credo ea, quae
docet Ecclesia: tamen non intelligitur necessario, quod Credo docenti Ecclesiae
tanquam Testi insallibili. ibid. Vbi etiam rejicit Opinionem. Durandi and Gabr.
Et Waldens. L. 2 Doctr. Fidei Art. 2. c. 21. Number. 4. Testimonium Ecclesiae
Catholicae est Objectum Fidei Christianae, and Legislatio Scripturae Canonica,
subjicitur tamen ipsi sicut Testis Iudici, and Testimonium Veritati etc. Canus
Loc. Lib. 2. cap. 8. Nec, si Ecclesia aditum nobis prabet ad hujusmodi Libros
Sacros cognoscendos, protinus ibi acquiescendum est, sed ultra ^portet
progredi, and Solida Dei veritate niti etc.
The Learned of your own part grant this: Although in that Article of the
Creed (I believe the Catholic Church) peradventure all this be contained (I
believe those things which the Church teaches) yet this is not necessarily
understood, That I believe the Church teaching, as an Infallible Witness. And
if they did not confess this; it were no hard thing to prove.

But here is the cunning of this Devise All the Authority's of Fathers,
Councels, nay of Scripture too, Omnis ergo Ecclesiastica Authoritas, cum sit ad
Testificandum de Christo, and Legibus ejus: vilior est Christi legibus, and
Scripturis Sanctis necessario postponenda. Wald. L. 2. Doct. Fidei Art. 2. cap.
21. Numb. 1.
(though this be contrary to their own Doctrine) must be finally Resolved
into the Authority of the Present Roman Church, And though they would seem to
have us believe the Fathers, and the Church of old, yet they will not have us
take their Doctrine from their own Writings, or the Decrees of Councels:
because (as they say) we cannot know by reading them, what their meaning was,
but from the Infallible Testimony of the present Roman Church teaching by
Tradition. Now by this, two things are evident. First, That they ascribe as
great Authority (if not greater) to a part of the Catholic Church, as they do
to the whole, which we believe in our Creed; and which is the Society of all
Christians. And this is full of Absurdity in Nature, in Reason, in All things,
That any Totum est majus sua part. Etiamsi Axioma sit apud Eucl^dem, non tamen
ideo Geometricum put andum est, quia Geometres to utitur. Vtitur enim and tota
Logica. Ram in Schol. Matthew. And Aristotle vindicates such Propositions (...).
from being usurped by Particular Sciences. (...) etc. Quia convenient omni
E^ti; and non alicui Generi separatim. 4. Metapb. cap. 3. T. 7.
Part should be of equal worth, power, credit, or authority with the Whole.
Secondly, that in their Doctrine concerning the Infallibility of their Church,
their proceeding is most unreasonable. For if you ask them, Why they believe
their whole Doctrine to be the sole true Catholic Faith? Their Answer is,
Because it is agreeable to the Word of God, and the Doctrine and Tradition of
the Ancient Church. If you ask them, How they know that to be so? They will
then produce Testimonies of Scripture, Counsels, and Fathers, But if you ask
a third time, By what means they are assured, that these Testimonies do
indeed make for them, and their Cause? They will not then have recourse to Text
of Scripture, or Exposition of Fathers, or phrase and propriety of Language, in
which either of them were first written, or to the scope of the Author, or the
Intelligentia dictorum ex causis est assumenda dicendi, quia non Sermonires,
sed Rei Sermo est subjectus. S. Hilar. L. 4. de Trin. Ex materia dicti
dirigendus est sensus. Tert. L. de Resur. carnis. c. 37.
Causes of the thing uttered, or the Conference with like Uidendo differentias
Similium ad Similia. Orig. Tract. 19 in S Matthew.
Places, or the Anteceden's Recolendum est unde venerit ista Sententia. and qua
illam superiora pepererint, quibusque connexa dependeat. S. Aug. Ep. 29 Solet
circumstantia Scriptura illuminare Sementiam. S. Aug. L. 83. Quaest. q. 69.
and Consequents of the same Places: Quae ambigue and obscure in nonnullis
Scripturae Sacrae locis dicta videntur, per ea quae alibi certa, and indubitata
habentur, d^clarantur. S Basil in Regulis contractis, Reg. 267. Manifestiora
quaeque praevaleant, and de incertis certiora praescribant. Tert. L. de Resur.
c. 19 and 21. S. Aug. L. 3. De Doct Christ. c. ^6. Moris est Scripturarum
obscuris Manifesta subnectere, and quod prius sub aenigmatibus dixerint, aperta
voce proferre. S. Hieron. in Esa 19. princ. Uide.. 26. Nu. 4.
or the Ex^osition of the dark and doubtful Places of Scripture by the
undoubted and manifest. With diverse other Rules given for the true knowledge
and understanding of Scripture, which do frequently occur in S. Aug. L. 3. de
Doctr. Christiana.
S. Augustine. No, none of these, or the like helps: That, with them, were to
Admit a Private Spirit, or to make way for it: But their final Answer is; They
know it to be so, because the present Roman Church witnessethit, according to
Tradition. So arguing, a primo ad ultimum, from first to last, the Present
Church of Rome and her Followers believe her own Doctrine, and Tradition to
be true and Catholic, because she professes it to be such. And if this be
not to prove idem per idem, the same by the same, I know not what is: which,
though it be most absurd in all kind of learning, yet out of this I see not how
it is possible to wind themselves, so long as the last resolution of their
Faith must rest (as they teach) upon the Tradition of the present Church only.

It seems therefore to me very necessary And this is so necessary, that
Bellarmine confesses, that if Tradition (which he relies upon) be not Divine:
He and his can have no Faith. Non habemus fidem. Fides enim verbo Dei nititur.
L. 4. de verbo Dei. c. 4.. At si ita est.

And A. C. tells us. p. 47. To know that Scripture is Divine and Infallible in
every part, is a Foundation so necessary, as if it be doubtfully questioned,
all the Faith built upon Scripture falls to the ground. And he gives the same
reason for it, p. 50. which Belarmine does.


, that Word of God, by some Authority that is absolutely Divine. For if they
be warranted unto us by any Authority less then Divine, then all things
contained in them (which have no greater assurance then the Scripture, in which
they are read) are not Objects of Divine belief. And that once granted will
enforce us to yield, That all the Articles of Christian Belief have no greater
assurance then Humane, or Moral Faith, or Credulity can afford. An Authority
then simply Divine must make good the Scriptures Infallibility, at least in the
last Resolution of our Faith in that Point. This Authority cannot be any
Testimony, or Voice of the Ecclesiam spiritu afflatam esse, certe credo. Non ut
veritat^m, authoritatemve Libris Canonicis tri^uat, sed ut doc eat illos, non
alios esse Canonicos. Nec fi aditum nobis praebet ad hujusmodi sacros Libr^s
cognoscendos, protinus ibi acquiescendum est, sed ultra oportet progredi, and
solida Dei veritate niti. Qua ex re intelligitur quid sibi volucrit Augustinus,
quam ait, Evangelio non crederem, nisi etc. M. Canus L. 2. de Locis, c. 8 fol.
34. b. Non docet fundatam esse Evangelii fidem in Ecclesiae Authoritate, sed
etc. Ibid.
Church alone. For the Church consists of men subject to Error; And no one of
them, fince the Apostles times, has been assisted with so plentiful a
measure of the Blessed Spirit, as to secure him from being deceived; And all
the Parts, being all liable to mistaking, and sallible, the Whole cannot
possibly be Infallible, in, and of it self, and privileged from being
deceived in some Things, o^ other. And even in those Fundamental Things, in
which the Whole Universal Church neither does, nor can Err; yet even there
her Authority is not Divine, because She delivers those supernatural Truths by
Promise of Assistance, yet tied to Means: And not by any special Immediate
Revelation, which is necessarily required to the very least Degree of Divine
Authority. And therefore our Hook. l. 3.. 9
Worthies do not only say, but prove, That all the Churches Constitutions are
of the nature of Humane Law. Stapl. Relect. Con. 4. q. 3. A. 1. and 2.
And some among you, not unworthy for their Learning, prove it at large, That
all the Churches Testimony, or voice, or Sentence (call it what you will) is
but suo modo, or aliquo modo, not simply, but in a manner Divine. Yea, and A.
C. himself, A. C. p. 51.
after all his debate comes to that, and no further. That the Tradition of the
Church is, at least in some sort, Divine and Infallible. Now that which is
Divine but in a sort or manner, be it the Churches manner, is aliquo modo non
Divina, in a sort not Divine. But this Great Principle of Faith (the Ground and
Proof of whatsoever else is of Faith) cannot stand firm upon a Proof that
is, and is not; in a manner, and not in a manner Divine, As it must, if we have
no other Anchor then the External Tradition of the Church to lodge it upon,
and hold it steady in the midst of those waves, which daily beat upon it.

Now here A. C. confesses expressly, That to prove Books of Scripture to be
Divine, we must be A. C. p. 49.
warranted by that which is Infallible. He confesses farther, that there can
be no sufficient Infallible Proof of A. C. p. 50.
this, but Gods Word, written, or unwritten. And he gives his Reason for it.
Because if the Proof be merely Humane, and Fallible, the Science or Faith
which A. C. p. 51.
is built upon it, can be no better. So then this is agreed on by me, (yet
leaving other men to travel by their own way, so be they can come to make
Scripture thereby Infallible) That Scripture must be known to be Scripture
by a sufficient, Infallible, Divine Proof. And that such Proof can be nothing
but the Word of God, is agreed on also by me. Yea, and agreed on for me it
shall be likewise, that Gods Word may be written, and unwritten. For Cardinal
Verbum Dei non est tale, nec habet ullam Authoritatem, quia scriptum est in
membranis, sed quia a Deo profectum est. Bellar. l. 4, de Verb. Dei. 2.
Ecclesiasticae Traditiones.
Bellarmine tells us truly, that it is not the writing, or printing, that makes
Scripture the Word of God; but it is the Prime Unerring Essential Truth, God
himself uttering, and revealing it to his Church, that makes it Verbum Dei,
the Word of God. And this Word of God is uttered to men, either immediately by
God himself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and so 'twas to the Prophets and
Apostles: Or mediately, either by Angels, to whom God had spoken first, and so
the Law was given, Lex ordinata per Angelos in manu (...) Gal. 3 19.
Gal. 3. and so also the Message was delivered to the Blessed Virgin, S. Luke
1., 0.
S. Luke 1. or by the Prophets The Holy Ghost etc. which spoke by the Prophets,
in Symb. Nicen.
and Apostles, and so the Scriptures were delivered to the Church. But their
being written, gave them no Authority at all, in regard of themselves. Written
or unwritten, the Word was the same. But it was written, that it might be the
better Nam Psiudoprophetae etiam viventibus ad^c Apostolis multas fingebant
corruptelas sub ^oc praetextu and titulo, quasi ab Apostolis viva veccessent
traditae: and propter hanc ips^m causam Apostoli Doctrinam suam coeperunt
Literis comprehendere, and Ecclesiis commendare. Chem. Exam. Council Trid. de
Traditionibus sub octavo genere Tradit. And so also Ians^n. Comment. in S. Ioh
5. 47. Sicut enim firmius est quod mandatur Literis, ita est culpabili^s and
majus non credere Scriptis, quam non credere Verbis.
preserved, and continued with the more integrity to the use of the Church, and
the more faithfully in our Labilis est memoria, and ideo indig^mus Scriptura:
Dicendum quod verum est, sed hoc non habet, nisi ex inundantia peccatorum.
Hent. a Gand. Sum. p. 1, Ar. 8. q. 4. sine. Christus ipse de pectore morituro
Testamentum transfert in tabulas diu duraturas. Optat. L 5. Christus ipse non
transtulit, sed ex Optati sew entia, Ejus Inspiratione, si non Iuss^, Apostoli
transtulerunt.
Memories. And you have been often enough told (were truth, and not the
maintaining of a party, the thing you seek for) that if you will show us any
such unwritten word of God delivered by his Prophets and Apostles, we will
acknowledge it to be Divine, and Infallible. So, written, or unwritten, that
shall not stumble us. But then A. C. must not tell us, at least not think we
shall swallow it into our Belief: that every thing which he says, is the
unwritten Word of God, is so indeed.

I know Bellarmine has written a whole Book Bellar. L. 4. De Verbo Dei non
script.
De Verbo Dei non scripto, of the Word of God not written, in which he handles
the Controversy concerning Traditions. And the Cunning is, to make his weaker
Readers believe, that all that, which He, and his are pleased to call
Traditions, are by and by no less to be received, and honored, then the
unwritten word of God ought to be. Whereas it is a thing of easy knowledge,
That the unwritten Word of God and Tradition, are not Convertible Terms, that
is, are not all one. For there are many Unwritten Words of God, which were
never delivered over to the Church, for ought appears: And there are many
Traditions (affirmed, at least to be such by the Church of Rome) which were
never warranted by any unwritten Word of God.

First, That there are many unwritten words of God, Apostles, during the Acts
1. 3.
forty days of his Conversing with them after his Resurrection, first
delivered over to the Church? or what were the unwritten Words He then spoke?
If neither He^, nor His Apostles, or Evangelists have delivered them to the
Church, the Church ought not to deliver them to her Children. Or if she do
Annunciare aliquid Christianis Catholicis, praeter id quod acceperunt, nunquam
licuit, nusquam licet, nunquam licebit. Vincen. Lir. c. 14. Et prae^ipit nihil
aliu ^innovari, nisi quo (...) traditum est. S. Cypri. ad Pompeium cont. Epist.
Stephan. princ.
tradere non traditum, make a Tradition of that, which was not delivered to
her, and by some of Them, then She is unfaithful to God, and does not servare
depositum, faithfully keep that which is committed to her Trust. 1 Timothy 6. 20.
and, 2 Timothy 1. 14.
1 Timothy 6. And her Sons, which come to know it, are not bound to obey her
Tradition against the Si ipsa (Ecclesia) contraria Scripturae diceret,
(Fidelis) ipsi non crederet. etc. Hen. a Gand. Sum. p. 1. A. 10. q. 1. And
Bellarmi^e himself, that he might the more safely defend himself in the Cause
of Traditions, says, (but how truly let other men Judge,) Nullam Traditionem
admittimus contra Scripturam. L. 4. (...) Verbo Dei. c. 3.. Deinde commune.
Word of their Father. For wheresoever Christ holds his peace, or that his
words a^e not Registered, I am of S. S. Aug. Tom. 96. in (...) Ioh. in ill^
Ferba, Multa habeo dicere, sed non potestis portare modo.
Augustines Opinion, No man may dare without rashness say they were these, or
these. So, there were many unwritten Words of God, which were never delivered
over to the Church; and therefor never made Tradition And there are many
Traditions, which cannot be said to be the unwritten word of God. For I
believe, a Learned Romanist, that will weigh before he speaks, will not easily
say, That to Anoint, or use Spittle in Baptism: or to use three Dippings in
the use of that Sacrament: or diverse other like Traditions had their Rise from
any Word of God unwritten: Or if he be so hardy as to say so, it is gratis
dictum, and he will have enough to do to prove it. So, there may be an
unwritten Word of God, which is no Tradition. And there are many Traditions,
which are no unwritten Word of God. Therefore Tradition must be taken two ways.
Either, as it is the Churches Act delivering, or the Thing thereby delivered,
and then it is Humane Authority, or from it, and unable infallibly to warrant
Divine Faith, or to be the Object of it. Or else as it is the unwritten Word of
God: and then where ever it can be made to appear so, it is of divine and
infallible Authority, no question. But then I would have A. C. consider where
he is in A. C. p. 49.
this Particular. He tells us, We must know infallibly, that the Books of Holy
Scripture are Divine, and that this must be done by unwritten Tradition, but
so, as that this Tradition is the Word of God unwritten: Now let him but prove
that this, or any Tradition, which the Church of Rome stands upon, is the Word
of God, though unwritten, and the business is ended. But A. C. must not
think, that because the Tradition of the Church tells me these Books are
Verbum Dei, Gods A. C. p. 50.
Word; and that I do both honor and believe this Tradition; That therefore
this Tradition it self is Gods Word too; and so absolutely sufficient and
infallible to work this Belief in me. Therefore for ought A. C. has yet
added, we must on with our Inquiry after this great Business, and most
necessary Truth.

2. For the second way of proving, That Scripture Divine and Infallible
Testimony, Lumine proprio, by the resplendency of that Light, which it has in
it self only, and by the witness that it can so give to it self, I could
never yet see cause to allow. Hook. l. 2.. 4
For as there is no place in Scripture that tells us, Such Books containing
such, and such Particulars are the Canon, and infallible Will and Word of God:
So if there were any such place, that were no sufficient proof; For a man may
justly ask another Book to bear witness of that; and again of that
another; and where ever it were written in Scripture, that must be a part of
the Whole. And no created thing can alone give witness to it self, and make
it evident, nor one part testify for another, and satisfy where Reason will
but offer to contest. Except those Principles only of Natural knowledge,
which appear manifest by intuitive light of understanding, without any
Discourse. And yet they also to the weaker sort require Induction preceding.
Now this Inbred light of Scripture is a thing coincident with Scripture it
self: and so, the Principles, and the Conclusion in this kind of proof should
be entirely the same, which cannot be. Besides, if this inward Light were so
clear, how could there have been any variety among the Ancient Believers
touching the Authority of S. Eusebius. L. 2. c. 27. fine. Edit. Basil. 1549.
James, and S. Jude's Epistles, and the Eusebius. L. 3. c. 25.
Apocalypse, with other Books which were not received for diverse years after
the rest of the New Testament? For certainly, the Light which is in the
Scripture, was the same then, which now it is. And how could the Gospel of S.
Bartholomew, of S. Thomas, and other counterfeit pieces obtain so much credit
with some, as to be received into the Canon, if the evidence of this Light were
either Universal, or Infallible, of, and by it self? And this, though I
cannot approve, yet, me thinks, you may, and upon probable grounds at least.
For I hope no Except A. C. whose boldness herein I cannot but pity. For he
denies this light to the Scripture, and gives it to Tradition: His words are,
p. 52. Tradition of the Church is of a company, which by its own light shows
it self to be infallibly assisted, etc.
Romanist will deny, but that there is as much light in Scripture to manifest,
and make ostension of it self to be infallibly the written Word of God, as
there is in any Tradition of the Church, that it is Divine, and infallibly the
unwritten Word of God. And the Scriptures saying from the mouths of the
Prophets, Isa 44. and passina.
Thus says the Lord, and from the mouths of the Act. 28. 25.
Apostles, that the Holy Ghost spoke by them, are at least as able, and as fit
to bear witness to their own Verity; as the Church is to bear witness to
her own Traditions, by bare saying they come from the Apostles. And your
selves would never go to the Scripture, to prove that there are Traditions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Jude, verse. 3.
as you do, if you did not think the Scripture as easy to be discovered by
inbred light in itself, as Traditions by their light. And if this be so, then
it is as probable at the least (which some of ours affirm) That Scripture may
be known to be the Word of God, by the Light, and Luster which it has in it
self, as it is (which you In your Articles delivered to D. W. to be answered.
And A. C. p. 52.
affirm) That a Tradition may be known to be such, by the light which it has
in it self: which is an excellent Proposition to make sport withal, were this
an Argument, to be handled merrily.

3. For the third Opinion, and way of proving; Testimony of the Holy Ghost, and
so look in vain after special Revelations, and make themselves by this very
Conceit, obnoxious, and easy to be led by all the whisperings of a seducing
private spirit; or else you would feign have them think so. For your side, both
upon this, and other Occasions, do often challenge, That we resolve all our
Faith into the Dictates of a A Jesuit, under the name of T S. set out a Book,
An. 1630. which he called, The Trial of the Protestant private Spirit.
private Spirit; from which we shall ever prove our selves as free, if not
freer than you. To the Question in hand then: Suppose it agreed upon, that
there must be a Ut Testimonia Scripturae certam and inaubitatam fidem
praestent, necessarium videtur ostendere, quod ipsae Divinae Scripturae sint
Dei Spiritu inspiratae. Orig. 4. (...)
Divine Faith, cui subesse non potest falsum, under which can rest no possible
error, That the Books of Scripture are the written Word of God: If they which
go to the testimony of the Holy Ghost for proof of this, do mean by Faith,
Objectum Fidei, the Object of Faith that is to be believed, then, no question,
they are out of the ordinary way. For God never sent us by any word or warrant
of his, to look for any such special, and private Testimony to prove which
that Book is, that we must believe. But if by Faith they mean, the Habit, or
Act of Divine infused Faith, by which virtue they do believe the Credible
Object, and thing to be believed; then their speech is true, and confessed by
all Divines of all sorts. For Faith is the gift 1. Cor. 12. 3. 4. Datur nobu a
Deo, etc. S. Aug. in Psalm. 87.
of God, of God alone, and an infused Quia homo assentiendo eis quae sunt
fid^i, clevatur supra Naturam suam, oportel quod hoc in^t ei ex supernaturali
p^incipio int^rius movente. quod est Dens. Tho. 2 2 ae. q. 6. A. 1. c. And your
own Divines agree in this, That Fides acquisita is not sufficient for any
Article, but there must be Fides infusa, before there can be Divine Certainty.
Fides acquisita innititur conjecturis humanis. Ad quem modum and Saraceni suis
Praeceptoribus, and Iudaei suis Rabinis, and Gent^s suis Philosophs, and omnes
suis Maj ribus inharent: non sic Christians, sed per interius lumen infusum a
Spiritu Sancto, quo firmissime and certissime moventur ad creden^m, etc. Canus.
L. 2. Locor. c. 8.. I am si hac.
Habit, in respect whereof the Soul is merely recipient; And therefore the
sole Infuser, the Holy Ghost must not be^ excluded from that work, which none
can do, but He. For the Holy Ghost, as Symb. Nicen. The Holy Ghost spoke by
the Prophets, etc. Et 1. S. Pet. 2. 21. Quis modus est, quo doces animas ea
quae futura sunt? Docuist^ enim Prophetas tuos. S. Aug. L. 11. Confess. c. 19.
He first dictated the Scripture to the Apostles: Nec enim Ecclesiae
Testimonium, aut Judicium praedicamus, Dei Spiritum, vel ab Eccl^sia doce^te,
vol a nobis audientibus, excludimus, sed utrobique diserte includimus, etc.
Stapl. trip. contr. Whitak. c. 3.
So did he not leave the Church in general, nor the true members of it in
particular, without Grace to believe, what himself had revealed, and made
Credible. So that Faith, as it is taken for the virtue of Faith, whether it be
of this, or any other Article, Fides quae caepit ab Ecclesia Testimonio,
quatenus proponit and inducit ad Fidem, de^nit in Deo intus revelante, and
intus docente quod forts Ecclesia pradicavit. Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. q. 3. a.
2. When grave and learned men do sometimes hold, that of this Principle there
is no proof, but by the Testimony of the Spirit, etc. I think it is not their
meaning, to exclude all outward Proofs, etc but rather this, That all other
means are uneffectuall of themselves to work Faith, without the special
Grace of God. Hook etc. Lib. 3.. 8.
though it receive a kind of preparation, or Occasion of Beginning from the
Testimony of the Church, as it proposes, and induces to the Faith; yet it
ends in God, revealing within, and teaching within, that which the Church
preached without. For till the Spirit of God move the Heart of man, he cannot
believe, be the Object never so Credible. The speech is true then, but quite De
habitu Fidei quoad fieri ejus, and generationem, quum a Deo immediate solo Dono
gratuito infusus est, Nihil ad Quastionem, nisi quoad hoc quod per Scriptura
inspectionem, etc. Henr. a Gand. Sam. a. 10. q. 1. lit. D.
out of the State of this Question: which inquires only after a sufficient
means to make this Object Credible, and fit to be believed, against all
impeachment of folly and temerity in Belief, whether men do actually believe
it or not. For which no man may expect inward private Revelation, without the
external means of the Church, unless perhaps the Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. Q.
3. A. 2. Does not only affirm it, but proves it too, a paritate rationis, in
case of necessity, where there is no Contempt of the external means.
case of Nece^ity be excepted, when a man lives in such a time and place as
excludes him from all ordinary means; in which I dare not offer to shut up God
from the fowls of men, nor to tie him to those ordinary ways and means, to
which yet in great wisdom and providence He has tied and bound all mankind.

Private Revelation then has nothing ordinarily Object Credible in this, That
Scripture is the Word of God, or in any other Article. For the Question is of
such outward, and evident means, as other men may take notice of, as well as
our selves. By which if there arise any Doubting, or Infirmity in the Faith,
others may strengthen us, or we afford means to support them: Whereas the
Quid cum singulis agitur, Deus scit qui agit, and ipsi cum quibus agitur,
sciunt. Quid autem agatur cum genere Humano, per Historiam commendari vol^it,
and per Prophetiam. S. Aug. de vera Relig. c. 25.
Testimony of the Spirit, and all private Revelation is within, nor felt, nor
seen of any, but him that has it. So that hence can be drawn no proof to
others. And Miracles are not sufficient alone to prove it, unless both They,
and the Revelation too agree with the Rule of Scripture; which is now an
unalterable Rule by Gal. 1. 8.
man, or Angel. To all this A. C. says nothing, save that I seem not to
admit of an infallible Impulsion of a private Spirit, ex part subjecti, A. C.
p. 52.
without any infallible Reason, and that sufficiently applied ex part objecti,
which if I did admit, would open a gap to all Enthusiasmes, and dreams of
fanaticall men. Now for this yet I thank him. For I do not only seem not to
admit, but I do most clearly reject this frenzy in the words going before.

4. The last way, which gives Utitur tam^ sacra Doctrina Ratione Humana, non
quidem ad probandum Fidem ipsam, sed ad manifest andum aliqua alia, quae
traduntur in hac Doctrina. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad 2.

Passibus rationis novus homo tendit in Deum. S. Aug. de vera Relig. c. 26.
(Passibus, veru^ est, sed nec aequis, nec solis:) Nam Invisibilia Dei altiori
modo quantum ad plura p^rcipitg Fides, quam Ratio naturalis ex Creaturis in
Deum procedens. Tho. 2. 2. q. 2. A. 3. ad 3.


Reason leave to Reason without Grace cannot see the way to Heaven, nor believe
this Book, in which God has written the way; yet Grace is never placed but in
a reasonable creature, and proves by the very seat, which it has taken up,
that the end it has, is to be spiritual eye-water, to make Reason see what by
Animalis homo non percipit. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
Nature only it cannot, but never to blemish Reason in that, which it can
comprehend. Now the use of Reason is very general; and man (do what he can) is
still apt to search and seek for a Reason why he will believe, though after he
once believes, his Faith grows Quia scientiae certitudinem habent ox naturali
lumine Rationis humanae, quae potest errare: Theologia autem (quae docet and
Objectum and Notitiam Fidei, sicut and Fidem ipsam) certitudinem habet ex
lumine Divinae scientiae, quae decipi non potest. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 5. c. Vt
ipsa fide valentiores facti, quod credimus intelligere mereamur. S. Aug. cont.
Ep. Manichaei, dictam, Fundamentum. c. 14. Hoc autem it a intelligendum est, ut
scientia certior sit Certitudine Evidentiae; Fides vero certior Firmitate
Adhaesionis. Majus lumen in Scientia, majus Robur in Fide. Et hoc, quia in
Fide, and ad Fidem Actus imperatus Voluntatis concurrit. Credere enim est Actus
Intellectus Vero assentiontis productus ex Voluntatis Imperio. Biel. in 3.
Sent. d. 23. q. 2. A. 1. Unde Tho. Intellectus Credentis determinatur ad Unum,
non per Rationem, sed per Voluntatem; and ideo Assensus hic accipitur pro Actu
Intellectus, secundum quod a Voluntate determinatur ad Vnum. 2. 2. q. 2. A. 1.
ad 3.
stronger, than either his Reason, or his Knowledge: and great reason for this,
because it goes higher, and so upon a safer Principle, than either of the other
can in this life.

In this Particular, the Books called the Scripture, Word of God, and so
infallible Verity, to the least point of them. Does any man doubt this? The
world cannot keep him from going to weigh it at the Balance of Reason,
whether it be the Word of God, or not. To the same Weights he brings the
Tradition of the Church, the inward motives in Scripture it self, all
Testimonies within, which seem to bear witness to it; and in all this, there
is no harm: the danger is, when a man will use no other Scale, but Reason, or
prefer Reason before any other Scale. For the Word of God, and the Book
containing it, refuse not to be weighed by Si vobis, rationi, and veritati
consentanca videntur, in pretio habete, etc. de mysteriis Religionis, Justin.
Mart. Apol. 2. Igitur, si fuit dispositio Rationis, etc. Tertull. L de Carne
Christi. c. 18. Rationabile est credere Deum esse Autorem Scripturae. Henr. a
Gand. Sum, To. 1. Ar. 9. q. 3.
Reason. But the Scale is not large enough to contain, nor the Weights to
measure out the true virtue, and full force of either. Reason then can give no
supernatural ground, into which a man may resolve his Faith, That Scripture is
the Word of God infallibly; yet Reason can go so high, as it can prove that
Christian Religion, which rests upon the Authority of this Book, stands upon
surer grounds of Nature, Reason, common Equity, and Justice, than any thing in
the World, which any Infidel, or mere Naturalist, has done, does, or can
adhere unto, against it, in that which he makes, accounts, or assumes as
Religion to himself.

The Ancient Fathers relied upon the Scriptures, no Christians more; and having
to do with Philosophers Scripture. In all which Disputes, because they were to
deal with Infidels, they did labor to make good the Authority of the Book of
God by such Arguments, as unbelievers themselves could not but think
reasonable, if they weighed them with indifferency. For though I set the
Mysteries of Faith above Reason, which is their proper place; yet I would have
no man think They contradict Reason, or the Principles thereof. No sure. For
Reason by her own light can discover how firmly the Principles of Religion are
true: but all the Light she has will never be able to find them false. Nor
may any man think that the Principles of Religion, even this, That Scriptures
are the Word of God, are so indifferent to a Natural eye, that it may with as
just cause lean to one part of the Contradiction, as to the other. For though
this Truth, That Scripture is the Word of God, is not so Demonstratively
evident, a priori, as to enforce Assent: yet it is strengthened so abundantly
with probable Arguments, both from the Light of Nature it self, and Humane
Testimony, that he must be very wilful, and selfe-conceited, that shall dare
to suspect it.

Nay, yet farther, Hook. L. 3.. 8. Si Plato ipse viveret, and me interrogantem
non aspernaretur etc. S. Aug. de vera Relig. c. 3. Vide amus quatenus Ratio
potest progredi a visibilibus ad invisibilia, etc. Ibid. c. 29.
It is not altogether impossible to prove it even by Reason, a Truth
infallible, or else to make them deny some apparent Principle of their own. For
Example: It is an apparent Principle, and with them, That God, or the Absolute
prime Agent, cannot be forced out of any Possession. For if He could be forced
by another Greater, He were neither Prince, nor Absolute, nor Si vim spectes,
Deus Valentissimus est, Arist. de Mundo. cap. 7. Domini and Moderatores omniu^.
Cic. 2. de Leg.
God, in their own Theology. Now they must grant, That that God, and Christ,
which the Scripture teaches, and we believe, is the only true God, and no other
with him, and so deny the Deity, which they worshipped, or else deny their own
Principle about the Deity, That God cannot be commanded, and forced out of
possession: For Ipse Saturnus, and Serapis, and Jupiter, and quicquid Daemonum
colitis, victi dolor quod sunt, cloquuntur. Nec utique in turpitudinem sui
uonnullis praesertim vestrorum assistentibus, mentiuntur. Ipsis testibus esse
eos Daemones de se verum confitentibus credit. Adjurati enim per Deum verum,
and solum inviti etc. Arnob. 8. contra Gent, Or Minutius Foelix, as is now
thought,
their Gods, Saturn, and Serapis, and Jupiter himself, have been adjured by
the Name of the true, and only God, and have been forced out of the bodies
they possessed, and confessed themselves to be foul and seduceing Devils. And
their Confession was to be supposed true, in point of Reason: For they that
were adored as Gods, would never belie themselves into Devils, to their own
reproach, especially in the presence of them that worshipped them, were they
not forced. This, many of the Unbelievers saw; therefore they could not (in
very force of Reason) but they must either deny their God, or deny their
Principle in Nature. Their long Custom would not forsake their God, and their
Reason could not forget their Principle. If Reason therefore might judge among
them, they could not worship any thing that was under Command. And if it be
reasonable to do, and believe this, then why not reasonable also to believe,
That Scripture is his Word, given to teach himself, and Christ, since there
they find Christ S. Mat. 12 22
doing that, and S. Mat. 16. 17
giving power to do it after, which themselves saw executed upon their
Divell-Gods?

Besides, whereas all other written Laws have Laws; this Law of Christ, and
this Canon of Scripture the container of it, is, or has been received in
almost Si Libri quoquo modo se habent sancti tamen Divinarum rernm pleni prope
totius generis humani confessione diffamantur. etc. S. Aug. de Vtil. Cred c. 7.
Scriptura summa dispositione Providentiae super omnes omnium Gentium Literas,
omnia sibi genera ingeniorum humanorum Divine Excellens Authoritate subjecit.
S. Aug. 11. de Civit. Dei, c. 1.

At in omni orb torrarum, in omni Gracia, and universis Nationibus,
innumerisunt. and immensi qui relictis Patriis Legibus. etc. ad observantiam
Mosis, and Christi. etc. Origin. 4. (...). cap. 1.


all Nations under Heaven: And wheresoevet it has been received, it has been
both approved for Unchangeable good, and believed for Infallible verity. This
persuasion could not have been wrought in men of all sorts, but by working
upon their Reason, unless we shall think all the World unreasonable, that
received it. And certainly God did not give this admirable faculty of Reasoning
to the soul of man, for any cause more prime then this, to discover, or to
Judge and allow (within the Sphere of its own Activity, and not presuming
farther) of the way to Himself, when and howsoever it should be discovered.

One great thing that troubled Rational men, was Manichee (an Heresy it was,
but more then half Pagan) namely, That somewhat must be believed, before much
could be known. Wise men use not to believe, but what they know: And the
Manichcee Ir^idere in Catholicae Fidei disciplina, quod juberentur homines
credere, non autem, etc. S. Aug. 1. Retrac. c. 14.
scorned the Orthodox Christian: as light of Belief, promising to lead no
Disciple after him, but upon evident knowledge. This stumbles many; but yet the
Principle, That somewhat must be believed before much can be known, stands
firm in Reason still. For if in all Sciences there be some Principles, which
cannot be prooved; if Reason be able to see this, and confess it; if almost
all Artists have granted it, if in the Mathematics, where are the Exactest
Demonstrations, there be Quaedam postulata; some things to be first Demanded,
and granted, be fore the Demonstration can proceed: Who can justly deny that to
Divinity, A Science of the Highest Object, God Himself, which he easily and
reasonably grants to inferior Sciences, which are more within his reach? And
as all Sciences suppose some Principles without prooving; so have they almost
all, some Text, some Authority, upon which they rely in some measure: and it is
Reason they should. For though these Sciences make not their Texts Infallible,
as Divinity does; yet full consent and prudent Examination, and long
continuance, have won reputation to them, and settled reputation upon them,
very deservedly. And were these Texts more void of Truth, then they are, yet it
were fit, and reasonable to uphold their credit, that Novices, and young
Beginners in a Science, which are not able to work strongly upon Reason, nor
Reason upon them, may have Authority to believe, till they can learn to
Conclude from Principles, and so to know. Is this also reasonable in other
Sciences, and shall it not be so in Theology, to have a Text, a Scripture, a
Rule, which Novices may be taught first to believe, that so they may after come
to the knowledge of those things, which out of this rich Principle, and And
therefore S. Aug. 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 8. would have men make themselves
perfect in reading the Letter of the Scripture, even before they understood it.
Eas not as habeat, etsi nondum intellectu, tamen lectione duntaxat; No question
but to make them ready against they understood it. And as Schoolmasters make
their Scholars conne their Grammer-rules by heart, that they may be ready for
their use, when they better understand them,
Treasure are Deduceable? I yet see not how right Reason can deny these
Grounds; and if it cannot, then a mere Natural man may be thus far
convinced, That the Text of God is a very Creditle Text.

Well, these are the four ways, by most of which, men offer to prove the
Scripture to be the Word of God, as by a Divine and Infallible Warrant. And,
it seems, no one of these does it alone. The Tradition of the present Church
is too weak, because that is not absolutely Divine. The Light which is in
Scripture it self, is not bright enough, it cannot bear sufficient witnesseto
itself. The Testimony of the Holy Ghost, that is most infallible, but
ordinarily it is not so much as considerable in this Question, which is not,
how, or by what means we believe, but how the Scripture may be proposed as a
Credible Object, fit for Belief. And for Reason, no man expects, that that
should prove it; it does service enough, if it enable us to disproove that
which misguided men conceive against it. If none of these then be an Absolute
and sufficient means to prove it, either we must find out another, or see
what can b^ more wrought out of these. And to all this again A. C. says
nothing.

For the Tradition of the Church then, certain Tradition. For if the speech
be of the Prime Christian Church, the Apostles, Disciples, and such as had
immediate Revelation from Heaven; no question, but the Voice and Tradition of
this Church is Divine, not aliquo modo, in a sort, but simply; and the Word of
God from them, is of like Validity, written, or delivered. And against this
Tradition (of which kind this, That the Books of Scripture are the Word of
God, is the most general and uniforme) the Church of England never excepted.
And when S. L. 1. cont. Epis. Fund. c. 5. Ego vero non crederem Evangelio, nisi
me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret Authoritas.
Augustine said, I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the
Catholic Church moved me (which Place you urged at the Conference, though
you are now content to slide by it) some of your own will not endure should be
understood, save Occham. Dial. p. 1. L. 1. c. 4. Intelligitur solum de Ecclesi^
qua fuit tempore Apostolorum.
of the Church in the time of the Apostles only: and Biel. lect, 2^. in C.
Miss^. A tempore Christi and Apostolorum, etc. And so does S. August. take
Eccles. Contra Fund.
some of the Church in General, not excluding after-ages. But sure to include
Christ, and his Apostles. And the certainety is there, abundance of certainety
in it self: but how far that is evident to us, shall after appear.

But this will not serve your turn. The Tradition of the present Church must
be as Infallible, Primitive. But the contrary to this is prooved. 16. Nu. 6.
before, because this Voice of the present Church, is not simply Divine. To
what end then serves any Tradition of the present Church? To what? Why to a
very good end. For first, it serves by a full consent to work upon the minds
of unbelievers, to move them to read, and to consider the Scripture, which
(they hear by so many Wise, Learned, and Devoute men) is of no meaner esteem
then the Word of God. And secondly, It serves among Novices, Weaklings, and
Doubters in the Faith, to instruct, and confirm them, till they may acquaint
themselves with, and understand the Scripture, which the Church delivers as the
Word of God. And thus again some of your own understand the forecited Place
of S. Augustine, I would not believe the Gospel, etc. Sive Inf^les, sive in
Fide Novitii. Can. Loc. L. 2. c 8. Neganti, aut omnino nescient^ Scripturam.
Stapl. Relect. Cent. 4. q. 1. A 3.
For he speaks it either of Novices, or Doubters in the Faith, or else of such
as were in part Infidels. You at the Conference (though you omit it here) would
needs have it, that S. Augustine spoke even of the Quid si fateamur Fideles
etiam, Ecclesiae Authoritate commoveri, ut Scripturas recipiant: Non tamen inde
sequitur eos hoc modo penitus (...): aut nulla alia fortioreque ratione induci?
Quis autem Christianus est, quem Ecclesia Christi, comm^dans Scripturam
Christi, non commoveat? Whitaker: Disp. de sacra Scriptura. Contro. 1. q 3. c.
8. vbt (...) locum hunc, S. Aug.
faithful, which I cannot yet think: For he speaks to the Manichees, and
they had a great part of the Infidel in them. And the words immediately before
these, are, If thou should find one, Qui Evangelio nondum credit, which did
not yet believe the Gospel, what would thou do to make him believe? Et
ibid. Quibus obtemperavi dicentibus Credit Evangelio. Therefore he speaks of
himself, when he did not believe.
Ego vero non, Truly I would not, etc. So to these two ends it serves, and
there need be no Question between us. But then every thing, that is the first
Inducer to believe, is not by and by either the Principal Motive, or the
chief, and last Object of Belief, upon which a man may rest his Faith.
Unless we shallbe of Certum est quod tenemur credere omnibus contentis in
Sacro Canone, quia Ecclesia credit ex caratione solu^. Ergo per prius and magis
tenemur Credere Ecclesiae, quam Evangelio. Almain. in 3. Did. 24 Conclus 6.
Dub. 6. And to make a show of proof for this, he falsifies S Aug. most
noto^ously and reads that known place, not Nisi me commoveret (as all read it)
but compelleret. Patet. quia dicit Augustinus, Evangelio non Credere^, nisi aa
hoc me compelleret Ecclesiae Au. horitas. Ibid. And so also Gerson (...), In
Declarat, veritatum, quae credendae sunt. etc. part. 1 p. 414.. 3. But in a
most ancient Manuscript in Corp. Chapter College Library in Cambridge, the words
are, Nisi me commoveret. etc.
Lacobus Almain's Opinion; That we are per prius and magis, first and more
bound, to believe the Church, then the Gospel. Which your own Learned men, as
you may see by Canus L. 2. de Locis c. 8. fo. 34. b.. 16. Number. 6.
Mel. Canus, reject as Extreme foul, and so indeed it is. The first knowledge
then (after the Quid Nominis is known by Grammar) that helps to open a man's
understanding, and prepares him to be able to Demonstrate a Truth, and make it
evident, is his Logic: But when he has made a Demonstration, he resolves the
knowledge of his Conclusion, not into his Grammatical, or Logical Principles,
but into the Immediate Principles out of which it is deduced: So in this
Particular, a man is probably led by the Authority of the present Church, as by
the first informing, induceing, persuading Means, to believe the Scripture to
be the Word of God: but when he has studied, considered, and compared this
Word with it self, and with other Writings, with the help of Ordinary Grace,
and a mind morally induced, and reasonably persuaded by the Voice of the
Church; the Scripture then gives greater, and higher reasons of Credibility to
it self, then Tradition alone could give. And then he that Believes, resolves
his last and full Assent, That Scripture is of Divine Authority, into internal
Arguments found in the Letter it self, though found by the Help and Direction
of Tradition without, and Grace within. And the resolution that is rightly
grounded, may not endure to pitch, and restit self upon the Helps, but upon
that Divine Light, which the Scripture, no Question, has in it self, but is
not kindled, till these Helps come. Thy word is a Light Psalm. 119. 105.
Sanctarum Scripturarum Lumen, S. Aug. L. de vera Relig. c. 7. Quid Lucem
Scripturarum vanis umbris? etc. S. Aug. L. de Mor. Eccl. Cathol. c. 35.
: so David. A Light? Therefore it is as much manifestativum sui, as alterius, a
manifestation to it self, as to other things which it shows: but still, not
till the Candle be Lighted; not till there has been a Preparing Instruction,
What Light it is. Children call the Sun, and Moon, Candles; Gods Candles:
They see the light as well as men, but cannot distinguish between them, till
some Tradition, and Education, has informed their Reason. And 1 Cor. 2. 14.
animalis homo, the natural man sees some Light of Moral counsel, and
instruction in Scripture, as well as Believers; But he takes all that glorious
Luster for Candlelight, and cannot distinguish between the Sun, and twelve
to the Pound, till Tradition of the Church, and Gods Grace put to it, have
cleared his understanding: So Tradition of the present Church, is the first
Moral Motive to Belief. But the Belief it self, That the Scripture is the
Word of God, rests Orig. 4. (...). c. 1. went this way, yet was he a great
deal nearer the prime Tradition, then we are. For being to prove that the
Scriptures were inspired from God, he says, De hoc assignabimus ex ipsis
Divinis Scripturis, quae nos competenter movcrint, etc.
upon the Scripture, when a man finds it to answer, and exceed all that, which
the Church gave in Testimony, as will after appear. And as in the Voice of the
Primitive, and Apostolical Church, there was Principaliter tamen (etiam and
hic) credimus propter Deum, non Apo^olos, etc. Henr. a Gand. Sum. A. 9. q. 3.
Now, if where the Apostles themselves spoke, ultimata resolutio Fidei was in
Deum, not in ipsos per se, much more shall it be in Deum, then in praesentem
Ecclesiam: and into the writings of the Apostles, then into the words of their
Successors, made up into a Tradition.
simply Divine Authority, delivering the Scripture, as Gods Word; so, after
Tradition of the present Church has taught, and informed the Soul, the Voice
of God is plainly heard in Scripture it self. And then here is double
Authority, and both Divine, that confirms Scripture to be the Word of God,
Tradition of the Apostles delivering it; And the internal worth and argument
in the Scripture, obvious to a soul prepared by the present Churches
Tradition, and Gods Grace.

The Difficulties which are pretended against Private Revelations for Light to
know Scripture. No, we do not, you see it is excluded out of the very state of
the Question: and we go to the Tradition of the present Church, and by it, as
well as you. Here we differ; we use the Tradition of the present Church, as the
first Motive, not as the Last Resolution of our Faith. We Resolve only into
Calv. Instit. 1. c. 5.. 2. Christiana Ecclesia Prophetarum scriptis, and
Apostolorum praedicatione initio fundata fuit, ubicunque reperietur ea
Doctrina, etc.
Prime Tradition Apostolical, and Scripture it self.

Secondly, you pretend, we do not, nor cannot prime Apostolical Tradition, but
by the Tradition of the present Church; and that therefore, if the Tradition of
the present Church be not Gods unwritten Word, and Divine, we cannot yet know
Scripture to be Scripture, by a Divine Authority. Well: Suppose I could not
know the prime Tradition to be Divine, but by the present Church, yet it does
not follow, that therefore I cannot know Scripture to be the Word of God by a
Divine Authority; because Divine Tradition is not the sole, and only means to
prove it. For suppose, I had not, nor could have full assurance of Apostolical
Tradition Divine; yet the moral persuasion, reason, and force of the present
Church, is ground enough to move any reasonable man, that it is fit he should
read the Scripture, and esteem very reverently and highly of it. And this once
done, the Scripture has then In, and Home-Arguments enough to put a Soul,
that has but ordinary Grace, out of Doubt, That Scripture is the Word of God,
Infallible and Divine.

Thirdly, you pretend, that we make the Scripture Lumine suo, by the Light and
Testimony which it has in, and gives to it self. Against this, you give
reason for your selves, and proof from us. Your Reason is, If there be
sufficient Light in Scripture to show it self, then every man that can, and
does but read it, may know it presently to be the Divine Word of God; which we
see by daily experience, men neither do, nor can. First it is not absolutely,
nor universally true, There is And where Hooker uses this very Argument, as he
does, L. 3.. 8. his words are not, If there be sufficient Light. But, if that
Light be Evident.
sufficient Light; therefore every man may see it. Blind men are men, and
cannot see it; and 1 Cor. 2. 14.
sensual men, in the Apostles judgment, are such: Nor may we deny, and put
out this Light, as insufficient, because blind eyes cannot, and perverse eyes
will not see it; no more then we may deny meat to be sufficient for
nourishment, though men that are heart-sicke, cannot eat it. Next, we do not
say, That there is such a full light in Scripture, as that every man upon the
first sight must yield to it; such Light as is found in Prime Principles; Every
whole is greater than a Part of the same, and this, The same thing cannot be,
and not be, at the same time, and in the same respect. These carry a natural
Light with them, and evident: for the Terms are no sooner understood, then the
Principles themselves are fully known, to the convincing of man's
understanding, and so they are the beginning of knowledge; which, where it is
perfect, dwells in full Light: but such a full Light we do neither say is, nor
require to be in Scripture; and if any particular man do, let him answer for
himself. The Question is, only of such a Light in Scripture, as is of force
to breed faith, that it is the Word of God; not to make a perfect knowledge.
Now Faith, of whatsoever it is, this or other Principle, is an Evidence, (...).
as well as Knowledge, and Heb. 11. 1.
the Belief is firmer then any Knowledge can be, because it rests upon Divine
Authority, which cannot deceive; whereas Knowledge (or at least he that thinks
he knows) is not ever certain in Deductions from Principles?. 16. (...). 13.
But the Evidence is not so dear: For it is Heb. 11. 1.
of things not seen, in regard of the Object; and in regard of the Subject
thatsees, it is in 1 Cor. 13. 12. And A. C. confesses. p. 52. That this very
thing in Question may be known infallibly, when it is known but obscurely. Et
Scotus in 3. Did. 23 q. 1. fol. 41. B. Hoc modo sacile est videre quomodo
^ides est cum aenigmate, and obscuritate: Quia Habitus Fidei non credit
Articulum esse verum ex Evidentia Obj^cti, sed propter hoc, quod assentit
veracitati inf^ndentis Habitum, and in hoc revelantis Credibilia.
aenigmate, in a Glass, or dark speaking. Now God does not require a full
Demonstrative Knowledge in us, that the Scripture is his Word, and therefore in
his Providence has kindled in it no Light for that, but he requires our Faith
of it, and such a certain Demonstration, as may fit that. And for that, he
has left sufficient Light in Scripture to Reason, and Grace meeting, where the
soul is morally prepared by the Tradition of the Church; unless you be of
Bellarmine's Bellar. l. 3. de Eccles. c. 14. Credere (...) esse divina^
Scripturas, non est omnino necessarium ad salutem. I will not break my
Discourse, to ris^e this speech of Bellarmine; it is bad enough in the best
sense, that favor it self can give it, For if he mean by omnino, that it is
not altogether, or simply necessary to believe there is Divine Scripture, and a
written Word of God; that is false, that being granted, which is among all
Christians, That there is a Scripture: And God would never have given a
Supernatural unnecessary thing. And if he means by omnino, that it is not in
any wise necessary, then it is sensibly false. For the greatest upholders of
Tradition that ever were, made the Scripture very necessary in all the Ages of
the Church. So it was necessary, because it was given; and given, because God
thought it necessary. Besides, upon Roman Grounds, this I think will follow:
That which the Tradition of the present Church delivers, as necessary to
believe, is omnino necessary to salvation: But that there are Divine
Scriptures, the Tradition of the present Church delivers, as necessary to
believe: Therefore, to believe there are Divine Scriptures, is omnino (be the
sense of the word what it can) necessary to Salvation. So Bellarmine is herein
foul, and unable to stand upon his own ground. And he is the more, partly,
because he avouches this Proposition for truth after the New Testament written.
And partly, because he might have seen the state of this Proposition carefully
examined by Gandavo, and distinguished by Times. Sum. p. 1. A. 8. q. 4. fine.
Opinion, That to believe there are any Divine Scriptures, is not omnino
necessary to Salvation.

The Authority which you pretend against this, is Lib. 1.. 14.
Hooker: Of things necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what Books we are
bound to esteem Holy; which Point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it
self to teach. Of this Protest. Apol. Tract. 1.. 10. N. 3.
Brierly (the Storehouse for all Priests that will be idle, and yet seem well
read) tells us, That L. 2.. 4.
Hooker gives a very sensible Demonstration: It is not the Word of God, which
does, or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it is His Word:
for if any one Book of Scripture did give Testimony to all; yet still that
Scripture, which gives credit to the rest, would require another to give
credit unto it. Nor could we ever come to any pause, to rest our assurance this
way. so that unless, beside Scripture, there were something that might assure,
etc. And L. 2.. 7. and. L. 3.. 8.
this he acknowledges (says Brierly) is the Authority of Gods Church.
Certainly, Hooker gives a true, and a sensible Demonstration; but Brierly
wants fidelity, and integrity, in citing him: For in the first place, Hooker's
speech is, Scripture it self cannot teach this; nor can the Truth say, that
Scripture it self can. It must needs ordinarily have Tradition, to prepare the
mind of a man to receive it. And in the next place, where he speaks so
sensibly, That Scripture cannot bear witness to it self, nor one part of it
to another; that is grounded upon Nature, which admits no created thing to be
witness to it self; and is acknowledged by our Savior, S. Ioh. 5. 31. He
speaks of himself as man.
If I bear witness to my self, my witness is not true, that is, is not of
force to be reasonably accepted for Truth. But then it is more then manifest,
S. Ioh. 8. 13.
that Hooker delivers his Demonstration of Scripture alone. For if Scripture
has another proof, nay many other proofs to usher it, and lead it in, then
no question, it can both prove; and approve it self. His words are, So that
unless, besides Scripture, there be, etc. Besides Scripture; therefore he
excludes not Scripture, though he call for another Proof to lead it in, and
help in assurance, namely, Tradition, which no man, that has his brains about
him, denies. In the two other Places Brierly falsifies shamefully; for folding
up all that Hooker says, in these words, This (other means to assure us
besides Scripture) is the Authority of Gods Church; he wrinkles that Worthy
Author desperately, and shrinkes up his meaning. For in the former place
abused by Brierly, no man can set a better state of the Question between
Scripture, and Tradition, then Hooker does: L. 2.. 7.
His words are these, The Scripture is the ground of our Belief; The Authority
of man (that is the Name he gives to Tradition) is the Key which opens the
door of entrance into the knowledge of the Scripture. I ask now, when a man
is entered, and has viewed a house, and upon viewing likes it, and upon liking
resolves unchangeably to dwell there; does he set up his Resolution upon the
Key, that let him in? No sure; but upon the goodness and Commodiousnesse,
which he sees in the House. And this is all the difference (that I know)
between us in this Point; In which, do you grant (as you ought to do) that we
resolve our Faith into Scripture, as the Ground; and we will never deny, that
Tradition is the Key that lets us in. In the latter place, Hooker is as plain,
as constant to himself, and Truth: L. 3.. 8.
His words are, The first outward Motive, leading men so to esteem of the
Scripture, is the Authority of Gods Church etc. But afterward, the more we
bestow our Labor in reading, or learning the Mysteries thereof, the more we
find that the thing it self does answer our received opinion concerning it:
so that the former inducement prevailing somewhat with us before, does now much
more prevail, when the very thing has ministered farther Reason. Here then
again, in his Judgment, Tradition is the first Inducement; but the farther
Reason, and Ground, is the Scripture. And Resolution of Faith ever settles upon
the Farthest Reason it can, not upon the First Inducement. So that the State of
this Question is firm, and yet plain enough, to him that will not shut his
eyes.

Now here after a long silence A. C. thrusts That if I would A. C. p. 52.
consider the Tradition of the Church, not only as it is the Tradition of a
Company of Fallible men, in which sense the Authority of it (as himself
confesses) is but Humane, and Fallible, etc. But as the Tradition of a Company
of men assisted by Christ, and his Holy Spirit; in that sense I might easily
find it more then an Introduction, indeed as much as would amount to an
Infallible Motive. Well, I have considered The Tradition of the present Church
both these ways. And I find that A. C. confesses, That in the first sense,
the Tradition of the Church is mere humane Authority, and no more. And
therefore in this sense, it may serve for an Introduction to this Belief, but
no more. And in the second sense, as it is not the Tradition of a Company of
men only, but of men assisted by Christ, and His Spirit: In this second sense
I cannot find, that the Tradition of the present Church is of Divine and
Infallible Authority, till A. C. can prove, That this Company of men (the
Roman Prelates, and their Clergy he means) are so fully, so clearly, so
permanently assisted by Christ, and his Spirit, as may reach to Infallibility,
much less to a Divine Infallibility, in this, or any other Principle, which
they teach. For every Assistance of Christ, and the Blessed Spirit, is not
enough to make the Authority of any Company of men Divine, and infallible; but
such and so great an Assistance only, as is purposely given to that effect.
Such an Assistance the Prophets under the Old Testament, and the Apostles under
the New had; but neither the High Priest with his Clergy in the Old, nor any
Company of Prelates, or Priests in the New, since the Apostles ever had it. And
therefore, though at the entreaty of A. C. I have considered this very A. C. p.
52.
well; yet I cannot, no not in this Assisted sense, think the Tradition of the
present Church, Divine, and Infallible, or such Company of men to be worthy of
Divine, and infallible Credit, and sufficient to breed in us Divine, and
Infallible Faith. Which I am sorry A. C. should affirm so boldly as he does.
What? A. C. p. 52.
That Company of men (the Roman Bishop, and his Clergy) of Divine and
Infallible Credit, and sufficient to breed in us Divine, and Infallible Faith?
Good God! Whither will these men go? Surely they are wise in their generation,
but that makes them never a whit the more the Children of light S. Luke 16. 8.
: S. Luke 16. And could they put this home upon the world (as they are gone
far in it) what might they not effect? How might they, and would they then
Lord it over the Faith of Christendom, contrary to 1. S. Pet. 5. 3.
S. Peter's Rule (whose Successors certainly in this they are not.) But I
pray, if this Company of men be infallibly assisted, whence is it, that this
very Company have erred so dangerously, as they have, not only in some other
things, but even in this Particular, by equaling the Tradition of the present
Church to the written Word of God? Which is a Doctrine unknown to the S. Basil
goes as far for Traditions as any. For he says: Parem vim habent ad
pictatem. L. de Sp. Sanct. c. 27. But first, he speaks of Apostolical
Tradition, not of the Tradition of the Present Church. Secondly, the Learned
take exceptions to this Book of S. Basil, as corrupted. BP. Andr. Opusc. cont.
Peron. p. 9. Thirdly, S. Basil himself, Ser. de Fide, professes that he uses
sometimes Agrapha, sed ca solum quae non sunt aliona a pia secundum Scripturam
sententia. So he makes the Scripture their Touchstone, or trial And therefore
must of Necessity make Scripture superior, in as much as that which is able to
try another, is of greater force, and superior Dignity in that use, then the
thing tried by it. And Stapleton himself confesses, Traditionem recentiorem
and posteriorem, sicut and particularem, nullo modo cum Scriptura, vel cum
Traditionibus prius a se explicatis comparandam esse. Stapleton. Relect.
Controv. 5. q. 5. A. 2.
Primitive Church, and which frets upon the very Foundation it self, by
justling with it. So belike, he that has but half an indifferent eye, may see
this Assisted Company have erred, and yet we must wink in obedience, and think
them Infallible.

But. A. C. would have me consider again, That A. C. p 52.
it is as easy to take the Tradition of the present Church in the two
forenamed senses, as the present Scriptures printed, and approved by men of
this Age. For in the first sense, The very Scriptures (says he) considered as
printed, and approved by men of this Age, can be no more then of Humane Credit.
But in the second sense, as printed and approved by men assisted by God's
Spirit for true Copies of that which was first written, then we may give
Infallible Credit to them. Well. I have considered this too. And I can take the
Printing, and Approving the Copies of Holy-Writ in these two senses. And I can,
and do make a difference between Copies printed and approved by mere moral
men, and men assisted by Gods Spirit. And yet for the Printing only, a
skillful, and an able moral man may do better service to the Church, then an
illiterate man, though assisted in other things by God's Spirit. But when I
have considered all this, what then? The Scripture being put in writing, is a
thing visibly existent; and if any error be in the Print, it is easily
corrigible by Ut. 18. Nu. 4. E^ S. Aug. L. 32. cont. Faustum. (...). 1^.
former Copies. Tradition is not so easily observed, nor so safely kept. And
howsoever, to come home to that which A. C. inferres upon it, namely, That the
A. C. p. 53.
Tradition of the present Church may be accepted in these two senses: And if
this be all that he will infer (for his pen here is troubled, and forsakes
him, whether by any check of Conscience, or no, I know not) I will, and you
see, have granted it already without more ado, with this Caution, That every
Company of men assisted by Gods Spirit, are not assisted to this height, to be
Infallible by Divine Authority.

For all this A. C. will needs give a needless Proof of the Business:
Namely, That there is the Promise of Christ's, and his Holy Spirits continual
presence, and A. C. p. 53.
assistance, S. Luke 10. 16. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Ioh 14. 16. not only to the
Apostles, but to their Successors also, the lawfully sent Pastors, and Doctors
of the Church in all Ages. And that this Promise is no less, but rather more
expressly to them in their Preaching by word of mouth, then in writing, or
reading, or printing, or approoving of Copies of what was formerly written by
the Apostles. And to all this I shall briefly say, That there is a Promise of
Christ's and the Holy Spirits continual presence, and assistance. I do
likewise grant most freely, that this Promise is on the part of Christ, and the
Holy Ghost, most really and fully performed. But then this Promise must not be
extended further then 'twas made. It was made of Continual presence, and
assistance, That I grant; And it was made to the Apostles, and their
Successors; That I grant too. But in a different Degree. For it was of
Continual, and Infallible Assistance to the Apostles; But to their Successors
of Continual, and fitting assistance, but not Infallible. And therefore the
lawfully sent Pastors and Doctors of the Church in all Ages, have had, and
shall have Continual Assistance; but by A. C's. leave, not Infallible, at
least, not Divine and Infallible, either in writing, reading, printing, or
approving Copies. And I believe A C is the first, that durst affirm this; I
thought he would have kept the Popes Prerogative entire, that He only might
have been Infallible; And not He neither, but in Cathedra sat down and well
advised. And well Advised: Yes, that is right, Nam multa sunt Decretales
haereticae, sicut dicit Ocham. Et firmiter hoc Credo, sed non licet dogmatizare
Oppositum, quoniam sunt determinatae, nisi manifest constet etc. Ia. Almain.
in 3. Sent. D. 24 q. unica. Conclus. 6. Dub. 6 fine. and Alphon. a Castro also
both says and prooves, C^lestinum Papam errasse, non ut privatam Personam, sed
ut Papam. L. 1. advers. Har. c. 4. and the Gloss Confesses. Eum errare posse
in C. 24. q. 1. C. A Recta ergo.
But he may be sat, and not well Advised, even in Cathedra. And now, shall we
have all the Lawfully sent Pastors, and Doctors of that Church in all ages
Infallible too? Here Is a deal of Infallibility indeed, and yet error store.
The truth is, the Jesuits have a Months mind to this Infallibility. And
though A. C. out of his bounty is content to extend it to all the lawfully sent
Pastors of the Church: yet to his own Society quostionlesse he means it
chiefly. As did the Apologist to whom Casaubon replies, to Fronto Ducaeus. The
words of the Nam in fide quidem Iesuitam errare non posse, atque adeo esse hoc
unicum (...), cateris, qua solent a Poetis plurima commemorari, posthac
annumerandum, si nescis, mi Fronto, and puto nescire, docebo te, ab Apologist a
doctus, hoc ipsum disertis verbis affirmante. Sic ille cap. 3. Ejus exemplaris
quod ad Sereniss. Regem fuit missum pagina. 119. Iungantur in nnum, ait, dies
cum necte, te^ebrae cum luce, calidum cum frigido, sanitas cum morbo, vita cum
morte: and erit tum spes aliqua posse in caput Iesuitae haeresin cadere. Isa.
Casaubon. Ep. ad Front. Ducaum. Land. 1611.
Apologist are. Let day and night -- life and death be joined together, and
then there will be some hope, that Heresy may fall upon the person of a
Jesuit. Yea marry, this is something indeed. Now we know where Infallibility
is to be found But for my present Occasion, touching the Lawfully sent Pastors
of the Church etc. I will give no other Confutation of it, then that M. Fisher
and A. C. (if they be two men) are lawfully sent Pastors and Doctors of the
Church; at least I am sure, they will assume they are, and yet they are not
Infallible; which, I think, appears plain enough in some of their errors
manifested by this Discourse, and elsewhere. Or if they do hold themselves
Infallible, let them speak it out, as the Apologist did.

As for the Three Places of Scripture, which A. C. cites, they are of old
alleged, and well known A. C. p. 53.
in this Controversy. The First is in S. Luke 10. S. Luke 10. 16.
where Christ says, He that hears you, hears me. This was absolutely true
in the Per quod docet quicquid per Sanctos Apostolis dicitur, acceptandum esse,
quia qui illos audit, Christum audit, etc. S. Cyrillus. Et Dominus dedit
Apostolis suis potestatem Evangelii, per quos and Veritatem, idest, Dei Filium
cogno^imus etc. Quibus and dixit Dominus, Qui ves audit etc. Iraeneus praefat.
in L. 3. advers. Haer. sine.
Apostles, who kept themselves to that, which was revealed by Christ. But it
was to be but Conditionally true in their Dicit ad Apostolos, ac per hoc ad
Omnes Praepositos, qui Apostolis vicaria Ordinatione succedunt. S. Cyprian. L.
4. Epist. 9. But S. Cyprian does not say, that this speech of our Saviors was
equaliter dictum, alike and equally spoken and promised to the Apostles, and
the succeeding Bishops. And I believe A. C. will not dare to say in plain and
express Terms, That this speech, He that hears you hears me, does as
amply belong to every Roman Priest, as to S. Peter, and the Apostles. No, a
great deal of Difference will become them well.
Successors, He that hears you, hears me. That is so long, and so Be ye
followers of me, even as I am of Christ. 1 Cor. 11. 1. and 1 These. 1. 6.
far, as you And so Vener. Beda expressly both for hearing the word, and for
contemning it. I or neither of these (says he) belong only to them which saw
our Savior in the flesh; but to all hodie quoque: but with this limitation; if
they hear, or despise Evangelii verba: not the Preachers own. Beda. in S.
Luke 10. 15. 16.
speak my words, and not your own. For S. Mat. 28. 20.
where the Command is for Preaching, the Restraint is added. Go (says Christ)
and teach all Nations. But you may not preach all things what you please; but
althings which I have commanded you. The Publication is yours, the Doctrine is
mine: And where the Doctrine is not mine, there your Publication is beyond, or
short of your Commission. The Second Place is in S. Matthew. 28. There Christ
says again S. Mat. 28. 19. 20.
I am with you always unto the end of the world. Yes; most certain it is,
present by his Spirit; For else in bodily presence He continued not with his
Apostles, but during his abodc on Earth. And this Promise of his spiritual
presence was to their Successors; else, why to the end of the world? The
Apostles did not, could not live so long. But then to the Rabanus Manr. goes no
furrher. then that to the End some will always be in the world fit for Christ
by his Spirit and Grace to inhabit: Divina mansione and inhabitatione digni.
Rab. in S. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Pergatis habentes Dominum Protectorem, and Ducem.
says S. Cypr. L. 4. Epist. 1. But he does not say, How far sorth, And
loquitur Fidelibus sicut uni Corpcri. S. Chrysostom. Homil in S. Matthew. And if S
Chrysostom. enlarge it so far, I hope A. C. will not extend the Assistance
given or promised here to the whole Body of the Faithful, to an Infallible,
and Divine Assistance in every of them, as well as in the Pastors and Doctors.
Successors, the Promise goes no further, then I am with you always; which
reaches to continual assistance, but not to Divine, and Infallible. Or if he
think me mistaken, let him show me any One Father of the Church, that extends
the sense of this Place to Divine and Infallible Assistance, granted hereby to
all the Apostles Successors. Sure I am, Saint In illis done quibus salus
aliorum quaeritur (qualia sunt Pr^phetiae, and interpretationes Sermanum etc.)
Spiritus Sanctus nequaquam semper in Pradicatorib us permanet. S. Greg. L. 2.
Moral. c 29. prin. Edit. Basil. 1551.
Gregory thought otherwise. For he says plainly, That in those Gifts of God
which concern other men's salvation (of which Preaching of the Gospel is One)
the Spirit of Christ, the Holy Ghost does not always abide in the Preachers,
be they never so lawfully sent Pastors, or Doctors of the Church. And if the
Holy Ghost does not always abide in the Preachers, then most certainly he does
not abide in them to a Divine Infallibility always. The Third Place is in S.
John 14. where Christ says S. John 14. 16.
The Comforter the Holy Ghost shall abide with you for ever, Most true again.
For the Holy Ghost did abide with the Apostles according to Christ's Promise
there made, and shall abide with their Successors for ever, to Iste Consolator
non auferetur a Vobis, sicut subtrahitur Humaint as mea per mortem, sed
aternaliter erit Vobiscum, hic per Grasiam, in futuro per Gloriam. Lyra. in S.
John 14. 16, You see there the Holy Ghost shall be present by Consolation and
Grace, not by Infallible Assistance.
comfort and preserve them. But here is no Promise of Divine Infallibility made
unto them. And for that Promise which is made, and expressly of Infallibility,
Saint John 16. (though not S. Ioh. 16. 13.
cited by A. C.) That Is confined to the Apostles only, for the settling of them
in all Truth. And yet not simply all: For there are some Truths (says Omnem
veritatem: Non arbitror in hac vita in cujusquam mente compleri: etc. S.
Augustine. in S. Ioh Tract. 96. versus fin.
Saint Augustine) which no man's Soul can comprehend in this life. Not simply
all: But Spiritus Sanctus etc. qui eos doceret Omnem Veritatem, quam tunc, cum
iis loquebatur, portare non poterant. S. Ioh. 16. 12 13. and S. Augustine.
Tract. 97. in S. Ioh. prin.
all those Truths, quae non poterant portare, which they were not able to
bear, when He Conversed with them. Not simply all; but all that was necessary
for the Founding, propagating, establishing, and Confirming the Christian
Church. But if any man take the boldness to enlarge this Promise in the
fullness of it, beyond the persons of the Apostles themselves, that will fall
out which Saint Omnes vel insipientissimi Haeretici, qui se Christianos vocars
volunt, audacias figmentorum suorum, quas maxim exhorret sensus humanus, hac
Occasion Evangelicae sententiae colorare comentur. etc. S. Augustine. T. 97. in
S. Ioh. circamed.
Augustine has in a manner prophesied: Every Heretic will shelter himself,
and his Vanities under this Color of Infallible Verity.

I told you a Number. 26. A. C. p. 52.
little before, that A. C. his The Tradition of the present Church is as able
to work in us Divine and Infallible Faith, That the Scripture is the Word of
God: As that the Bible (or Books of Scripture) now printed, and in use, is a
true Copy of that, which was first written, by the Penne-men of the Holy
Ghost, and delivered to the Church. It Is most true, the Tradition of the
present Church is a like operative, and powerful in, and over both these
works: but neither Divine, nor Infallible in either. But as it is the first
moral Inducement to persuade, that Scripture is the Word of God; so is it also
the first, but moral still, that the Bible we now have, is a true Copy of
that which was first written. But then as in the former, so in this latter for
the true Copy, The last Resolution of our Faith cannot possibly rest upon the
naked Tradition of the present Church, but must by, and with it go higher to
other Helps, and Assurances. Where I hope A. C. will confess, we have
greater helps to discover the truth, or falsehood of a Copy, then we have
means to look into a Tradition. Or especially to sift out this Truth, that it
was a Divine and Infalli^le Revelation, by which the Originals of Scripture
were first written: That being fatre more the Subject of this Inquiry, then the
Copy, which according to Art, and Science may be examined by former preceding
Copies close up to the very Apostles times.

But A. C. has not done yet; For in the last That Tradition, and Scripture, A.
C. p. 53.
without any vicious Circle, do mutually confirm the Authority either of
other. And truly for my part, I shall easily grant him this, so he will grant
me this other: Namely, That though they do mutually, yet they do not equally
confirm the Authority either of other. For Scripture does infallibly confirm
the Authority of Church Traditions truly so called: But Tradition does but
morally and probably confirm the Authority of the Scripture. And this is
manifest by A. C's. own Similitude, For (says he) it is as a Kings Ambassadors
word of mouth, and His Kings Letters bear mutual witness to each other. Just
so indeed. For His Kings Letters of Credence under hand and seal, confirm the
Ambassadors Authority Infallibly to all that know Seal, and hand: But the
Ambassadors word of mouth confirms His Kings Letters but only probably. For
else, Why are they called Letters of Credence, if they give not him more
Credit, then he can give them? But that which follows I cannot approve, to
wit, That the Lawfully sent Preachers of the Gospel are Gods Legates, and the
Scriptures Gods Letters, which he has appointed his Legates to deliver, and
expound. So far it is well, but here is the sting. That these Letters do
warrant, that the People may hear, and give Credit to these Legates of Christ,
as to Christ the King himself. Soft, this is too high a great deal. No Will
A. C. maintain, that any Legate a Latere, is of as great Credit, as the Pope
himself?
Legate was ever of so great Credit as the King Himself. Nor was any Priest,
never so lawfully sent, ever of that Authority, that Christ himself; No sure,
For ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye do well; for so I am, says our
Savior, S. John 13. And certainly, this did not suddenly S. John. 13. 13.
drop out of A. C's. Pen. For he told us once before, That this Company of
men which deliver the present Churches Tradition, (that is the lawfully sent A.
C. p. 52.
Preachers of the Church) are assisted by Gods Spirit to have in them Divine
and Infallible Authority, and to be worthy of Divine and Infallible Credit,
sufficient to breed in us Divine, and Infallible Faith. Why, but is it possible
these men should go thus far to defend an Error, be it never so dear unto
them? They as Christ? Divine, and Infallible Authority in them? Sufficient to
breed in us Divine, and Infallible Faith? I have often heard some wise men say,
That the Jesuit in the Church of Rome, and the Precise party in the Reform^d
Churches agree in many things, though they would seem most to differ. And
surely this is one: For both of them differ extremely about Tradition. The one
in magnifying it, and exalting it into Divine Authority; The other vilifying,
and depressing it almost beneath Humane. And yet even in these different ways,
both agree in this consequent. That the Sermons and Preachings by word of
mouth, of the lawfully sent Pastors and Doctors of the Church are able to breed
in us Divine and Infallible Faith; Nay are the For this A. C. says expressly of
Tradition p. 52. And then he adds, that the Promise for this was no less, but
rather more Expressly made to the lawfully sent Pastors and Doctors of the
Church in all ages in their teaching by word of mouth, then in writing, etc. p.
53.
very word of God. So A. C. expressly. And no less then so, have some accounted
of their own factious words (to say no more) then as the For the freeing of
factious and silenced Ministers is termed, the Restoring of Gods Word to ^s
Liberty: In the Godly Author of the late News from Ipswich p. 5.
Word of God. I ever took Sermons (and so do still) to be most necessary
Expositions, and Applications of Holy Scripture, and a great ordinary means of
saving knowledge. But I cannot think them, or the Preachers of them Divinely
Infallible. The Ancient Fathers of the Church preached far beyond any of
these of either faction; And yet no one of them durst think himself
Infallible, much less, that whatsoever he preached was the Word of God. And
it may be Observed too, That no men are more apt to say, That all the Fathers
were but Men, and might Err, then they that think their own preachings are
Infallible.

The next thing (after this large Interpretation of A C.) which I shall trouble
you with, is, That Scripture to be the Word of God, which I here use, is the
same, which the Ancient Church ever held, namely, Tradition, or Ecclesiastical
Authority first; and then all other Arguments, but especially internal, from
the Scripture it self. This way the Church went in S. Augustine's And S. Aug.
himself L. 13. contr. Faustum c. 5. proves by an Internal Argument the
fulfilling of the Prophets. Scriptura (says he) quae fidem suam rebus ipsis
probat quae per temporum successiones hac impleri, etc. And Hen. a Gand. Par.
1. Sum. A. (...). q. 3. cites S. Aug. Book de vera Religione. In which Book,
though these Four Arguments are not found i^ Terms together, yet they fill up
the scope of the whole Book.
Time. He was no enemy to Church-Tradition; yet when he would prove, that the
Author of the Scripture (and so of the whole knowledge of Divinity, as it is
supernatural) is Deus in Christo, God in Christ; he takes this as the
All-sufficient way, and gives four proofs, all internal to the Scripture:
First, The Miracles. Secondly, That there is nothing carnal in the Doctrine.
Thirdly, That there has been such performance of it. Fourthly, That by such a
Doctrine of Humility, the whole world almost has been converted. And whereas
ad muniendam Fidem, for the Defending of the Faith, and keeping it entire,
there are two things requisite, Scripture, and Church-Tradition; Duplici modo
muniri fide^ etc. Primo Divinae Legis Authoritate, tum deinde Ecclesia
Catholicae Traditione. cont. Har. c. 1.
Vincent Lirinens. places Authority of Scriptures first; and then Tradition.
And since it is apparent, that Tradition is first in order of time, it must
necessarily follow, that Scripture is first in order of Nature, that is, the
chief, upon which Faith rests, and resolves it self. And your own School
confesses this was the way ever. The Woman of S. Ioh. 4.
Samaria is a known Resemblance, but allowed by your selves. For Hen. a Gand.
Sum. Par. 1. A. 10. q 1. Sic quotidie apudillos qui forts sunt, intrat Christus
per mulierem, i. Ecclesiam, and credunt per istam famam, etc. Gloss. in S. Ioh.
cap. 4.
quotid^e, daily with them that are without Christ enters by the woman, that is
the Church, and they believe by that fame which she gives, etc But when they
come to hear Christ himself, they believe his words, before the words of the
Woman. For when they have once found Christ, Ibid. Plus verbis Christi in
Scripturae credit, quam Ecclesiae testificanti. Quia propter illam jam credit
Ecclesiae. Et si ipsa quidem contraria Scripturae diceret, ipsi non crederet,
etc. Primam fidem tribuamus Scripturis Canonicis, secundam sub ista,
Definitionibus and Consuctudinibus Ecclesiae. Catholicae, post is it as studiosis
viris non sub poena perfidiae, sed proterviae, etc. Walden. Doct. Fid. To. 1.
L. 2. Art. 2. c. 23. Nu. 9.
they do more believe his words in Scripture, then they do the Church, which
testifies of him; because then propter illam, for the Scripture they believe
the Church: And if the Church should speak contrary to the Scripture, they
would not believe it. Thus the School taught then; And thus the Gloss
commented then; And when men have tired themselves, hither they must come. The
Key, that lets men in to the Scriptures, even to this knowledge of them, That
they are the Word of God, is the Tradition of the Church: but when they are in,
In sacra Scriptura Ipse immediate loquitur fidelibus. Ibid.
They hear Christ himself immediately speaking in Scripture to the Faithful:
S. John 10. 4.
And his Sheep do not only hear, but know his voice. And then here is no
vicious Circle indeed of prooving the Scripture by the Church, and then round
about, the Church by the Scripture. Only distinguish the Times, and the
Conditions of men, and all is safe. For a Beginner in the Faith, or a Weakling,
or a Doubter about it, begins at Tradition, and proves Scripture by the Church:
But a man strong and grown up in the Faith, and understandingly conversant in
the Word of God, proves the Church by the Scripture; And then upon the matter,
we have a double Divine Testimony, altogether Infallible, to confirm unto us,
That Scripture is the Word of God. The first is the Tradition of the Church of
the Apostles themselves, who delivered immediately to the world, the Word of
Christ. The other, the Scripture it self, but after it has received this
Testimony. And into these we do, and may safely Resolve our Faith. Quod autem
credimus posterioribus, circa quos non apparent virtutes Divinae, hoc est, Quia
non praedicant alia, quam quae illi in Scriptis certissimis re^iquerunt. Qua
constat per midios in nullo fuisse vitiata ex consensione concordi in eis
omnium succedentium usque ad tempora nostra. Henr. a Gand. Sum. P. 1. A. 9. q.
3.
As for the Tradition of after Ages, in, and about which Miracles and Divine
Power were not so evident, we believe them (by Gandavo's full Confession)
because they do not preach other things then those former (the Apostles) left
in scriptis certissimis, in most certain Scripture. And it appears by men in
the middle ages, that these writings were vitiated in nothing, by the
concordant consent in them of all succeeders, to our own time.

And now by this time it will be no hard thing Fathers, which seem to speak
differently in no few places, both one from another, and the same from
themselves, touching Scripture and Tradition; And that as well in this Point,
to prove Scripture to be the Word of God, as for concordant exposition of
Scripture in all things else. When therefore the Fathers say, Scripturas
habemus ex Traditione. S. Cvril. Hier. Catech. 4. Multa quae non inveniuntur in
Literis Apostolorum, etc. non nisi ab illis tradita and commendata creduntur.
S. Aug. 2. de Baptism. contra Denat. c. 7.
We have the Scripture by Tradition, or the like, either They mean the
Tradition of the Apostles themselves delivering it, and there, when it is
known to be such, we may resolve our Faith. Or if they speak of the Present
Church, then they mean, that the Tradition of it, is that by which we first
receive the Scripture, as by an according Means to the Prime Tradition. But
because it is not simply Divine, we cannot resolve our Faith into it, nor
settle our Faith upon it, till it resolve it self into the Prime tradition of
the Apostles, or the Scripture, or both; and there we rest with it. And you
cannot show an ordinary consent of Fathers: Nay can you, or any of your
Quarter, show any one Father of the Church, Greek, or Latin, that ever said,
We are to resolve our Faith, that Scripture is the Word of God, into the
Tradition of the present Church? And again, when the Fathers say, we are to
rely upon Scripture Non aliunde scientia Coelestium. S. Hilar. L. 4. dc
Trinit. Si Angelus dc Coelo annunciaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis, etc.
S. Aug. L. 3. cont. Petil. c. 6.
only, they are never to be understood with Exclusion of Tradition, in what
causes soever it may be had, Quum sit perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad
omnia satis superque sufficiat, etc. Vin. Lir. contra Haeres. c. 2. And if it
be sibi ad omnia, then to this, To prove it self, at least after Tradition has
prepared us to receive it.
Not but that the Scripture is abundantly sufficient, in, and to it self for
all things, but because it is deep: and may be drawn into different senses,
and so mistaken, if any man will presume upon his own strength, and go single
without the Church.

To gather up whatsoever may seem scattered That Scripture is the Word of God,
I shall now in the Last Place put all together, that so the whole state of the
Question may the better appear.

First then I shall desire the Reader to consider, Pun. 1.
that every Rational Science requires some Principles quite without its own
Limits, which are not proved in that Science, but presupposed. Thus Rhetoric
presupposes Grammar, and Music Arithmeticke. Therefore it is most reasonable
that Omnis Scientia praesupponit fidem aliquam. S. Prosper. in Psalm 123. And
S. Cynl. Hierosol. Catechesi 5. shows how all things in the world do side
consistere. Therefore most unreasonable to deny that to Divinity, which all
Sciences, nay all things challenge. Namely, somethings to be presupposed, and
believed.
Theology should be allowed to have some Principles also, which she proves
not, but presupposes. And the chiefest of these, is, That the Scriptures are of
Divine Authority.

Secondly, that there is a great deal of difference Pun. 2.
in the Manner of confirming the Principles of Divinity, and those of any other
Art, or Science whatsoever.

For the Principles of all other Sciences do finally resolve, either into the
Conclusions of some Higher Science; or into those Principles which are per se
nota, known by their own light, and are the Grounds and Principles of all
Science. And this is it, which properly makes them Sciences, because they
proceed with such strength of Demonstration, as forces Reason to yield unto
them. But the Principles of Divinity resolve not into the Grounds of Natural
Reason (For then there would be no room for Faith, but all would be either
Knowledge, or Vision) but into the Maxims of Divine Knowledge supernatural.
And of this we have just so much light, and no more, then God has revealed
unto us in the Scripture.

Thirdly, That though the Evidence of these Supernatural Pun. 3.
Truths, which Divinity teaches, appears not so manifest as that of the
Natural; Si vis credere manifestis, invisibilibus magis quam visibilibus
oportet credere. Licet dictum sit admirabile, verum est, etc. S. Chrysostom.
Hom. 46. ad Pot. And there he proves it. Aliae Scientiae certitudinem habent ex
Naturali Lumine Rationis Humanae, quae decipi potest: Haec autem ex Luminc
Divinae Scientiae, quae decipi non potest. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 5. c.
yet they are in themselves much more sure and infallible then they. For they
proceed immediately from God, that Heavenly Wisdom, which being the fountain
of ours, must needs infinitely precede ours, both in Nature and excellence. He
that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Psalm. 94. 10. Our old English
Translation reads it, Shall not he punish? That is, shall not he know when, and
why, and how to punish?
Psalm. 94. And therefore, though we reach not the Order of their Deductions,
nor can in this life come to the vision of them, yet we yield as full, and
firm Assent, not only to the Articles, but to all the Things rightly deduced
from them, as we do to the most evident Principles of Natural Reason. This
Assent is called Faith. And Faith being of things not seen, Heb. 11. Heb. 11.
1.
S^t Ratio convincens, and propter came (...). alias non crediturus, tollitur
(...) si^i. B^l. 3. D. 25. q. unic. sine. Non est dicendus credere, cujus
judicium sulagitur, aut cogitur, etc. Stapl. That. contra Wintaker. cap. 6. p.
64.
would quite loose its honor, nay it self, if it met with sufficient Grounds
in Natural Reason, whereon to stay it self. For Faith is a mixed Act of the
Will and the Understanding, and the Vides no^ sit in nobis nisi volentibus.
Tol^. in S. (...) 16. Annot. 33. Et qui voluerunt, ^runt. S. Aug. Sermon. 60.
d^rb. Dom. (...). 5. Fides Actus est, non schus ^ctus, sed etiam Voluntatis,
quae qinon potest. Imo magis Voluntatis quam Intelle us quatenus illa
Operationis prin^ium est, and Assensum (qui p^oprie Actus fi^i est) sola
clicit. Nec ab (...) Voluntas, sed a Voluntate (...). Actu sidei determinatur.
Sta^ I. T^lic. cont. Whitak. c. 6. p. 64. C^e enim est Actus Intellectus det^
^i ^unum ex Imperio Voluntatis (...). 2. 2. q. 4. A^c. Non potest dari aliquis
sidei, quinunque ille sit, non qui in suis Causis mediate (...) med^e b actu
Voluntatis Alm. in 3. S^t D. 24. (...). 6. Dub. 4. A (...). Aug. says. Fidei
locum esse Cor. T^. 52. in S. Ioh. Where the Heart is put to the whole soul,
which equally comprehends both the Will and the Vnde^ ing. And so does Biel
also, in 3. Sunt. D. 25. q unic. Art. 1. F.
Will inclines the Understanding to yield full approbation to that whereof it
sees not full proof. Not but that there is most full proof of them, but
because the maine Grounds which prove them, are concealed from our view, and
folded up in the unrevealed Counsel of God, God in Christ resolving to bring
mankind to their last happiness by Faith, and not by knowledge, that so the
weakest among men may have their way to blessedness open. And certain it is,
that many weak men believe themselves into Heaven, and many over-knowing
Christians loose their way thither, while they will believe no more then they
can clearly know. In which pride, and vanity of theirs they are left, and have
these things hid from them, S. Matthew. 11. S. Mat. 11. 25.


Fourthly, That the Credit of the Scripture, the Pun. 4.
Book in which the Principles of Faith are written, (as of other writings
also) depends not upon the subservient Inducing Cause, that leads us to the
first knowledge of the Author, which leader here is the Church, but upon the
Author himself, and the Opinion we have of his sufficiency, which here is the
Holy Spirit of God, whose Penmen the Prophets and Apostles were. And therefore
the Mysteries of Divinity contained in this Book; As the Incarnation of our
Savior; The Resurrection of the dead, and the like, cannot finally be
resolved into the sole Testimony of the Church, who is but a Subservient Cause,
to lead to the knowledge of the Author, but into the wisdom and Sufficiency
of the Author, who being Omnipotent, and Omniscient, must needs be Infallible.

Fifthly, That the Assurance we have of the Penmen of the Scriptures, the Holy
Prophets, and Apostles, Pun. 5.
is as great, as any can be had of any Humane Authors of like Antiquity. For
it is morally as evident to any Pagan, that S. Matthew and S. Paul writ the
Gospel, and Epistles which bear their Names, as that Cicero, or Seneca wrote
theirs. But that the Apostles were divinely inspired, whilst they writ them,
and that they are the very Word of God expressed by them, this has ever been
a matter of Faith in the Church, and was so, even while the Apostles themselves
The Apostles indeed they knew, for they had clear Revelation: They to whom
they preached, might believe, but they could not know without the like
Revelation. So S. Ioh. 19 35. He that saw, knows that he says true, that you,
which saw not, might believe. Deus in Prophetis (and sic in Apostolis) quos
immediate illuminabat, causabat evidentiam. Iaco Aimain. in 3. Sent. Dis. 24.
q. unic a. Conclus. 6. But for the residue of men, it is no more, but as Thomas
has it. Oportet quod credatur Authoritati eorum, quibus Revelatio facta est.
Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad 8.
lived, and was never a matter of Evidence and Knowledge, at least as Knowledge
is opposed to Faith. Nor could it at any time then be more Demonstratively
prooved then now. I say, not scientifice, not Demonstratively. For, were the
Apostles living, and should they tell us, that they spoke, and writ the very
Oracles of God: yet this were but their own Testimony of themselves, and so
not alone able to enforce Belief on others. And for their Miracles, though
they were very Great Inducements of Belief, yet were neither they Evident and
Convincing Proofs, A on est evidens vel ista esse vera miracula: vel ista
fieri ad illam Veritatem comprobandam, I^. Almain. in 3. Sent. D. 24. q. uni^
Concl. 6. Therefore the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles did, were fully
sufficient to beget Faith to assent, but not Evidence to Convince.
alone and of themselves. Both because, There may be counterfeit Miracles: And
because true ones are neither Cautos nos fecit Sponsus, quia and Miraculis
decipi non debemus. S. Aug. T. 13. in S. ^oh. And he that says we ought not to
be deceived, acknowledges that we may be deceived even by Miracles. And
Arguments which can deceive, are not sufficient to Convince. Though they be
sometimes too full of efficacy to pervert. And so plainly Almain. out of Ocham.
Nunquam acquiritur Evidentia per Medium quod de se generat falsum assensum,
sunt verum. la. Alma. in 3 Sent. Di. 24. q unic. Conc. 6. And therefore that
Learned Roman Catholic, who tells us, the Apostles Miracles made it evident,
that their doctrine was true and Divine, went too far. Credible they made it,
but not Evident. And therefore he is after forced to confess, That the soul
sometimes assents not to the Miracles, but in great timidity, which cannot stand
with clear Evidence. And after again, That the soul may renounce the
Doctrine formerly confirmed by Miracles. unless some inward, and supernatural
Light be given, etc. And neither can this possibly stand with Evidence. And
therefore Bellarmine goes no farther then this: Miracula esse sufficientia, and
efficacia ad novam fidem persuadendam. L. 4. de Notis Eccles. c. 14.. 1. To
induce and persuade, but not to Convince. And Thomas will not grant so much,
for he says expressly: Miraculum non est sufficiens Causa inducens Fidem. Quia
videntium unum and idem Miracul^, quidam credunt, and quidam non. Tho. 2. 2. q.
6. A. 1. c. And Ambros. Catharin. in Romans 10. 15. is downright at Nulla fides
est habenda signo. Examinanda sunt, etc. Anastasius Nicanus Episcopus, apud
Baron. ad An. 360. number. 21, Non sunt necessaria sign^ vera sidet, etc. Suarez,
defens. Fidei Catho. L. 1. c. 7. Nu. 3.
Infall^ble nor Inseparable Marks of Truth in Doctrine. Not Infallible: For
they may be Marks of false Doctrine in the highest degree. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. S. Marc. 13. 22.
Deuteronomy. 13. Not proper, and Inseparable: For Operatio Virtutum alteri datur. 1.
Cor. 12. 10. (To one and another he says, not to al.) Damonia fugare, Mortu^s
suscitare, etc. dedit quibusdam Discipulis suis, quibusdam non dedit. (That is
to do Miracles.) S. Aug. Sermon. 22. de Verbis Apost, (...). 5.
all which wrote by Inspiration, did not confirm their Doctrine by Miracles.
For we do not find that David, or Solomon, with some other of the Prophets,
did any, neither were any wrought by S. John the Baptist, S. Ioh. 10. 41.
S. Ioh. 10. So, as Credible Signs they were, and are still of as much forceto
us, as it is possible for things on the credit of Relation to be: For the
Witnesses are many, and such as spent their lives in making good the Truth,
which they saw. But that the Workers of them were Divinely and Infallibilly
inspired in that which they Preached, and writ was still to the Here it may be
observed how warily A. C. carries himself. For when he has said, That a
clear R^lation was made to the Apostles, which is most true; And so the
Apostles knew that which they taught simpliciter a priori, most Demonstratively
from the Prime Cause. God himself. Then he adds p 51. I say clear in
attestante. That is the Revelation of this Truth was clear in the Apostles
that witnessed it. But to make it knowledge in the Auditors, the same, or like
Revelation, and as clear must be made to them. For they could have no other
knowing Assurance; Credible they might, and had. So A. C. is wary there, but
comes not home to the Business: And so might have held his peace. For the
Question is not, what clear Evidence the Apostles had? but what Evidence they
had, which heard them?
Hearers a matter of Faith, and no more evident by the light of Humane Reason
to men that lived in those Days, then to us now. For had that been
Demonstrated, or been clear (as Prime Principles are) in its own light, both
they and we had apprehended all the Mysteries of Divinity by Knowledge, not by
Faith. But this is most apparent was not. For had the Prophets, or Apostles
been ordered by God to make this Demonstratively, or Intuitively by Discourse,
or vision appear as clear to their Auditors, as to themselves it did, that
Whatsoever they taught was Divine, and Infallible Truth, all men which had the
true use of Reason, must have been forced to yield to their Doctrine. Esaias 53.
1.
Esaias could never have been at Domine quis? Lord who has believed our Report?
Esaias 53. Nor Ier, 20. 7.
Jeremy at Domine, factus sum, Lord I am in derision daily, Ier. 20. Nor could
any of S. Paul's Auditors have mocked at him (as some of them did) Acts 17. 32.
And had Zedcchiah and the people seen it as clearly as Jeremy himself did,
that the word he spoke was Gods word, and Infallible, Jerusalem, for ough^ we
know, had not been laid desolate by the Chaldean. But because they could not
see this by the way of knowledge, and would not believe it by way of Faith,
they, and that City perished together. Jer. 38. 17.
Act. 17. for Preaching the Resurrection, if they had had as full a view as S.
Paul himself had in the Assureance, which God gave of it in, and by the
Resurrection of Christ. verse. 31. But the way of Knowledge was not that which
God thought fittest for man's Salvation. For Man having sinned by Pride, God
thought fittest to humble him at the very root of the Tree of Knowledge, and
make him deny his understanding, and submit to Faith, or hazard his happiness.
The Credible Object all the while, that is, the Mysteries of Religion, and the
Scripture which contains them is Divine and Infallible, and so are the Penmen
of them by Revelation. But we, and all our Forefathers, the Hearers, and
Readers of them, have neither Nemo pius, nisi qui Scripturae credit. S. Aug. L.
26. cont. Faustum. c. 6. Now no Man believes the Scripture, that does not
believe that it is the Word of God. I say, which does not believe, I do not
say, which does not know oport^t quod Credatur Authoritati eorum quibus
Revelatio facta est. Tho p. 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad secundum. (...) C c. Quod vero
Animam habemus, unde manis st^m? Si enim Uisibilibus credere vel^, and de Deo,
and de Angelis, and de mente, and de Anima dubitabis: and sic tibi omnia
veritatis dogmata deperibunt. Et certe si manifestis credere velis,
Invisibilibus magis quam Uisibilibus credere oportet. Li^et enim admirabile sit
dictum, verum tam^n, and apud mentem habentes valde certum, vel in confesso Ex
homil. 13 S Chry^ost. in S. Mat. To. 1. Edit. Fronto: Paris. 1630.
knowledge, nor vision of the Prime Principles in, or about them, but * Faith
only. And the Revelation, which was clear to them, is not so to us, nor
therefore the Prime Tradition it self delivered by them.

Sixthly, That hence it may be gathered, that Pun. 6.
the Assent, which we yield to this maine Principle of Divinity, That the
Scripture is the Word of God, is grounded upon no Compelling, or Demonstrative
Ratiocination, but relyes upon the strength of Faith, more then any other
Principle whatsoever. And this is the Ground of that which I said before,. 15.
Nu. 1. That the Scripture only, and not any unwritten Tradition was the
^oundation of our Faith. Namely, when the Authority of Scripture is first
yielded unto.
For all other necessary Points of Divinity, may by undeniable Discourse be
inferred out of Scripture it self once admitted; but this, concerning the
Authority of Scripture not possibly: But must either be prooved by Revelation,
which is not now to be expected: Or presupposed and granted as manifest in it
self, like the Principles of nat^rall knowledge, which Reasm alone will never
Grant: Or by Tradition of the Church, both Prime, and Present, with all other
Ratinall Helps, preceding, or accompanying the internal Light in Scripture it
self; which though it give Light enough for Faith to believe, yet Light enough
it gives not to be a convincing Reason, and proof for knowledge. And this is
it, which makes the very entrance into Divinity, inaccessible to those men, who
standing high in the Opinion of their own wisdom, will believe nothing, but
that which is irrefragably prooved from Rational Principles. For as Christ
requires a Denial of a man's self, that he may be able to follow him. S. Luke
9: So as great a part as any of S. Luke 9. 23.
this Denial of his Whole-selfe (for so it must be) is the denial of his
Understanding, and the composing of the unquiet search of this Grand Inquisitor
into the Secrets of Him that made it, and the over-ruleing the doubtfulnesse of
it by the fervency of the Intellectus Credentis determinatur per Voluntatem,
non per Rationem. Tho. 2. 2. q. 2. A. 1. ad tertium. And what power the Will
has in Case of men's Believing, or not Believing, is manifest, Jer. 44. But
this is spoken of the Will compared with the Vnderstandin^ only, leaving the
Operations of Grace free over Both.
Will.

Seventhly, That the knowledge of the Supreme Pun. 7.
Cause of all (which is God) is most remote, and the most difficult thing
Reason can have to do with. The Quod sit, That there is a God, Communis enim
sententia est Patrum and Theologorum aliorum, demonstrari posse naturali
ratione Deum esse; Sed a post^riori and per effectus. Sic Tho. p. 1. q. 2. A.
2. Et Damas^. L. 1. Orth. Fid. c. 3. and Almain. in 3. sent. D. 24 q. 1. But
what may be demonstrated by natural reason, by natural light may the same be
known. And so the Apostle himself, Romans 1. 20. Invisibilia Dei a Creatur a
mundi per ca quae facta sunt, intellecta conspiciuntur. And so Calvin most
clearly, L. 1. Inst c. 5.. 1. Aperire Oculos nequeunt, quin aspicere cum
coguntur, though Bellarmine would needs be girding at him. L. 4. de Great. and
Lib. Arbit. c 2. Videtur autem and Ratio iis quae apparent attestari: Omnes
enim homines de Diis (ut ille loquitur) habent existimationem, Arist. L. 1. de
Coelo T. 22.
bleare-eyed Reason can see. But the Damasc. L. 1. Ortho. Fid. c. 4.
Quid sit, what that God is, is infinitely beyond all the fathoms of Reason. He
is a Light indeed, but such as no man's Reason can come at for the Brightness. 1 Timothy 6. 16. Et ne V^stigium sic accedendi (...) S. Aug. nisi augeas imaginari
ne cogitationis lucem soli^ innumerabiliter vel quid aliud etc. L. 8, de T^in.
c. 2, Solus modus accedendi, Preces sunt. Boet. de consol^. Philos. L. 5.
prosa. 3.
1 Timothy 6. If any thing therefore be attainable in this kind, it must be by
Prater Scientias Philosophicas, necesse est ut ponatur alia Scientia (...)
revelata de iis quae hominis captum (...). Tho. p. 1. q. 1 A. 1.
Revelation; And that must be from Himself: for none can Reveal, but And
therefore Bid is ex^sse, That God could not reveal any thing that is to come,
nisi illud esset a Deo praes^um s^u praevisum (i. e. unless God did fully
comprehend that which He does reveal) Biel in 3. sent. D. 239. 2. A. 1.
he that Comprehends. And Nullus Intellectus Creatus videndo Deum, potest
cogno (...) om^ia quae Deus sacit. vel potest saccre. Hoc enim esset
Comprehendere ejus virtutem. etc. Tho. p. 1. q. 12. A. 8. C.

Ad Argumentum: Quod Deus ut Speculum est: Et quod Omnia quae sieri possunt, in
co resplendent. Respondet Thom. Quod non est necessarium, quod videns speculum,
omnia in speculo videat, nisi speculum visu suo compr^hendat. Tho. p. 1. q. 12.
A. 8. a 12. (Now no man can comprehend this Glass which is God Himself.)


none does, or can comprehend God, but Himself. And when he does Reveal, yet
He is no farther discernable, then Deus enim est Speculum voluntarium revelans
quae and quod vult alicui beato: non est Speculum naturaliter repraesentans
omnia. Biel. Suppl. in 4. Sent. D. 49. q. 3. propos. 3.
Himself pleases. Now since For if Reason well put to its search did not find
this out, how came Arist. to assirme this by rationa l disquisition. (...) etc.
Restat, ut men's sola extrinsecus accedat, eaque sola divina sit, nibil enim cum
ejus Action communicate Actio corporalis. A^st. l. 2. de genesis Anim. c. 3. This
cannot be spoken of the Soul, were it mortal. And therefore I must needs be
of Paulus Benius his opinion, who says plainly, and proves it too, Turpi^r
assixam a quib^sdam Aristoteli Mortalitatis Animae Opinionem. Benius in Timaeum
Platonis Decad. 2ae. L. 3.
Reason teaches, that the Soul of man is immortal, and For it Reason did not
dictate this also, whence is it that Aristotle disputes of the way and means
of attaining it. L. 1. Moral. c. 9. And takes on him to prove That Felicity is
rather an Honorable then a Commendable thing. c. 12. And after all this, he
adds, Deo (...) tota vita est, hominibus autem catenus, quatenus similitudo
quaedam ejusmodi Operationis ipsis in est, Arist. l. 10. Moral. c. 8.
capeable of Felicity. And since that Felicity consists in the Contemplation of
the highest Cause, which again is God himself. And since Christ therein
Confirms that Dictate, that man's eternal Happiness is to know God, and Him whom
he has sent, S. S. John 17. 3. Ultima Beatitudo hominis consistit in quadam
supernaturali visione Dei. Ad hanc autem visi^m Homo pertingere non potest,
nisi per modum Addis^is a Deo Doctore, Omnis qui audit a Patre and didicit. S.
John 6. 45. Thom. 2. 2. q. 2. A. 3. in c.
Ioh. 17. And since nothing can put us into the way of attaining to that
Contemplation, but some Revelation of Himself, and of the way to himself. I
say, since all this is so, It cannot reasonably be thought by any prudent man,
that the All-wise God should create man with a Desire of Felicity; and then
leave him utterly destitute of all Isntrumental Helps to make the Attainment
possible: since Deus and natura nihil frustra faciunt. Arist. L. 1. de Coelo T.
32. frustra autem est quod non potest habere suum usu^ Thom. ibid.
God and Nature do nothing, but for an end. And Help there can be none
sufficient, but by Revelation And once grant me that Revelation is necessary,
and then I will appeal to Reason it self, and that shall prove abundantly one
of these two. That either, there was never any such Revelation of this kind
from the worlds beginning to this day: And that will put the frustra upon God
in point of man's Felicity: Or, that the Scriptures which we now embrace, as
the Word of God, is that Revelation. And that is it we Christians labor to make
good against all Atheism, Profaneness, and Infidelity.

Last of all, To prove that the Book of God which Pun. 8.
we honor as His Word, is this necessary Revelation of God and his Truth,
which must, and is alone able, to lead us in the way to our eternal
Blessedness (or else the world has none) comes in a Cloud of witnesses. Some
for the Infidel, and some for the Believer. Some for the VVeake in Faith, and
some for the Strong. And some for all. For then first comes in the Tradition of
the Church, the present Church; so it is no Heretical, or Schismatic
Belief. Then the Testimony of former Ages; so it is no New Belief. Then the
consent of Times; so it is no Divided or partial Belief. Then the Harmony of
the Prophets, and them fulfilled; so it is not a 2 Pet. 1. 16.
Devised, but a forespoken Belief. Then the success of the Doctrine contained
in this Book; so it is not a Belief stisted in the Cradle; but it has spread
through the world in despite of what the world could do against it; And
increased from weak, and unlikely Beginnings, to incredible Greatness. Then
the Constancy of this Truth; so it is no Moone-Beliefe: For in the midst of the
worlds Changes, it has preserved it is Creed entire through many generations.
Then, that there is nothing Carnal in the Doctrine; so it is a Chaste Belief.
And all along it has gained, kept, and exercised more power upon the minds of
men, both learned, and unlearned, in the increase of virtue, and repression of
vice, then any Moral Philosophy, or Legal Policy that ever was. Then comes
the inward Light and Excellency of the Text it self; and so it is no dark, or
dazzling Belief. And it is an Excellent Text: For see the riches of Natural
knowledge, which are stored up there, as well as Supernatural. Consider how
things quite above Reason consent with things Reasonable. Weigh it well what
Majesty lies there hid under Humility: Quasi quidam fluvius est, planus, and
Altus, in quo and Agnus ambulet, and Elephas na^et. S. Greg. Pr^fat. in Lib.
Moralium. c. 4.
What Depth there is with a Perspicuity unimitable: What In Lege Domini voluntas
ejus. Psa. 1. 2. Dulcior super mel and favum. Psa 18. 11. and passim.
Delight it works in the Soul, that is devoutely excercised in it, how the
Multa dicuntur submiss^s and humirepe^tibus animis, ut accommodatius per humana
in Divina consurgant. Multa etiam figurate, ut studiosa men's, and quaesitis
exerceatur utilius and uberius laetetur inventis. S. Aug. de Mor. Ec. Cat. c.
17. Sed nihil sub spirituali sensu continetur Fidei necessarium, quod Scriptura
per Literalem sensum alicubi manifest non tradat. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 10 ad 1.
Sublimest wits find in it enough to amaze them; while the c simplest want not
enough to direct them. And then we shall not wonder, if (with the assistance of
Credimus etc. sicut ob alia multa certiora Argumenta (quam est Testimonium
Ecclesia) tum propter hoe potissimum, quod Spiritus Sanctus nobis intus has
esse Dei voces persuadeat. Whitaker, Disput. de Sa. Scrip. Controvers. 1. q. 3.
c. 8.
Gods Spirit, who alone works Faith and Belief of the Scriptures, and their
Divine Authority, as well as other Articles) we grow up into a most Infallible
Assurance, such an Assurance, as has made many lay down their lives for this
Truth: such, as that, * Though an Angel from Heaven should Preach unto us
another Gospel, we would not believe Gal. 1. 8.
Him, or it. No; though we should see as great, and as many Miracles done over
again to dissuade us from it, as were at first to win the world to it. To
which firmness of Assent by the Operation of Gods Spirit, the Will conferres
as much, or more strength, then the Understanding, Clearenesse, the whole
Assent being an Act of Faith, and not of Knowledge. And therefore the Question
should not have been asked of me by F. How I knew? But upon what Motives I
did believe Scripture to be the Word of God? And I would have him take heed,
lest hunting too close after a way of Knowledge, he loose the way of Faith,
and teach other men to loose it too.

So then the Way lies thus (as far as it appears Pun. 9.
to me) The Credit of Scripture to be Divine Resolves finally into that Faith,
which we have touching God Himself, and in the same order. For as that, so
this has Three maine Grounds, to which all other are Reducible. The First is,
the Tradition of the Church: And this leads us to a Reverend persuasion of it.
The Second is, The light of Nature: And this shows us how necessary such a
Revealed Learning is, and that no other way it can be had. Cum Fides
infallibili veritati innita^: Et ideo cum impossible sit de vero demonstrari
Contrarium: sequitur omnes Probationes qua contra fidem inducuntur, non posse
esse Demonstrationes sed solubilia Argumenta. Tho. p. 1. q. A. 1. 8. c.
Nay more, that all Proofs brought against any Point of Faith, neither are,
nor can be Demonstrations, but soluble Arguments. The Third is, The light of
the Text it self; in Conversing wherewith we meet with the Fidei ultima
Resolutio est in Deum illuminantem. S. Aug. cont. Fund. c. 14.
Spirit of God inwardly inclining our hearts, and sealeing the full Assurance
of the sufficiency of all Three unto us. And then, and not before, we are
certain, That the Scripture is the Word of God both by Divine, and by
Infallible Proof. But our Certainty is by Faith, and so voluntary, not by
Knowledge of such Principles, as in the light of Nature can enforce Assent,
whether we will or no.

I have said thus much upon this great Occasion, because this Argument is so
much pressed, without due respect to Scripture. And I have proceeded in a
Syntheticall way, to build up the Truth for the benefit of the Church, and the
satisfaction of all men Christianly disposed. Whereas had I desired only to rid
my hands of these Captious Jesuits (for certainly this Question was Captiously
asked:) it had been sufficient to have restored the Question, thus, How do
you know the Testimony of the Church (by which, you say, you know Scripture to
be the Word of God) to be Divine and Infallible? If they prove it by Scripture
A. C. p. 53. Et vid.. 16. N. 28.
(as all of them do, and as A. C. does) how do they know that Scripture to be
Scripture? It is but a Circular Assurance of theirs, by which they found the
Churches Infallibility upon the Testimony of the Scripture; And the Scriptures
Infallibility upon the Testimony of the Church: That is upon the Matter, the
Churches Infallibility upon the Churches Infallibility. But I labor for
edification, not for destruction. And now, by what I have here said, I will
weigh my Answer, and his Exception taken against it.


F. The Bishop said, That the Books of Scripture are Principles to be Supposed,
and needed not to be Proved.


B. Why, but did I say, That this Principle (The Books of Scripture are the
Word of God) is to be supposed, as needing no Proof at al to a Natural man? Or
to a man newly entering upon the Faith? yea or perhaps to a Doubter, or Weakling
in the Faith? Can you think me so weak? It seems you do. But sure I know,
there is a great deal of difference between Ethnicks that deny, and deride
the Scripture, and men that are Born in the Church. The first have a farther
way about to this Principle; The other in their very Christian Education suck
it in, and are taught so soon as they are apt to learn it, That the Books,
commonly called The Bible, or Scripture, are the Word of God. And I dealt with
you Dixi sicut ^i congru^, ad qu^ ^bam, etc. S Aug. l. 1. Retract. c. 13.
as with a Christian, though in Error, while you call Catholic. The Words
before spoken by me were, That the Scripture only, not any unwritten
Tradition, was the Foundation of Faith. The Question between us, and you, is,
Whether the Scripture do contain all necessary things of Faith? Now in this
Question, as in all Nature, and Art, the Subject, the Scripture is and must be
Nor is it such a strange thing to hear that Scripture is such (...) suppose^d
Principle among Chri^ians. Quod a Scriptura evidenter dedu^itur, est evidenter
verum, suppositis Scripturis. Bellarm. L. 4. de Eccl. Milit. c. 3.. 3.
supposed. The Quaere between the Romane-Catholikes and the Church of England,
being only of the Praedicate, the thing uttered of it, Namely, whether it
contain all Fundamentals of Faith, all Necessaries for Salvation within it?
Now since the Question proposed in very form of Art, proves not, but De
Subjecto enim quaeritur semper; non Subjecti^n ipsum.
supposes the Subject, I think I gave a satisfying Answer, That to you, and
me, and in this Question, Scripture was a Supposed Principle, and needed no
Proof. And I must tell you, that in this Question of the Scriptures perfect
Continent, it is against all Art, yea and Equity too, in Reasoning to call for
a Proof of That here, which must go unavoydably supposed in this Question. And
if any man will be so familiar with Impiety, to Question it, it must be tried
in a preceding Question, and Dispute by it self. Yet here not you only, but L.
4. de verb. Dei. c. 4.. Quar^o necesse est. (...) the lesuite here apud A. C.
p. 49.
Bellarmine, and others run quite out of the way to snatch at Advantage.


F. Against this I read what I had formerly written in my Reply against M. John
White: Wherein I plainly showed, that this Answer was not good, and that no
other Answer could be made, but by admitting some Word of God unwritten, to
assure us of this Point.


B. Indeed here you read out of a Book (which Discourse upon this Argument.
But surely I so untied the knot of the Argument, that I set you to your Book
again. For your self confess, that against this you read what you had
formerly written. Well! what ere you read there, certain it is you do a great
deal of wrong to M. Hooker L. 3. 8.
, and my self, that because we call it a Supposed or Presumed Principle among
Christians, you should fall by and by into such a Whereas Bellarm. says
expressly, that in the Controversies between you and us: Non agitur de
Metaphysicis subtilitatibus, quae sinc periculo ignorari, and interdum cum
laud oppugnari possunt, etc. Bellarm. Praefat. Operibus praefix.. 3.
Metaphysicall Discourse to prove, That that which is a His omnibus
Questionibut praemittenda est Controversia de Verbo Dei. Neque enim disputari
potest, nisi prius in aliquo Communi Principio cum Adversariis conveniamus.
Convenit autem inter nos and omues omnino Haereticos, Verbum Dei esse Regulam
fidei, ex qua de Dogmatibus judicandum sit, esse Commune Principium ab omnibus
concessum, unde Argumenta ducantur, etc. Bellarm. Praefat. Operib. prafix..
ult. And if it be Commune Principium ab omnibus concessum, then I hope it must
be taken as a thing supposed, or as a Praecognitum in this Dispute between us.
Praecognitum, fore-knowne in Science, must be of such light, that it must be
known of, and by it self alone; and that the Scripture cannot be so known to
be the Word of God.

I will not now enter again into that Discourse, Beam, which is very glorious
(especially in some parts of Scripture) gives light to prove it self. You see
neither Hooker, nor I, nor the Church of England (for ought I know) leave the
Scripture alone to manifest it self, by the light, which it has in it self
No; but when the present Church has prepared, and led the way, like a
preparing Morning-Light to Sunshine; then indeed we settle for our Direction,
but not upon the first opening of the morning Light, but upon the Sun it self.
Nor will I make needless enquiry, how far, and in what manner a
Praecognitum, or Supposed Principle in any Science, may be proved in a Higher,
to which that is subordinate; or accepted in a Prime. Nor how it may in
Divinity, where Prae, as well as Post-cognita, things fore, as well as
after-knowne, are matters, and under the manner of Faith, and not of Science
strictly. Nor whether a Praecognitum, a presupposed Principle in Faith, which
rests upon Divine Authority, must needs have as much, and equal Light to
Natural Reason, as Prime Principles have in Nature, while they rest upon
Reason. Nor whether it may justly be denied to have sufficient Light, because
not equal. Your own School Colligitur aperta ex Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 5. ad 1.
Et Articulorum Fidei veritas non potest nobis esse evidens absolute. Bellar. L.
4. de Eccles. Mil. c. 3.. 3.
grants, That in us, which are the Subjects both of Faith and Knowledge, and in
regard of the Evidence given in unto us, there is less Light, less Evidence
in the Principles of Faith, then in the Principles of Knowledge, upon which
there can be no doubt. But I think the School will never grant, That the
Principles of Faith (even this in Question) have not sufficient Evidence. And
you ought not to do, as you did, without any Distinction, or any Limitation,
deny a Praecognitum, or Prime Principle in the Faith; because it answers not in
all things to the Prime Principles in Science, in their Light, and Evidence; a
thing in it self directly against Reason.

Well, though I do none of this, yet first I must A. C. here steps in again,
and tells me, That though a Praecognitum in Faith need not be so clearly
known, as a Praecognitum in Science, yet there must be this proportion
between them, that, whether it be in Science, or in Faith, the Praecognitum,
or thing supposed as known, must be prius cognitum, first known, and not need
another thing pertaining to that Faith, or Knowledge, to be known before it.
But the Scripture (says he) needs Tradition to go before it, and introduce
the knowledge of it. Therefore the Scripture is not to be supposed, as a
Praecognitum, and a thing fore-knowne. Tru'y I am sorry to see in a man very
learned such wilful mistakes. For A. C. cannot but perceive, by that which I
have clearly laid down. 17. and 18. Nu. 2.
before, That I intended not to speak precisely of a Praecognitum in this
Argument. But when I said, Scriptures were Principles to be supposed; I did
not, I could not intend, They were prius cognitae, known before Tradition;
since I confess every where, That Tradition introduces the knowledge of them.
But my meaning is plain; That the Scriptures are and must be Principles
supposed, before you can dispute this Question; And my immediate Words in the
Conference, upon which the Jesuit asked, How I knew Scripture to be Scripture?
were (as the ^esuite himself relates it apud A. C. p. 48.) That the Scripture
only, not any unwritten Tradition, was the Foundation of our Faith. Now the
Scripture cannot be the only Foundation of Faith, if it contain not all
things necessary to Salvation; Which the Church of Rome denying against all
Antiquity, makes it now become a Question. And in regard of this, m^ A^ver was,
That the Scriptures are and must be Principles supposed, and praecognitae,
before the handling of this Question.
Whether the Scriptures contain in them all things necessary to Salvation.
Before which Question it must necessarily be supposed and granted on both
sides, That the Scriptures are the Word of God. For if they be not, it is
instantly out of all Question, that They cannot include all Necessaries to
Salvation. So it is a Praecognitum, not to Tradition (as A C. would cunningly
put upon the Cause) but to the whole Question of the Scriptures sufficiency.
And yet if he could tie me to a Praecognitum in this very Question, and
proveable in a Superior Science; I think I shall go very near to prove it in
the next Paragraph and entreat A. C. to confess it too.

And now having told A. C. this, I must secondly Truth and himself in this
Case. And it is the common fault of them all. For when the Protestants answer
to this Argument (which, as I have showed, can properly have no place in the
Question between us about Tradition) Hook, L. 3;. 8.
they which grant this as a Praecognitum, a thing foreknown (as also I do) were
neither ignorant, nor forgetful, That things presupposed, as already known in
a Science, are of two sorts. For either they are plain and fully manifest in
their own Light: or they are proved, and granted already, some former
knowledge having made them Evident. This Principle then, The Scriptures are the
Oracles of God, we cannot say is clear, and fully manifest to all men simply,
and in self-Light, for the Reasons before given. Yet we say, after Tradition
has been our Introduction, the Soul that has but ordinary Grace added to
Reason, may discern Light sufficient to resolve our Faith, that the Sun is
there. This Principle then being not absolutely, and simply evident in it
self, is presumed to be taught us otherwise. And if otherwise, then it must be
taught in and by some superior Science, to which Theology is subordinate. Now
men may be apt to think out of Reverence, That Divinity can have no Science
above it. But your own School teaches me that it has. Hoc modo sacra
Doctrina est Scientia; quia ^dit ex Principiis notis Lumine superioris
Scientia, quae scilicet est Scientia Dei and Beatorum. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. a. 2.
And what says A. C. now to this of Aquinas? Is it not clear in him, that this
Principle, The Scriptures are the Word of God, of Divine and most Infallible
Credit, is a Praecognitum in the knowledge of Divinity, and proveable in a
superior Science, namely, the Knowledge of God, and the Blessed in Heaven?
Yes; so clear, that (as I told you he would) A. C. confesses it, p. 51. But he
adds: That because no man ordinarily sees this Proof, therefore we must go
either to Christ, who saw it clearly: Or to the Apostles, to whom it was
clearly revealed; or to them, wholly Succession received it from the Prime
Secrs. So now because Christ is ascended, and the Apostles gone into the number
of the Blessed, and made in a higher Degree partakers of their knowledge;
therefore we must now only go unto then Successors, and borrow light from
the Tradition of the present Church. For that we must do; And it is so far
well. But that we must rely upon this Tradition, as Divine, and Infallible,
and able to breed in us Divine, and Insallible Faith, as A. C. adds, p. 51, 52.
is a Proposition, which in the times of the Primitive Church would have been
accounted very dangerous, as indeed it is. For I would fame know, why leaning
too much upon Tradition may not mislead Christians, as well as it di^ the
Jews. But they, says S. Hilarie, Traditionis savore Legis praecepta
transgressi sunt: Can. 14. in S. Mat. Yet to this height are They of Rome now
grown, That the Traditions of the present Church are infallible: And by
out-f^cing the Truth, lead many after them. And as it is Jer. 5. 31. The
Prophets prophecy untruths, an^ the Priests receive gifts, and my people
delight therein, what will become of this in the end?
The sacred Doctrine of Divinity in this sort is a Science, because it proceeds
out of Principles that are known by the light of a Superior Knowledge, which
is the Knowledge of God, and the Blessed in Heaven. In this Superior Science,
this Principle, The Scriptures are the Oracles of God, is more then evident in
full light. This Superior Science delivered this Principle in full revealed
Light to the Prophets, and Apostles. Non creditur Deus esse Author bujus
Scientiae, quia Homines hoc testati sunt in quantum Homines nudo Testimonio
Humano; sed in quantum circa eos effulsit virtus Divina. ^sa Deus iis, and sibi
ipsi in eis Testimonium p^buit. Hen. a Gand. Sum. P. 1. A. 9. q. 3.
This Infallible Light of this Principle made their Authority derivatively
Divine. By the same Divine Authori^y they wrote, and delivered the Scripture to
the Church. Therefore from them immediately the Church received the Scripture,
and that incorrupt, though not in the same clearenesse of Lig^t, which they
had. And yet since no sufficient Reason has, or can be given, that in any
Substantial thing it has been Corru^pi non possunt, quia in manibus sunt
omnium Christianorum; Et quisquis hoc primitus ausus esset, multorum Codicum
vetustiorum collatione confutaretur. Maxim, quia non un^ lingua, sea multis
continetur Scriptura. Nonnullae autem Codicum mendositates, vel de
Antiquioribus, vel de Lingua praecedente emendantur. S. Aug. L. 32. cont.
Faustum. c. 16.
Corrupted, it remains firm at this day, and that proved in the most Supreme
Science; and therefore now to be supposed (at least by all Christians) That
the Scripture is the Word of God. So; my Answer is good, even in strictness,
That this Principle is to be supposed in this Dispute.

Besides, the Jews never had, nor can have any That the Old Testament is the
Word of God, then we have of the New. For theirs was delivered by Moses, and
the Prophets; and ours was delivered by the Apostles, which were Prophets too.
The Jews did believe their Scripture by a Divine Authority: For so the Jews
argue themselves: S. John 9. 29.
S. Ioh. 9. We know that God spoke with Moses. Maldonat. in S. Ioh. 9. It aque
non magis errare posse eum sequentes, quam si Deum ipsum sequerentur.
And that therefore they could no more err in following Moses, then they could
in following God himself. And our Savior seems to infer as much, S. Ioh.
5. 47.
S. Ioh. 5. where he expostulates with the Jews thus: If you believe not Moses
his Writings, how should you believe Me? Now how did the Jews know that God
spoke to Moses? How? why apparently, the same way that is before set down.
First by Tradition. So S. Hom. 57. i^ S. Ioh. 9. (...)
Chrysostom: We know why? By whose witness do you know? By the Testimony of
our Ancestors. But he speaks not of their immediate Ancestors, but their
Prime, which were Prophets, and whose Testimony was Divine; into which (namely
their Writings) the Jews did Resolve their Faith. And even that Scripture of
the Old Testament was a 2. S. Pet. 1. 19.
Light, and a shining Light too: And therefore could not but be sufficient,
when Tradition had gone before. And yet though the Jews entered this way to
their Belief of the Scripture, they do not say, S. Chrysostom. ubi supra. (...)
Audivimus, We have heard that God sp^ke to Moses, but We know it. So they
Resolved their Faith higher, and into a more inward Principle, then an Ear to
their immediate Ancestors, and their Tradition. And I would willingly learn of
you, if you can show it me, where ever any one Jew disputing with another about
their Law, did put the other to prove, that the Old Testament was the Word of
God. But they still supposed it. And when others put them to their Proof, this
way they went. And yet you say:


F. That no other Answer could be made, but by admitting some Word of God
unwritten, to assure us of this Point.


B. I think, I have showed, that my Answer is good, and that no other Answer
need be made. If there were need, I make no Question, but another Answer might
be made to assure us of this Point, though we did not admit of any Word of God
unwritten. I say, to assure us; and you express no more. If you had said, to
assure us by Divine Faith, your Argument had been the stronger. But if you
speak of Assurance only in the general, I must then tell you (and it is the
great advantage which the Church of Christ has against Infidels) a man may be
assured, nay infallibly assured by Ecclesiastical, and Humane Proof. Men that
never saw Rome, may be sure, and infallibly believe, That such a City there
is, by Historical, and acquired Faith. And if Consent of Humane Story can
assure me this, why should not Consent of Church-storie assure me the other,
That Christ, and his Apostles delivered this Body of Scripture as the Oracles
of God? For Jews, Enemies to Christ, they bear witness to the Old Testament;
and Christians through almost all Nations Tant a hominum, and temporum
consensione firmatum. S. Aug. L. de Mor. Eccles. Cath. c. 29. Is Libri quoquo
modo se habent, sancti tamen Divinarum Rerum pleni prope totius generis humani
Confessione diffamantur, etc. S. Aug. de util. cred. c. 7. and L. 13. cont.
Faust. c. 15.
give in evidence to both Old and New. And no Pagan, or other Enemies of
Christianity, can give such a Worthy and Consenting Testimony for any
Authority upon which they rely, or almost for any Principle which they have,
as the Scripture has gained to it self. And as is the Testimony which it
receives, above all Super omnes omnium Genti^ Literas. S. Aug. 11. de Civit.
Dei c. 1.
Writings of all Nations; so here is assurance in a great measure, without any
Divine Authority, in a Word written, or Unwritten. A great assurance, and it is
Infallible too; Only then we must distinguish Infallibility. For first a thing
may be presented as an infallible Object of Belief, when it is true and
remains so. For Truth qua talis, as it is Truth, can not deceive. Secondly, a
thing is said to be Infallible, when it is not only true, and remains so,
actually, but when it is of such invariable constancy, and upon such ground, as
that no Degree of falsehood at any time, in any respect can fall upon it.
Certain it is, that by Humane Authority, Consent, and Proof a man may be
assured infallibly, that the Scripture is the Word of God, by an acquired Habit
of Faith, cui non su'est falsum, under which nor Error, nor falsehood is: But he
cannot be assured infallibly, by Divine Faith, Incertum esso non potest hos
esse Libros Canonicos. Wall. Doct. fid. l. 2. a. 2. c. 20.
cui subesse non potest falsum, into which no falsehood can come, but by a
Divine Testimony: This Testimony is absolute in Scripture it self, delivered
by the Apostles for the Word of God, and so sealed to our Souls by the
operation of the Holy Ghost. That which makes way for this as an Canus. Loc. l.
2 c. 8. facit Ecclesiam Causam sine quanon.
Introduction and outward motive, is the Tradition of the present Church; but
that neither simply Divine, nor sufficient alone, into which we may resolve our
Faith, but only as is. 16.
before expressed.

And now to come close to the Particular. The miserable Rent in the Church of
Christ (which I think no true Christian can look upon, but with a bleeding
heart) that you and We were all of One Belief: That belief was tainted, in
tract and corruption of times, very deeply. A Division was made; yet so, that
both Parts held the Creed, and other Common Principles of Belief. Of these,
this was one of the greatest, Inter omnes pene constat, aut certe id quod satis
est, inter me and illos, cum quibus nunc agitur, convenit hoc etc. Sic in alia
Causa cont. Manichaos, S. Aug. L. de Mor. Eccl. Cath. c. 4.
That the Scripture is the Word of God; For our belief of all things
contained in it, depends upon it. Since this Division, there has been nothing
done by us to discredit this Principle. Nay, We have given it all honor, and
ascribed unto it more sufficiency, even to the containing of all things
necessary to salvation, with Vin. Lir. cont. Hares. c. 2.
Satis super que, enough and more then enough; which your selves have not done,
do not. And for begetting and settling a Belief of this Principle, we go the
same way with you, and a better besides. The same way with you: Because we
allow the Tradition of the present Church to be the first induceing Motive to
embrace this Principle; only we cannot go so far in this way as you, to
make the present Tradition always an Infallible Word of God unwritten; For
this is to go so far in, till you be out of the way. For Tradition is but a
Lane in the Church; it has an end, not only to receive us in, but another
after, to let us out, into more open, and richer ground. And We go a better way
then you: Because after we are moved, and prepared, and induced by Tradition,
we resolve our Faith into that Written Word, and God delivering it; in which we
find materially, though not in Terms, the very Tradition, that led us
thither. And so we are sure by Divine Authority that we are in the way, because
at the end we find the way proved. And do what can be done, you can never
settle the Faith of man about this great Principle, till you rise to greater
assurance, then the Present Church alone can give. And therefore once again to
that known place of S. Augustine Contr. Epist. Fund. c. 5.
The words of the Father are, Nisi commoveret, Unless the Authority of the
Church moved me: but not alone, but with other Motives; e^se it were not
commovere, to move together. And the other Motives are Resolvers, though this
be Leader. Now since we go the same way with you, so far as you go right;
and a better way then you, where you go wrong; we need not admit any other Word
of God, then We doc. And this ought to remain, as a Presupposed Principle
among all Christians, and not so much as come into this Question, about the
sufficiency of Scripture between you, and us. But you say that


F. From this the Lady called us, and desiring to hear, Whether the Bishop
would grant the Roman Church to be the Right Church? The B. granted, That it
was.


B One occasion which moved Tertullian to de Praescript. adversus Haereticos,
was, Pamel in Summar. Lib -- Uiaens Disputationibus ^ihil ant parum profici.
saw little or no Profit come by Disputations. Sure the Ground was the same
then, and now. It was not to deny, that Disputation is an Opening of the
Understanding, a sifting out of Truth; it was not to affirm, that any such
Disquisition is in, and of it self unprofitable. If it had, S. Stephen Acts 6
9.
would not have disputed with the Cyrenians, nor S. Paul with the Acts. 9. 29.
Grecians first, and then with the Jews, Acts 19. 17.
and all Comers. No sure: it was some Abuse in the Disputants, that frustrated
the good of the Disputation. And one Abuse in the Disputants, is a Resolution
to hold their own, though it ^e by unworthy means, and disparagement
Debilitaetur generosa indoles conjecta in argutias. Sen. Aep. 48.
of truth. And so I find it here. For as it is true, that this Question was
asked; so it is altogether false, that it was asked in this Here A. C. has
nothing to say, but that the Jesuit did not affirm, That the Lady ask^d this
Question in this or any other precise form. No? why, the words preceding are
the Jesuits own. Therefore, if these were not the Ladies words, he wrongs her,
not I him.
form, or so Answ^red. There is a great deal of Difference (especially as
Romanists handle the Question of the Church) between The Church, and A Church;
and there is some, betvveene a True Church and a Right Church: which is the
word you use, but no man else that I know; I am sure not I.

For The Church may import in our Language, The only true Church; and perhaps
(as some of you seem to make it) the Root and the Ground of the Catholic. And
this I never did grant of the Roman Church, nor ever mean to do. But A
Church can imply no more, then that it is a member of the Whole. And this I
never did, nor ever will deny, if it fall not absolutely away from Christ. That
it is a True Church I granted also; but not a Right (as you impose upon me.)
For Ens and Verum, Being and True, are convertible one with another; and every
thing that has a Being, is truly that Being, which it is, in truth of
Substance. But this word Right is not so used, but is referd more properly to
perfection in Conditions: And in this sense, every thing that has a true, and
real Being, is not by and by Right in the Con^itions of it. A man that is most
dishonest, and unworthy the name, a very Thief (if you will) is a True man, in
the verity of his Essence, as he is a Creature endued with Reason; for this
none can steal from him, nor he from himself, but Death: But he is not
therefore a Right, or an upright man. And a Church that is exceeding corrupt,
both in Manners and Doctrine, and so a dishonor to the Name, is yet a True
Church in the verity of Essence, as a Church is a Company of men, which
profess the Faith of Christ, and are Baptized into His Name: But yet it is not
therefore a Right Church, either in Doctrine, or Manners. It may be you meant
cunningly to slip in this word Right, that I might at unwares grant it
Orthodox. But I was not so to be caught; For I know well, that Orthodox
Christians are keepers of integrity, and followers of right things (so
Integritatis custodes, and recta sectantes. De vera Relig. c. 5.
S Augustine) of which, the Church of Rome at this day is neither. In this
sense then no Right, that is, no Orthodox Church at Rome.

And yet no News it is, that I granted the Roman Church to be a True Church.
For so much very learned Protestants Hooker l. 3.. 1. Iunius l. de Ec. c. 17.
Falluntur qui Ecclesiam negant, qui^ Papatus in ea est. Reynold. These. 5. Negat
tantum esse Catholicam, vel sanu^ ^jus membrum. Nay the very Separatists grant
it. Fr. Johnson in his Treatise called, A Christian Plea, Printed 1617. p. 123.
etc.
have acknowledged before me; and the Truth cannot deny it. For that Church,
which receives the Scripture as a Rule of Faith, though but as a partial and
imperfect Rule; and both the Sacraments as Isntrumental Causes, and Seals of
Grace, though they add more, and misuse these; yet cannot but be a True Church
in essence. How it is in Manners and Doctrine, I would you would look to it
with a single eye, Si tamen bono ingenio Pictas and Pax quaeda mentis accedat,
sine qua de sanctis rebus nihil prorsus intelligi potest. S. Aug. de V^. Cred.
c. 18.
For if Piety and a Peaceable mind be not joined to a good understanding,
nothing can be known in these great things.

Here AC. tells us, That the Jesuit does not say, that the Lady asked this
Question in this, or any other precise form A. C. p. 53.
of words; But says, the Jesuit is sure, her desire was to know of me,
whether I would grant the Roman Church to be the right Church? And how was the
Jesuit sure the Lady desired to hear this from me? Why, A. C. tells us that
too. For he adds, That the Jesuit had particularly spoken with her before, A.
C. p. 54.
and wished her to insist upon that Point. Where you may see, and it is fit the
Clergy of England should consider with what cunning Adversaries they have to
deal, who can find a way to And after A. C. says again p. 54. that the Lady
did not ask the Question, as if she meant to be satisfied with hearing what I
said. So belike they take Ca^tion before hand for that too, That what ever we
say (unless we grant what they would have) their Pro^elytes shall not be
satisfied wi^hit.
prepare their Disciples, and instruct them before hand upon what Points to
insist, that so they may with more ease slide that into their hearts and
consciences, which should never come there. And this once known, I hope they
will the better provide against it. But A. C. goes on, and tells us, That
certainly A. C. p. 54.
by my Answer, the Ladies desire must needs be to bear from me, not whether
the Church of Rome were a right Church etc. but whether I would grant that
there is but one holy Catholic Church, and whether the Roman Church (that is,
not only that which is in the City, or Diocese of Rome, but all that agreed
with it) be not it. About A Church, and The Church, I have said enough. 20. N.
1.
before, and shall not repeat. Nor is there any need I should. For A. C. would
have it The Church, The One, Holy, Catholic Church. But this cannot be
granted, take the Roman Church, in what sense they please, in City, or
Diocese, or all that agree with it. Yet howsoever before I leave this, I must
acquaint the Reader with a perfect Iesuitisme. In all the Primitive Times of
the Church, a Man, or a Family, or a National Church were accounted Right, and
Orthodox, as they agreed with the Catholic Church; But the Catholic was never
then measured, or judged by Man, Family, or Nation. But now in the Jesuits new
schole, The One, Holy, And though Stapleton to magnify the Church of Rome is
p^eased to say: Apud veteres pro codem habit a fuit Ecclesia Romana and
Ecclesia Catholica: yet he is ^o modest as to give this Reason of it: Quia ejus
Communio erat evident er and certissime cum tota Catholica. Relect. Con. 1. q.
5. A. 3. (Lo, The Com^union of the Roman was then with the Catholic Church,
not of the Catholic with i^.) An^ S. Cyprian employed his Legates Caldonius
and Fortunatus, not to bring the Catholic Church o the Communion of Rome, bu^
Rome to the Catholic Church: Elaborar^nt, ut ad Cath licae Ecclesiae unitat^m
(...) Corporis membra (...), etc Now the Mem^ers of this R^ and t^rne Body were
they of Rome then in an open Schism between Corn^ius and Novatian. S. Cypr.
L. 2. Epist. 10.
Catholic Church must be measured by that which is in the City or Diocese of
Rome, or of them which agreed with it, and not Rome by the Catholic. For so A.
C. says expressly, The La^y would know of me, not whether that were the
Catholic Church to which Rome agreed; but whether that were not the Holy
Catholic Church, which agreed with Rome. So upon the matter, belike the
Christian Faith was committed to the Custody of the Roman, not of the
Catholic Church; And a man cannot agree with the Catholic Church of Christ
(in this new Doctrine of A. C.) unless^ he agree with the Church of Rome; but
if he agree with that, all is safe, and he is as Orthodox, as he need be.

But A. C. is yet troubled about the form of the Ladies Question. And he will
not have it, That She desired to know, whether I would grant the Roman Church
to be the Right Church? Though these be her words, according to the Jesuits
own setting down, but he thinks the Question was, Whether the Church of Rome
was not the Right Church? not Be not, but was not. Was not? That is, was not
once or in time past the Right A. C. p. 54.
Church before Luther and others made a breach from it? Why, truly A. C. needed
not have troubled himself half so much about this. For let him take his
Choice. It shall be all one to me, whether the Question were asked by Be, or by
Was? For the Church of Rome neither is, nor was the Right Church, as the Lady
desired to hear. A Particular Church, it is, and was, and in some times right,
and in some times wrong, and then in some things right, and in some things
wrong: But The Right Church, or The Holy Catholic Church it never was, nor
ever can be. And therefore was not such before Luther, and Others either left
it, or were thrust from it. A Particular Church it was; But then A. C. is not
distinct enough here neither. For the Church of Rome both was and was not a
Right, or Orthodox Church before Luther made a Breach from it. For the word
Ante, Before, may look upon Rome, and that Church a great way off, or long
before; and then in the Prime times of it, it was a most Right and Orthodox
Church. But it may look also nearer home, and upon the immediate times before
Luther, or some Ages before that; And then in those times C^ infiniti Abusus,
Schismata quoque and Haereses per totum nunc Christianum Orbem invalescant,
Ecclesiam Dei legitima indigere Reformatione nemini non apertum erit. Pet. de
Aliaco Card. Cameracensis L. de Refor. Ecclesiae. And if Schisme^ and Heresies
did then invade the whole Christian world, let A. C. consider how Rome escaped
free. And I think Cameracensis was in this Prophetical. For sixty years and
more before Luther was borne, and so before the great troubles which have since
fallen upon all Christendom, he used these words in the Book which himself
delivered up in the Council of Constance: Nisi celeriter fiat Reformatio,
a^deo dicere quod licet magna sint, quae videmus, tamen in brevi
incomparabiliter majora videbimus. Et post ista tonitrua tam horrenda, majora
alia audien^s etc. Came. l. de Refor. Eccle. And it will hardly sink into any
man's judgment, that so great a man, as Pet. de Aliaco was in that Church,
should speak thus, if he did not see some errors in the Doctrine of that
Church, as well as in Manners. Nay Cassander though he lived and dyed in the
Communion of the Church of Rome, yet found fault with some of her Doctrines.
Consulta. Artic. 21. and. 22. And Pope Julius the third Professed at Bononia,
in Sacramentorum Ecclesiae ministerium innumerabiles Abusus irrepsiss^.
Espen^us in Tit. 1. and yet he was one of the Bishops nay the chief Legate in
the Council of Trent.
Rome was a Corrupt and a tainted Church, far from being Right. And yet both
these times Before Luther made his Breach. So here A. C. should have been more
distinct. For the word Before includes the whole time before Luther, in part of
which time that Church of Rome was Right, and in other part whereof it was
wrong. But A. C. adds yet, That I suspected the Lady would infer, if once
that Church were Right, what hindered it now to be? Since that did not depart A.
C. p. 54.
from the Protestant Church, but the Protestant Church from it. Truly, I
neither suspected the Inference would be made, nor fear it, when it is made.
For it is no News that any Particular Church, Roman, as well as another, may
once have been Right, and afterward wrong and in far worse case. And so it
was in Rome after the enemy had sowed tares among the wheat. S. Mat. 13. 25.
S Mat. 13 But whether these Tares were sown, while their Bishops slept; or
whether For A. C. knows well, what strange Doctrines are charged upon some
Popes. And all Bellarmines labor, though great and full of art, is not able to
wash them clean. Bellarm. L. 4. d^. Romans Pont. c. 8. etc. Et Papas quosdam
graves errores seminasse in Ecclesia Christi lu^arius est. Et prob^ur a laco.
Almain. Opusc. de Autho. Ecclesiae. c. 10. And Cassander speaks it out more
pla^ly V^inam Illi (He speaks of the Bi^hops and Rectors in the Roman Church)
a qu^bus (...) (...) (...) ^sset, non Ipsi Superst^num Auctores ^sent: ^el
(...) (...) in Animis hom^um simpli^um aliquando (...) (...) (...). (...).
Co^sulta. Art. 21. (...) finem.
They themselves did not help to sovv them, is too large a Disquisition for
this Place. So though it were once Right; yet the Tares which grow thick in it,
are the Cause why it is not so now. And then, though that Church did not depart
from the Protestants Church; yet if it gave great and just Cause for the
Protestant Church to depart from the Errors of it, while it in some
Particulars departed from the Truth of Christ, it comes all to one for this
Particular, That the Roman Church which was once right, is now become wrong,
by embracing Superstition, and Error.


F. Farther he confessed, That Protestants had made a Rent and Division from it.


B. I confess I could here be heartily Grave omnino crimen, sed defensionem
longinquam non requirit, satis est enim negare; sic^t pro Ecclesia olim. S.
Aug. de Util. Cred. c. 5.
angry, but Religion to leave all gall out of my Ink; For I never granted, that
the Roman Church either is, or was the right Church. It Is too true indeed,
that there is a miserable Rent in the Church, and I make no Question but the
best men do most bemoane it Hanc quae respectu hominum Ecclesia dicitur,
observare, (...) Communionem colere debemus. Calv. Inst. 4. c. 1
; nor is he a Christian, that would not have Unity, might he have it with
Truth. But I never said, nor thought. 7.
that the Protestants made this Rent. The Cause of the Schism is yours; for
you thrust us from you; because we called for Truth, and Redress of Abuses.
For a Recte scias nos secisse recedendo a vobis, etc. Lucif. L. de Non
conveniendo cum Haereticis. He speaks of the Arrians, and I shall not compare
you with them, nor give any Offense that way. I shall only draw the general
argument from it, thus: If the Orthodoxe did well in departing from the
Arrians, then the Schism was to be imputed to the Arrians; although the
Orthodoxe did depart from them. Otherwise if the Orthodoxe had been guilty of
the Schism, he could not have said, Recte scias nos fecisse recedendo. For it
cannot be that a man should do well in making a Schism. There may be therefore
a necessary separation, which yet incurres not the blame of Schism; And that
is, when Doctrines are taught contrary to the Catholic Faith.
Schism must needs be theirs, whose the Cause of it is. The Woe runs full out
of the mouth of S. Mat. 18. 7.
Christ, ever against him, that gives the Offense; not against him that takes
it, ever. But you have, by this carriage, given me just cause, never to treat
with you, or your like, but before a Judge, or a Jury.

But here A. C. tells me, I had no cause to be angry, either with the Jesuit,
or my self. Not with the Jesuit, A. C. p. 55, 56.
for he writ down my words in fresh memory, and upon special notice taken of
the Passage, and that I did say either I^dem, or aequipollentibus verbis,
either in these, or equivalent words, That the Protestants did make the R^nt,
or Division from the Roman Church. What, did the Jesuit set down my words in
fresh memory, and upon special notice taken, and were they so few as these,
The Protestants did make the Schism; and yet was his memory so short, that he
cannot tell, whether I uttered this iisdem, or aequipollentibus verbis? Well, I
would A. C. and his Fellows would leave this Art of theirs, and in Conferences
(which A. C. p. 57.
they are so ready to call for) impose no more upon other men, then they utter.
And you may observe too, that after all this full Assertion, that I spoke this
iisdem, or aequipollentibus verbis, A. C. concludes thus; The Jesuit took
special notice in fresh memory, and is sure he related, at A. C. p. 55.
least in sense, just as it was utt^red. What Is this, At least in sense j^st as
it was uttered? Do not these two Enterfeire, and show the Jesuit to be upon
his shuffling pace? For if it were just as it was uttered, then it was in the
very form of words too, not in sense only. And if it were but At least in
sense, then when A. C. has made the most of it, it was not just as 'twas
uttered. Besides, at least in sense, does not tell us in whose sense it was.
For if A. C. mean the Iesuite's sense of it, he may make what sense he pleases
of his own words; but he must impose no sense of his upon my words. But as he
must leave my words to my self, so when my words are uttered, or written, he
must leave their sense either to me, or to that genuine Construction, which an
Ingenuous Reader can make of them. And what my words of Grant were, I have
before expressed, and their sense too.

Not with my self: That Is the next. For A. C. it is truth, and that the world
knows it, that the A. C. p. 56.
Protestants did depart from the Church of Rome, and got the name of
Protestants, by protesting against it. No, A. C. by your leave, this is not
truth neither; and therefore I had reason to be angry with my self, had I
granted it. For, first, the Protestants did not depart: For departure is
voluntary, so was not theirs. I say, not theirs, taking their whole Body and
Cause together. For that some among them were peevish, and some ignorantly
zealous, is neither to be doubted, nor is there Danger in confessing it. Your
Body is not so perfect (I wot well) but that many amongst you are as pettish,
and as ignorantly zealous, as any of Ours. You must not suffer for these; nor
We for those; nor should the Church of Christ for either. Next, the Protestants
did not get that Name by Protesting against the Church of Rome, but by
Protesting (and that when nothing else would serve) Conventus suit Ordinum
Imperii Spirae. Ibi Decretum factum est, ut Edictum Wormatiense observaretur
contra Novatores (sic appellare placuit) and ut omnia in integrum restituantur
(and sic nulla omnino Reformatio.) Contra hoc Edictum solennis fuit
Protestatio. Aprilis 16. An. Chapter 1529. Et hinc ortum pervulgatum illud
Protestantium nomen. Se. Calvis. Chron. ad. An. 1529. Th^s Protestation
therefore was not simply against the Roman Church, but against the Edict,
which was for the restoring of all things to their former estate, without any
R^formation.
against her Errors, and Superstitions. Do you but remove them from the Church
of Rome, and our Protestation is ended, and the Separation too. Nor is
Protestation it self such an unheard of thing in the very heart of Religion.
For the Sacraments both of the Old and New Testament are called by your own
School, Visible Signs protesting the Faith. Now if the Sacraments be
Protestantia, Signs Protesting, why may not men also, and without all offense,
be called Protestants, since by receiving the true Sacraments, and by refusing
them which are corrupted, they do but Protest the sincerity of their Faith
against that Doctrinall Corruption, which has invaded the great Sacrament of
the Eucharist, and other Parts of Religion? Especially, since they are men
Quibus homo fidem suam protestaretur. Tho. p. 3. q. 61. A. 3. 4. C.
which must protest their Faith by these visible Signs and Sacraments.

But A. C. goes on, and will needs have it, that Protestants were the Cause of
the Schism. For A. C. p. 56.
(says he) though the Church of Rome did thrust them from her by
Excommunication, yet they had first divided themselves by obstinate holding,
and teaching opinions contrary to the Roman Faith, and Practice of the Church,
which to do, S. Bernard thinks is Pride, and S. Augustine Madness. So then, in
his Opinion; First, Excommunication on their Part was not the Prime Cause of
this Division; but the holding and teaching of contrary Opinions. Why but then
in my Opinion, That holding and teaching was not the Prime Cause neither, but
the Corruptions and Superstitions of Rome, which forced many men to hold, and
teach the contrary. So, the Prime Cause was theirs still. Secondly, A. Cs.
words are very considerable. For he charges the Protestants to be the Authors
of the Schism for obstinate holding and teaching Contrary Opinions. To what I
pray? Why to the I know Bellarm. quotes S. Jerome: Sciro Romanam Fidem, etc.
supra. 3. Nu. 9. But there S. Jerome does not call it Fidem Romanam, as if
Fides Romana and Fides Catholica were convertible; but he speaks of it in the
Concrete. Romana Fides, i. Romanorum Fides, qua laudata suit ab Apostolo. etc.
To. 1. 8. S. Hieron. Apol. 3. cont. Ruffin. That is that Faith which was then
at Rome when S. Paul commended it. But the Apostles commending of it in the
Romans at one time passes no deed of Assurance, that it shall continue worthy
of Commendations among the Romans through all t^mes.
Roman Faith. To the Roman Faith? It was wont to be the Christian Faith, to
which contrary Opinions were so dangerous to the Maintainers: But all is Roman
now with A. C. and the Jesuit. And then to countenance the Business, S.
Bernard and S. Augustine are brought in, whereas neither of them speak of the
Roman, and S. Bernard perhaps neither of the Catholic, nor the Roman, but of
a Particular Church, or Congregation. Or if he speak of the Catholic, of the
Roman certainly he does not. His words are, Quae major superbia, etc. What
greater pride, then that one man should prefer his judgment before the whole
Congregation of all the Christian Churches in the world. So A. C. as out of
Saint Bernard. Quae major superbia, quam ut unus homo toti Congregationi
judicium suum praeferat, tanquam ipse solus Spiritum Dei habeat. S. Bern. Sermon.
3. ae Resurr.
But Saint Bernard not so. For these last words (of all the Christian Churches
in the world) are not in Saint Bernard. And whether Toti Congregationi implie
more in that Place then a Particular Church, is not very manifest. Nay I think
it is plain, that he speaks both of, and to that particular Congregation to
which he was then preaching. And I believe A. C. will not easily find where
tota Congregatio, the whole Congregation is used in S. Bernard, or any other of
the Fathers, for the whole Catholic Church of Christ. And howsoever the
meaning of S. Bernard be, it is one thing for a private man, Iudicium suum
praeferre, to prefer, and so follow his private Judgment, before the Whole
Congregation, which is indeed, Lepra proprii Consilii (as S. Bernard there calls
it) the proud Leprosy of the Private Spirit. And quite another thing for an
Intelligent man, and in some things unsatisfied, modestly to propose his doubts
even to the Catholic Church. And much more may a whole National Church, nay
the whole Body of the Protestants do it. And for S Augustine, the Place
alleged out of him is a known Place. And he speaks indeed of the Whole
Catholic Church. And he Similiter etiam siquid horum tota per Orbem frequentat
Ecclesia: Nam and hinc quin it a faciendum fit disput are, Insolentissimae
Insaniae est. S. Aug. Epist. 118. c. 5.
says (and he says it truly) It Is a part of most insolent madness for any
Man to dispute, whether that be to be done, which is usually done in, and
thorough the whole Catholic Church of Christ. Where first here is not a word of
the Roman Church, but of that, which is tota per Orbem, all over the World,
Catholic, which Rome never yet was. Secondly, A. C. applies this to A. C. p.
56.
the Roman Faith, whereas S. Augustine speaks there expressly of the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, and Quaeris quid per quintam Feriam ultime hebdom
adis Quadragesimae fires debet, An offerendum sit mane? etc. S. Aug. Ibid.
particularly about the Manner of Offering upon Maundy-Thursday, whether it be
in the Morning, or after Supper, or both. Thirdly, it is manifest, by the words
themselves, that S. Augustine speaks of no Matter of Faith there, Roman, nor
Catholic. For Frequentat, and And so Bellarmine most expressly. But then he
adds, Universam Ecclesiam non posse errare, non solum in Credendo, sed nec in
Operando: and praesertim in Ritu and Cultu Divino. L 4. de Verb. Dei. c. 9.. 4
And if this be true, what is it to Rome?
Faciendum are for Things done, and to be done, not for Things believed, or to
be believed. So here is not One Word for the Roman Faith in either of these
Places. And after this, I hope you will the less wonder at A. Cs. Boldness.
Lastly, a right sober man may without the least Touch of Insolency or Madness,
dispute a Business of Religion with the Roman either Church or Prelate, (As
all men know Eusebius. L. 5. Hist. Eccl. c. 26, Et Socrat. L. 5. Hist. c. 22.
Irenaeus did with Victor.) so it be with Modesty, and for the finding out, or
Confirming of Truth, free from Vanity, and purposed Opposition against even a
Particular Church. But in any other way to dispute the Whole Catholic Church,
is just that which S Augustine calls it, Insolent Madness.

But now were it so, that the Church of Rome were Orthedoxe Faith, by the
Jesuite's leave, is not simply to be called the Roman, but the Christian and
the Catholic Faith. And yet A. C. will not understand A. C. p. 56.
this, but Roman and Catholic, whether Church or Faith must be one and the
same with him; and therefore inferres, That there can be no just Cause to make
a Schism or Division from the whole Church. For the whole Church cannot
universally err in Doctrine of Faith. That the whole Church cannot universally
err in the Doctrine of Faith, is most true, and it is granted by diverse
Quaestio est, An Ecclesia totalis toteliter (...), 1. pro omnibus simul
Electis, dum sunt Membra M^tis Ecclesiae, possint errare, vel in tota fi^e, vel
in gravi aliquo fidei puncto? Et respondemus simpliciter, (...) esse
impossible. Keckerm. Syst. Theol. p. 387 Edit. Hannoviae. An. 1602. Calvinus
and caeteri Haeretici concedunt Ecclesiam absolute non posse deficcre; Sed
dicunt intelligi debere de Ecclesia Invi^. Bellarm. L. 3. de Eccles. Milit. c.
13.. 1. But this Exception of Bellarmine's, that the Protestants, whom, out of
his Liberality, he calls Heretics, speak of the In^isible Church, is merely
frivolous. For the Church of the Elect is in the Church of them that are
Called, and the Invisible Church in the Visible. Therefore if the whole Church
of the Elect cannot err in Fundamentals, the whole Visible Church, in which
the same Elect are, cannot err. Now that the Invisible Church of the Elect is
in the Visible, is manifest out of S. Aug. Ipsa est Ecclesia quae intra sagenam
Dominicam cum malis piscibus natat. S. Aug. Epist. 48. Grana sunt inter illam
palcam, quando Area, cum videretur tota, palea putabatur. S. Aug. in Psalm. 121.
And this is proved at large by Hooker. L. 3. Eccles. Pol.. 1. For else the Elect
or Invisible Church is tied to no duty of Christianity. For all such Duties are
required of the Church, as it is Visible, and performed in the Church, as it is
Visible. And Dr. Field speaks as plainly, we hold it impossible, that the
Church should ever by Apostasy and Misbeliefe, wholly depart from God, etc. So
we hold, that it never falls into Heresy. So that Bellarmine is as much to be
blamed for idle and needless busying himself to prove, That the Visible
Church never falls into Heresy, which we most willingly grant. Field. L. 4. de
Eccles. c. 2. Taking the Church for all the Believers now living, and in things
necessary to be known expressly. Ibid. And Bellarmine himself adds; Calvinus
dicit hanc Propositionem [Ecclesia non potest errare] veram esse si
intelligatur cum duplici restrictione. Prima est, si non proponat Dogmata extra
Scripturam, etc. (And indeed Calvin does say so, L. 4 Instit. c. 8.. 13.)
Secunda est, si intelligatur de sola Ecclesia Universali, non autem de
Representativa. Bellar. L. 3. de Eccl. Milit. c. 14.. 2. And I hope it is as
good and a better Restriction in Calvin: To say the Catholic Church cannot
err, if it keep to the Scripture: then for Bellarmine to say: The particular
Church of Rome cannot err, because of the Pope's residing there, or the Pope
cannot err, if he keep his chair, which yet he affirms. L. 4. de Romans Pont.
c. 4.. 2.
Protestants (so you will but understand its not erring, in Absolute
Fundamental Doctrines.) And therefore it is true also, that there can be no
just Cause to make a Schism from the whole Church. But here is the Iesuite's
Cunning. The whole Church, with him, is the Roman, and those parts of
Christendom, which subject themselves to the Roman Bishop. All other parts of
Christendom are in Heresy, and Schism, and what A. C. pleases. Nay soft. For
another Church may separate from Rome, if Rome will separate from Christ. And
so far as it separates from Him and the Faith, so far may another Church
sever from it. And th^s is all that the Learned Protestants do or can say: And
I am sure all that ever the Church of England has either said, or done. And
that the whole Church cannot err in Doctrines absolutely Fundamental, and
Necessary to all men's Sa^vation (besides the Authority of these Protestants,
most of them being of prime rank) seems to me to be clear by the Promise of
Christ, S. Matthew. 16 that the gates of Hell shall not prevail S. Matthew. 16. 18.
against it. Whereas most certain it is, that the Gates of Hell prevail very
far against it, if the Whole Militant Church universally taken, can Err,
from, or in the Foundation, But then this Power of not Erring is not to be
conceived, as if it were in the Church primo and per se, Originally, or by any
power it has of it self. For the Church is constituted of Men, and Humanum
est errare, all men can err. But this Power is in it, partly by the virtue of
this Promise of Christ: and partly by the Matter which it teaches, which is
the unerring Word of God, so plainly and manifestly delivered to her, as that
it is not possible she should universally fall from it, or teach against it in
things absolutely necessary to Salvation. Besides, it would be well waighed,
whether to believe or teach otherwise, will not impeach the Article of the
Creed concerning the Holy Catholic Church, which we profess we believe. For
the Holy Catholic Church there spoken of, contains not only the whole
Militant Church on earth, but the whole Triumphant also in Heaven. For so
Ecclesia hic tota accipi^da est, non solum ex par^e qua p^rinatur ^terris, etc.
v^tiam ex illa part quae in coel^ etc. S. Aug. E^hir. c 56.
S. Augustine has long since taught me. Now if the whole Catholic Church in
this large extent be Holy, then certainly the whole Militant Church is Holy, as
well as the Triumphant, though in a far lower degree, in as much as all Nemo ex
toto Sanctus. Optat. L 7 contra, Parmen.
Sanctification, all Holiness is imperfect in this life, as well in Churches,
as in Men. Holy then the whole Militant Church is. For that which the Apostle
speaks of Abraham, is true of the Church, which is a Body Collective made up
of the spiritual seed of Abraham. Romans 11. If the root be holy so are the
branches. Well then the whole Militant Church is Holy, Romans 11. 16.
and so we believe. Why but, will it not follow then Tha^ the whole Militant
Church cannot possibly err in the Foundations of the Faith, That she may err
in Superstructures and Deductions and other by, and unnecessary Truths, if her
Curiosity, or other weakness carry her beyond, or cause her to fall short of
her Rule, no doubt need be made. But if She can err either from the
Foundation, or in it, She can be no longer Holy, and that Article of the Creed
is gone For if She can err quite from the Foundation, then She is nor Holy,
nor Church, but becomes an Infidel. Now this cannot be. For Dum Christus or at
in Excelso, Navicula (id est E^clesia) ^tur fluctibus in profundo etc sed quia
Christus orat, non potest mergi S. Aug. Sermon 14 de Verb. Domi. c 2. Et B^llar
L. 3 ac Eccle. Milit c. 13. Praesidi^ Christi ful^itur Eccl^siae perpetuitas ut
inter turbulentas a^itationes, and formi^abiles m^tus. etc. salva tam^n maneat.
C^. L. 2. Instit. c. 15.. 3. Ipsa Symboli (...) admonemur perpetuam resid^re in
Ecclesia Christi remission m Peccatorum. Calv. L. 4. Inst. c. 1.. 17. Now
remission of sins cannot be perpetual in the Church, if the Church it self be
(...) perpetual. But the Church it self cannot be perpetual, if it fall away.
all Divine Ancient, and Modern, Romanists, and Reformers, agree in this, That
the whole Militant Church of Christ cannot fall away into general Apostasy.
And if She Err in the Foundation that is in some one or more Fundamental
Points of Faith, then She may be a Church of Christ still, but not Holy, but
becomes Heretical; And most certain it is that, no Spiritus Sanctificationis
non p^ost inveniri in Haereticorum mentibus. S. Hierom. in Ierom. 10.
Assem^ly (be it never so general) of such Heretics, is, or can be Holy.
Other Errors that are of a meaner alay take not Holiness from the Church; but
these that are dyed in grain cannot consist with Holiness, of which Faith in
Christ is the very Foundation. And therefore if we will keep up our Creed, the
whole Militant Church must be still Holy. For if it be not so still, then there
may be a time, that Falsum may subesse Fidei Catholicae, that falsehood, and
that in a high degree, in the very Article, may be the Subject of the Catholic
Faith, which were no less then Blasphemy to affirm. For we must still believe
the Holy Catholic Church. And if She be not still Holy, then at that time when
She is not so, we believe a Falsehood under the Article of the Catholic Faith.
Therefore a very dangerous thing it is to cry out in general terms, That the
whole Catholic Militant Church can Err, and not limit nor distinguish in
time, that it can err indeed, for Ignorance it has, and Ignorance can Err.
But Err it cannot, either by falling totally from the Foundation, or by
Heretical Error in it. For the Holiness of the Church consists as much, if
not more, in the Verity of the Faith as in the Integrity of Manners taught and
Commanded in the Doctrine of Faith.

Now in this Discourse A. C. thinks he has met that I may not only safely
grant, A. C. p. 56.
that Protestants made the Division that is n^w in the Church; but further
also, and that with a safe Confidence, as one did, was it not you? says he,
That it was ill done of those, who did first made the Separation, Truly I do
not now remember, whether I said it or no. But because A. C. shall have full
satisfaction from me, and without any Tergiversation, if I did not say it then,
I do say it now, and most true it is, That it was ill done of those, who e're
they were, that first made the separation. But then A. C must not understand me
of Actual only, but of Causall separation. For (as I said. 21. Nu. 1.
before) the Schism is theirs, whose the Cause of it is: And he makes the
Separation, that gives the first just Cause of it; not he that makes an Actual
Separation upon a just Cause preceding. And this is so evident a Truth, that A,
C. cannot deny it; for he says it is most true. Neither can he deny it in this
A. C. p. 56.
sense, in which I have expressed it; For his very Assertion against us (though
false) is in these Terms, That we gave the first Cause; Therefore he must
mean it of Causall, not of Actual Separation only.

But then A. C. goes on and tells us, That after this Breach was made, yet the
Church of Rome was so kind A. C. p. 57.
and careful to seek the Protestants; that She invited them publicly with
safe conduct to Rome, to a General Council, freely to speak what they could
for themselves. Indeed I think the Church of Rome did carefully seek the
Protestants; But I doubt it was to bring them within their Net. And she invited
them to Rome; A very safe place if you mark it, for them to come to, Just as
the Lion (in the Olim quod vulpes aegroto cauta Leoni Respondit, referam, Quia
me vestigia terrent Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
Apologue) invited the Fox to his own Den. Horat. L. 1. Ep. 1. ex Aesop.
Yea but there was safe Conduct offered too? Yes, Conduct perhaps, but not
safe, or safe perhaps for going thither, but none for coming thence. Vestigia
nulla retrorsum. Yea, but it should have been to a General Council? Perhaps
so. But was the Conduct safe, that was given for coming to a Council, which
they call General, to some others before them? No sure, Though I cannot
justify all which these two men said, yet safe Conduct being given, that
Public Faith ought not to have been violated.
John Hus, and Jerome of Prage burnt for all their safe conduct. And so long as
Affirmant uno consensu omnes Catholici, debere Haereticis servari fidem, sive
salvus conductus concedatur Iure communi sive speciali. Bec. Dis. Theol. de
Fide Haereticis servanda. c. 12.. 5. But for all this Brag of (Affirmant uno
consensu omnes Catholici) Becanus shuffles pitifully, to defend the Council of
Constance. For thus he argues: Fides non est violata Hussio. Non a Patribus.
Illi enim fidem non dederunt. Non ab Imperatore Sigismundo. Ille enim dedit
fidem, sed non violavit. Ibid.. 7. But all men know that the Emperor was used
by the Fathers at Constance to bring Husse thither. Sigismundus Hussum
Constantiam vocat, and missis Literis publica fide cavet, mense October. Ann.
1414. etc. Edit. in 160. Et etiamsi Primo graviter tulit Hussi in
carcerationem, tamen cum dicerent Fidem Haereticis non esse servandam, non modo
remisit Offensionem, sed and primus accrbe in eum pronunciav it Ibid. This is a
mockery. And Becanus his Argument is easily returned upon himself. For if the
Fathers did it in cunning, that the Emperor should give safe conduct, which
themselves meant not to keep, then they broke faith And if the Emperor knew,
they would not keep it, then he himself broke faith, in giving a safe
conduct, which he knew to be invalid. And as easy it is to answer what Becanus
adds to save that Councels Act could I stay upon it.

Fides Haereticis data servanda non est, sicut nec Tyrannis, Piratis and
c^teris publicis praedonibus. etc. Simanca. Jnstit. Tit. 46.. 51. And although
Becanus in the place above cited. 13. confidently denies, that the Fathers at
Constance decreed, No faith to be kept with Heretics, and cites the words of
the Council Sess. 19. yet there the very words themselves have it thus: Posse
Concilium cos punire etc. etiamsi de salvo conductu consisi ad locum ven^rint
Judicii etc. And much more plainly Simanca, Just. Tit. 46.. 52. Iureigitur
Haeretici quidam gravissimo Concilii Constantiensis Judicio legitima flamma
concremati sunt, quamvis promi^sa illis securitas fuisset. So they are not
only Protestants which charge the Council of Constance with this. Nor can
Becanus say as ^e does, Affirmant uno consensu omnes Catholici, sidem Hareticis
servandam esse. For Simanca denies it. And he quotes others for it which A. C.
would be loath should not be accounted Catholics. But how faithfully Simanca
says the one, or Becanus the other, let them take it between them, and the
Reader be judge. In the mean time the very Title of the Canon of the Council
of Constance Sess. 19. is this. Quodnon obstantibus salvis conductibus
Jmperatoris, Regum. etc. possit per Indicem competentem de Haeretica p^te
inquiri.


the IeIesuites write and maintain, That Faith given is not to be kept with
Heretics: And the Church of Rome leaves this lewd Doctrine uncensured (as it
has hitherto done, and no exception put in of force and violence.) A. C shall
pardon us, that we come not to Rome, nor within the reach of Roman Power, what
freedom of Speech soever be promised us. For to what end Freedom of Speech
on their part, For so much. A. C. confesses p. 45. For if they should give way
to the altering of one, then why not of another, and another, and so of al? And
the Trent Fathers in a great point of Doctrine being amazed, and not knowing
what to answer to a Bishop of their own, yet were resolved not to part with
their common error. Certum tamen er at Doctrinam eam non probare, sed quam
antea didicissent firmiter tenere etc. Hist. Con. Trid. L. 2. p. 277. Edit.
Leyd. 1612.
since they are resolved to alter nothing? And to what end Freedom of speech
on our part, if after speech has been free, life shall not?

And yet for all this, A. C. makes no doubt, but that the Roman Church is so
far from being Cause of the continuance A. C. p. 57.
of the Schism, or hinderance of the Reunion, that it would yet give a free
hearing with most ample safe Conduct, if any hope might be given, that the
Protestants would sincerely seek nothing but Truth, and Peace. Truly A. C. is
very Resolute for the Roman Church, yet how far he may undertake for it, I
cannot tell. But for my part, I am of the same Opinion for the continuing of
the Schism, that I was for the making of it. That is, that it is ill, very ill
done of those, whoever they be, Papists, or Protestants, that give just Cause
to continue a Separation. But for free-hearings, or safe Conducts, I have said
enough till that Church do not only say, bnt do otherwise. And as for Truth
and Peace, they are in every man's mouth with you, and with us; But lay they but
half so close to the hearts of men, as they are common on their tongues, it
would soon be better with Christendom, then at this day it is, or is like to
be. And for the Protestants in general, I hope they seek both Truth and
Peace, sincerely. The Church of England, I am sure does, and has taught me to
Beseeching God to inspire continually the Universal Church with the Spirit of
truth, unity, and concord. etc. In the Prayer for the Militant Church. And in
the third Collect on Good Friday.
pray for both, as I most heartily do. But what Rome does in this, if the
world will not see, I will not Censure.

And for that, which A. C. adds, That such a free hearing is more then ever
the English Catholics could obtain, A. C. p. 57.
though they have often offered, and desired it, and that but under the Princes
word: And that no Answer has, nor no good Answer can be given. And he cites
Campian for it. How far, or how often this has been asked by the English
Rommists, I cannot tell, nor what Answer has been given them. But surely
Campian was too bold, and so is A. C. too, to say Campian. praefat. Rationsbut
praefixa.
Honestum responsum nullum, no good Answer can be given. For this, I think is
a very good Answer; That the Kings and the Church of England had no Reason to
admit of a Public Dispute with the English Romish Clergy, till they shall be
able to show it under the Seal, or Powers of Rome, That that Church will
submit to a Third, who may be an Indifferent Judge between us and them; or to
such a General Council as is after. 26. Nu. 1.
mentioned. And this is an Honest, and I think a full Answer. And without this
all Disputation must end in Clamor; And therefore the more public, the worse.
Because as the Clamor is the greater, so perhaps will be the Schism too.


F. Moreover he said, he would ingenuously acknowledge, That the Corruption of
Manners in the Romish Church, was not a sufficient Cause to justify their
Departing from it.


B. I would I could say, you did as ingenuously repeat, sufficient Cause to
justify their Departure. How could I say this, since I did not grant, that
they did Depart, otherwise then is. 21. N. 6.
before expressed?) There is difference between Departure, and causel^sse
Thrusting from you; For out of the Church is not in your Power (God be
thanked) to thrust us: Think on that. And so much I said expressly then, That
which I did ingenuously confess, was this, That Corruption in Manners only, is
no sufficient Cause to make a Separation in the Church; Modo ea quae ad
Cathedra^ pertinent recta praecipiant S. Hier. Ep. 236.
Nor is it. It is a Truth agreed on by the Fathers, and received by Divines of
all sorts, save by the Cathari, to whom the Donatist, and the Anabaptist after
accorded. And against whom L. 4. Instit. c. 1.. 13. etc. Ep. 48. A malis
piscibus cord semper and moribus se^arantur. etc. Corporalem separationem in
^tore maris, hoc est, in fine saculi expectant.
Calvin disputes it strongly. And S. Augustine is plain: There are bad fish in
the Net of the Lord, from which there must be ever a Separation in heart, and
in manners; but a corporali (...) must be expected at the Sea shore, that is,
the end of the world. And the best fish that are, must not tear and break the
Net, because the bad are with them. And this is as ingenuously Confessed for
you, as by me. For if Corruption in Manners were a just Cause of Actual
Separation of one Church from another, in that Catholic Body of Christ, the
Church of Rome has given as great cause as any, since (as Uix ullum peccatum
(sol^ Haeresi excepta) c^gitari potest, quo illa Seeds ^urpiter maculata non
fucrit, maxim ab An, 8^0. Relect. Cont. 1. q. 5. Art. 3.
Stapleton grants) there is scarce any sin that can be thought by man
(Heresy only excepted) with which that Sea has not been foully stained,
especially from eight hundred years after Christ. And he need not except
Haeresie, into which Biel in Can. Miss. Lect. 23.
Biel grants it possible the Bishops of that Sea may fall. And Stel. in S. Luc.
c 22 Almain. in 3. Sent. d. 24. q. 1 fine. Multae sunt Decretales haereticae
etc. And so they erred as Popes.
Stella, and Almaine g^ant it freely, that some of them did fall, and so ceased
to be Heads of the Church, and left Christ (God be thanked) at that time of his
Vicars defection, to look to his Cure himself.


F. But (says he) beside Corruption of Manners, there were also Errors in
Doctrine.


B. This I spoke indeed. And can you prove, that That some of the errors of the
Roman Church were dangerous to salvation. For it is not every light E^ror in
Disputable Doctrine, and Points of curious Speculation, that can be a just
Cause of Separation in that Admirable Body of Christ, which is his Ephesians. 1. 23.
Church, or of one Member of it from another. For he gave his Natural Body to
be rent and torn upon the Cross, that his Mystical Body might be One. And
S. S. Aug. Ep. 50. Et iterum Colum ba non sunt qui Ecclesia^ dissipant.
Accipitres sunt, Milvi sunt: Non laniat Columba. etc. S. Aug. tract. 5. in S.
John.
Augustine inferres upon it; That ^e is no way partaker of Divine Charity, that
is an enemy to this Unity. Now what Errors in Doctrine may give just Cause of
Separation in this Body, or the Parts of it one from another, were it never so
easy to determine (as I think it is most difficult) I would not venture to
set it down in particular, least in these times of Discord, I might be
thought to open a Door for Schism; which surely I will never do, unless it
be to let it out. But that there are Errors in Doctrine, and some of them such,
as most manifestly endanger salvation, in the Church of Rome, is evident to
them that will not shut their Eyes. The proof whereof runs through the
Particular Points, that are between us; and so is too long for this Discourse.
Now here A. C. would feign have a Reason given him, Why I did endeavor A. C.
p. 55.
to show what Cause the Protestants had to make that Rent or Division, if I did
not grant that they made it. Why truly in this reasonable demand I will
satisfy him. I did it partly because I had granted in the general, that
Corruption in Manners was no sufficient cause of Separation of one Particular
Church from another, and therefore it lay upon me, at least to Name in general
what was: And partly because he, and his Party will needs have it so, that we
did make the Separation; And therefore though I did not grant it, yet amiss I
thought it could not be, to Declare by way of Supposition, that if the
Protestants did at first Separate from the Church of Rome, they had reason so
to do: For A. C. himself confesses, A. C. p. 56.
That Error in Doctrine of the Faith is a just Cause of Separation; so just, as
that no Cause is just, but that. Now had I leisure to descend into Particulars,
or will to make the Rent in the Church wider, it is no hard matter to prove,
that the Church of Rome has erred in the Doctrine of Faith, and dangerously
too: And I doubt I shall afterward descend to Particulars, A. C. his
Importunity forcing me to it.


F. Which when the General Church would not Reform, it was lawful for
Particular Churches to Reform themselves.


B. Is it then such a strange thing, that a Particular Church may reform it
self, if the General will not? Reformation of either Manners, or Doctrine, it
is lawful for the Church sinoe Christ, to do as the Church before Christ did,
and might do. The Church before Christ consisted of Jews and Proselytes: This
Church came to have a Separation, upon a most ungodly Policy of 3. Reg. 12. 27.
Ieroboam's, so that it never peeced together again. To a Common Council, to
reform all, they would not come. Was it not lawful for Judah to reform her
self, when Israel would not join? Sure it was, or else the Prophet deceives
me, that says expressly, Hos. 4. 15.
Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah sin. And S. Hierome Super
Haereticis prona intelligentia est. S. Hier. Ibid.
expounds it of this very particular sin of Heresy, and Error in Religion.
Nor can you say, that Non tamen cessavit Deus and populum hunc arguere per
Prophetas. Nam ibi extiter unt Magni illi and insignes Prophetae Elias and
Elizaeus, etc. S. Aug. L. 17. de Civit. Dei. c. 22. Multi religiose intra se
Dei cultum habebant, etc. De quo numero eorumve Posteris septem illa mi^ia
fuisse statuo, qui in Persecutione sub Achabo Deum sibi ab Idololatria immunes
reservarunt, nec genua ante Baal flexerunt. Fran. Monceius L. 1. de Vit. Aureo.
c. 12.
Israel from the time of the Separation was not a Church; for there were true
Prophets in it, 3. Reg. 17. sub Achabo.
Elias, and 4. Reg. 3. sub Iehoram filio Achabi.
Elizaeus, and others, and 3. Reg. 19. 18.
thousands that had not bowed knees to Baal. And there was salvation for these;
which cannot be in the Ordinary way, where there is no Church. And God
threatens Hos. 9. 17.
to cast them away, to wander among the Nations, and be no Congregation, no
Church: therefore he had not yet cast them away in Non Ecclesiam, into
No-Church. And they are expressly called the People of the Lord in 4. Reg. 9. 6.
Iehu's time, and so continued long after. Nor can you plead, that Judah is
your part, and the Ten Tribes ours (as some of you do) for if that be true,
you must grant that the Multitude and greater number is ours: And where then is
Multitude, your numerous Note of the Church. For the Ten Tribes were more then
the two. But you cannot plead it. For certainly if any Calves be set up, they
are in Dan, and in Bethel: They are not ours.

Besides, to reform what is amiss in Doctrine, or Manners, is as lawful for
a Particular Church, as it is to publish and promulgate any thing that is
Catholic in either. And your Question, Quo Judice? lies alike against both.
And yet I think it may be proved, that the Church of Rome, and that as a
Particular Church, did promulgate an Orthodoxe Truth, which was not then
Catholikely admitted in the Church; namely, The Procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Son. If she erred in this Fact, confess her Error; if she erred
not, why may not another Particular Church do as she did? A learned
Schoole-man of yours says she may: Non oportuit ad hac cos vocare, quum
Authoritas fuerit publicandi apud sia^ Romanam, pracipue cum unicuique ctiam
particulari Ecclesiaeliceat, id quod Catholicum est, promulgare. Alb. Mag. in
1. Did. 11. A. 9.
The Church of Rome needed not to call the Grecians to agree upon this Truth,
fince the Authority of publishing it was in the Church of Rome, especially
since it is lawful for every particular Church to promulgate that which is
Catholic. Nor can you say, he m anes Catholic, as fore determined by the
Church in general; for so this Point, when Rome added Filioque to the Creed of
a General Council, was not. And how the Grecians were used in the
after-Councell (such as it was) of Florence, is not to trouble this Dispute;
But Catholic stands there, for that which is so in the nature of it, and
Fundamentally. Nor can you justly say, That the Church of Rome did, or might do
this, by the Pope's Authority over the Church. For suppose he have that, and
that his Sentence be Infallible, (I say, suppose both, but I give neither) yet
neither his Authority, nor his Infallibility can belong unto him, as the
particular Bishop of that Sea, but as the Non errare, convenit Papa ^t est
Caput. Bell. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3.
Ministerial Head of the whole Church. And you are all so Iodged in this, that
L. 2. de Christo. c. 21.. Quando autem. So you cannot find Record, of your own
Truths, which are far more likely to be kept: but when Errors are crept in,
we must be bound to tell the place, and the time, and I know not what, of
their Beginnings, or else they are not Errors. As if some Errors might not
want a Record, as well as some Truth.
Bellarmine professes he can neither tell the year when, nor the Pope under
whom this Addition was made. A Particular Church then, if you judge it by the
School of Rome, or the Practice of Rome, may publish any thing that is
Catholic, where the whole Church is silent; and may therefore Reform any
thing that is not Catholic, where the whole Church is negligent, or will not.

But you are as jealous of the honor of Rome, as Omnino recte, nisi
excepisset, etc. Nec consideravit quanti refer at concedere Ecclesiis
particularibus jus condend^rum Canonum de Fide, inconsult a Romana Sede, quod
nunquam licuit, nunquam factum est, etc. Capell. de Appellat. Ecol. Africanae.
c. 2. Nu. 12.
Capellus is, who is angry with Baronius about certain Canons in the second
Milevit^ne Council, and says, That he considered not of what consequence it
was, to grant to Particular Churches the Power of making Ca^ons of Faith,
without consulting the Roman Sea, which (as he says, and you with him) was
never lawful, nor ever done. But suppose this were so, my Speech was not, Not
consulting, but in Case of Neglecting, or Refusing: Or when the difficulty of
Time and Place, or other Circumstances are such, that a Rex confitetur se
vocasse Concilium tertium Toletanum; Quia decur^s retro temporibus Haeresis
imminens in tota Ecclesia Catholica agere Synodica Negotia denegabat, etc.
Council. Toletan. tertium. Can. 1.
General Council cannot be called, or not convene. For that the Roman Sea
must be consulted with, before any Reformation be made. First, most certain
it is, Capellus can never prove. And secondly as certain, that were it
proved, and practiced, we should have no Reformation: For it would be long
enough, before the Church should be cured, if that Sea alone should be her
Physician, which in truth is her Disease.

Now if for all this you will say still, That a Provincial Council will not
suffice, but we should have borne with Things, till the time of a General
Council. First, it is true, a General Council, free and entire, would have
been the best Remedy, and most able for a Gangrene that had spread so far,
and eaten so deep into Christianity. But what? Should we have suffered this
Gangren to endanger life and all, rather then be cured in time by a Physician
of a weaker knowledge, and a less able Hand? Secondly, We live to see since,
if we had stayed and expected a General Council, what manner of one we should
have had, if any. For that at Trent was neither general, nor free. And for the
Errors which Rome had contracted, it confirmed them, it cured them not. And
yet I much doubt, whether ever that Council (such as it was) would have been
called, if some Provincial and National Synods under Supreme and Regal
Power, had not first set upon this great work of Reformation; Which I heartily
wish had in all places been as Orderly and Happily pursued, as the Work was
right Christian and good in it self. But humane frailty, and the Heats and
Distempers of men, as well as the Cunning of the Devil, would not suffer that.
For even in this sense also, The wrath of man does not accomplish the will of
God, S. James 1. But I have learned S. James 1. 20.
not to reject the Good, which God has wrought, for any Evil, which men may
fasten to it.

And yet if for all this, you think it is better for us Grave and Learned Men,
and of your own Party, have taught me, That when the Universal Church will
not, or for the Iniquities of the Times, cannot obtain and settle a free
general Council, it is lawful, nay sometimes necessary to Reform gross
Abuses by a National, or a Provincial. For, besides Alb. Magnus, whom I
quoted. 24. Nu. 2.
before, Gerson, the Learned and Devout Chancellor of Paris tells us plainly:
Nolo tamen dicere, quin in multis partibus possit Ecclesia per suas parts
reformari. Imo hoc necesse esset, sed ad hoc agendum sufficerent Concilia
Provincialia, etc Gerson, tract. de Genesis Council. unius obedientia. part 1. p.
222. F.
That he will not deny, but that the Church may be reformed by parts. And that
this is necessary, and that to effect it, Provincial Councels may suffice;
And, in somethings, Diocesan. And again, Omnes Ecclesiae status aut in
Gonerali Concilio reformetis, aut (...) Conciliis Provincialibus reformari
mandetis. Gerson. Declarat. Defectuum Virorum Ecclesiasticorum. par. 1. page
209. B.
Either you should reform all Estates of the Church in a General Council, or
command them to be reformed in Provincial Councels. Now Gerson lived about two
hundred years since. But this Right of Provincial Synods, that they might
decree in Causes of Faith, and in Cases of Reformation, where Corruptions had
crept into the Sacraments of Christ, was practiced much above a thousand years
ago by many, both National and Provincial Synods. For the Council. Romans 2. sub
Sylvestro.
Council at Rome under Pope Sylvester An: 324. condemned Photinus and
Sabellius. (And their Heresies were of high Nature against the Faith.) The
Council. Gang. Can. 1.
Council at Gangra about the same time condemned Eustathius for his condemning
of Marriage as unlawful. The Con. Carth. 1. Can. 1.
first Council at Carthage, being a Provincial, condemned Rebaptization much
about the year ^48. The Con. Aquiliens.
Provincial Council at Aquileia in the year 381. in which S. Ambrose was
present, cond^mned Pall^dius and Secundinus for embracing the Arrian Heresy.
The Con. Carth. 2. Can. 1.
second Council of Carthage handled and Decreed the Belief and Preaching of
the Trinity; And this a little after the year 424. The Quaedam de causis
fidei, unde nunc quaestio Pelagianorum imminet, in hoc (...) sanctissimo
primitus tractentur, etc. Aurel. Carthaginensis in Praefat. Conc. Milevit. apud
(...).
Council of Milevis in Africa, in which S. Augustine was present, condemned
the whole Course of the Horesie of Pelagius, that greatand bewitching Heresy,
in the year 416. The Con. Aurausican. 2. Can. 1, 2, and 6.
second Council at Orang, a Provincial too, handled the great Controversies
about Grace and Free Will, and set the Church right in them, in the year 444
The Con. Tolet. 3.
third Council at Toledo (a National one) in the year 589. determined many
things against the Arrian Heresy about the very Prime Articles of Faith, under
fourteen several Anathema's. The fourth Council at Toledo did not only
handle Matters of Faith for the Reformation of that People, Que omnia in aliis
Symbolis explicit tradita non sunt. Conc. Tolet. 4. Can. 1.
but even added also some things to the Creed, which were not expressly
delivered in former Creeds. Nay the Bishops did not only practice this, to
Condemn Heresies in National and Provincial Synods, and so Reform those
several Places, and the Church it self by parts: But They did openly
challenge this as their Right and Due, and that without any leave asked of the
Sea of Rome. For in this Fourth Council of Toledo Statuimus, ut saltem semel
in Anno a Nobis Concilium celebretur, it a tamen, ut si Fide^ C^usa est, aut
quaelibet alia Ecclesiae communis, Generalis Hispani^ and Galliciae Synodus
celebretur, etc. Conc. Tolet. 4. Can. 3.
They Decree, That if there happen a Cause of Faith to be settled, a General,
that is, a National Synod of all Spain and Gallicia shall be held thereon.
And this in the year 643. Where you see, it was then Catholic Doctrine in all
Spain, that a National Synod might be a Competent Judge in a Cause of Faith
And I would feign know, what Article of the Faith does more concern all
Christians in general, then that of Filioque? And yet the Church of Rome her
self made that Addition to the Creed without a General Council, as I have
showed. 24. Nu. 2.
already. And if this were practiced so often, and in so many places, why may
not a National Council of the Church of England do the like? as She did.
For, She cast off the Pope's Usurpation, and as much as in her lay, restored
the King to his right. That appears by a The Institution of a Christian man:
printed An. 1534.
Book subscribed by the Bishops in Henry the eight's time. And by the In
Synodo Londin^nsi Sess. 8. Die Veneris. 29. Ianuarii. An. 1562.
Records in the Archbishop's Office, orderly kept and to be seen. In the
Reformation which came after, our And so in the Reformation under Hezekiah, 2.
Chron. 29 and under Iosia, 4 Reg. 23. And in the time of Reccarcdus King of
Spain, the Reformation there proceeded thus: Quum gloriosissimus Princeps
omnes Regimin^ sui Pontifices in unum convenire mand^sset, etc. Con^il. Tolet.
3. Can. 1. Cum convemssemus Sacerdotes Domini apud urbem Toletan^, ut R^giis
imperiis atque jussis commoniti, etc. Council. Tolet. 4. in princ. apud
Cara^zam. And both these Synods did treat of Matters of Faith.
Princes had their parts, and the Clergy theirs. And to these Two principally
the power and direction for Reformation belongs. That our Princes had their
parts, is manifest by their Calling together of the Bishops, and others of the
Clergy, to consider of that which might seem worthy Reformation. And the
Clergy did their part: For being thus called together by Regal Power, they
met in the National Synod of sixty two. And the Articles there agreed on, were
afterward confirmed by Acts of State, and the Royal Assent. In this Synod the
Positive Truths which are delivered, are more then the Polemicks. So that a
mere Calumny it is, That we profess only a Negative Religion. True it is,
and we must thank Rome for it, our Confession must needs contain some
Negatives. For, we cannot but deny that Images are to be adored. Nor can we
admit Maimed Sacraments. Nor grant Prayers in an unknown tongue. And in a
corrupt time, or place, it is as necessary in Religion to deny falsehood, as to
assert, and vindicate Truth. Indeed this latter can hardly be well and
sufficiently done, but by the former; an Affirmative Verity being ever included
in the Negative to a Falsehood. As for any Error which might fall into this (as
any other Reformation) if any such can be found, then I say, and it is most
true: Reformation, especially in Cases of Religion, is so difficult a work,
and subject to so many Pretensions, that it is almost impossible but the
Reformers should step too far, or fall too short, in some smaller things or
other, which in regard of the far greater benefit coming by the Reformation
it self, may well be passed over, and borne withal. But if there have been
any wilful, and gross errors, not so much in Opinion, as in Fact, ( Quisquis
occasion hujus Legis, quam Regesterra Christo servientes ad emendandam vestram
impietatem promulgaverunt, res proprias vestras cupide appetit, displicet
nobis. Quisquis denique ipsas res pauperum, vel Ba^licas Congregationum, etc.
non per Iustitiam, sed per Avaritiamtenet, displicet nobis. S. Aug. Epist. 48.
versus finem.
Sacrilege too often pretending to reform Superstition) that is the Crime of
the Reformers, not of the Reformation; and they are long since gone to God to
answer it, to whom I leave them.

But now before I go off from this Point, I must General Church as it was for
the most part forced under the Government of the Roman Sea. And this you
understand well enough; For in your very next words you call it the Roman
Church. Now I make no doubt, but that as the Universal Catholic Church would
have reformed her self, had she been in all parts freed of the Roman Yoke:
so while she was for the most in these Western parts under that yoke, the
Church of Rome was, if not the Only, yet the Chief Hindrance of Reformation.
And then in this sense, it is more then clear, That if the Roman Church will
neither Reform, nor suffer Reformation, it is lawful for any other Particular
Church to Reform it self, so long as it does it peaceably and orderly, and
keeps it self to the Foundation, and free from And this a Particular Church
may do; but not a Schism. For a Schism can never be peaceable, nor orderly,
and seldom free from Sacrilege. Out of which respects, (it may be) as well as
for the gr^evousnesse of the Crime, S. Aug. calls it Sacrilegium Schismatis. L.
1 de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 8. For usually they go together.
Sacrilege.


F. I asked Quo Iudice, did this appear to be so? Which Question I asked, as
not thinking it equity that Protestants in their own Cause should be Accusers,
VVitnesses, and Judges of the Roman Church.


B You do well to tell the reason now, why you Question; For you did not
discover it Conference: if you had, you might then have received your Answer.
It is most true: No man in common equity ought to be suffered to be Accuser,
Witness, and Judge in his own Cause. But is there not as little reason, and
equity too, that any man that is to be accused, should be the Accused, and yet
Witness, and Judge in his own Cause? If the first may hold, no man shall be
Innocent; and if the last, none will be Nocent. And what do we here with (in
their own Cause against the Roman Church?) Why? Is it not your own too,
against the Protestant Church? And if it be a Cause common to both, as certain
it is, then neither Part alone may be Judge: If neither alone may judge, then
either they must be judged by a. 21. Nu. 9.
Third which stands indifferent to both, and that is the Scripture, or if there
be a jealousy or Doubt of the sense of the Scripture they must either both
repair to the Exposition of the Primitive Church, and submit to that; or both
call, and submit to a General Council, which shall be lawfully called, and
fairly, and freely held with indifferency to all parties; And that must judge
the Difference according to Scripture, which must be their Rule as well as
Private Men's.

And here after some loud Cry against the Pride Insolent madness of the
Prot^stants, A. C. adds, That A. C. p. 58.
the Church of Rome is the Principal, and Mother Church: And that therefore,
though it be against common equity, that Subjects, and Children should be
Accusers, Witnesses, Judges, and Executioners against their Prince, and Mother
in any case: yet it is not absurd, that in some Cases, the Prince, or Mother
may Accuse, Witness, Judge, and if need be, execute Justice, against unjust
and rebellious Subjects, or evil Children. How far forth Rome is a Prince
over the whole Church, or a Mother of it will come to be showed at after. In
the mean time, though I cannot grant her to be either, yet let us suppose her
to be both, that A. Cs. Argument may have all the strength it can have. Nor
shall it force me (as plausible as it seems) to weaken the just power of
Princes over their Subjects, or of Mothers over their Children, to avoid the
shocke of this Argument. For though A. C. may tell us it is not absurd in some
Cases; yet I would feign have him name any one Moderate Prince that ever
thought it just, or took it upon him to be Accuser, and Witness, and Judge
in any Cause of moment against his Subjects, but that the Law had Liberty to
Judge between them. For the great Philosopher tells us, (...), Arist. Eto. c.
6.
That the Chief Magistrate is Custos juris, the Guardian and keeper of the
Law, and if of the Law, then both of that equity and equality which is due unto
them that are under him. And even Tiberius himself, in the Cause of Silanus,
when Dolabella would have flattered him into more power then in wisdom he
thought fit then to take to himself, he put him off thus. No, Minui Jura
quoties gliscat Potestas, nec utendum Imperio, ubi Legibus agi possit. Tacit.
L. 3 Annal.
the Laws grow less where such Power enlarges. Nor is absolute Power to be
used, where there may be an orderly proceeding by Law. And for Heb. 12. 9.
Parents, it is true, when Children are young, they may chastise them without
other Accuser or Witness, then themselves; and yet the children are to give
them reverence. And it is presumed that natural affection will prevail so far
with them, that they will not punish them too much. For all experience tells us
(almost to the loss of Education) that they God used Samuel as a Messenger
against Eli for his overmuch indulgence to his sons. 1 Samuel 3. 13. And yet
Samuel himself committed the very same fault concerning his own sons. 1 Samuel
8. 3. 5. And this Indulgence occasioned the Change of the Civil government, as
the former was the loss of the Priesthood.
punish them too little, even when there is cause. Yet when Children are grown
up, and come to some full use of their own Reason, the Apostles Rule is
Coloss. 3. 21.
Colos. 3. Parents, provoke not your Children. And if the Apostle prevail not
with froward Parents, there is a Magistrate, and a Law to relieve even a son
against Crimini ci Tribunus inter eatera dabat, quod filium juvenem nullius
probri compertum, extorrem urbe, domo, penatibus, foro, luce, congressu
aequalium prohibitu^, in opus servile, prope in carcerem, atque in ergastulum
dederit. Live. dec. 1. l. 7.
unnatural Parents: as it was in the Case of T. Manlius against his over
Imperious Father. And an express Law there was among the Jews Deuteronomy. 21. when
Children Deuteronomy. 21. 19.
were grown up and fell into great extremities, that the Parents should then
bring them to the Magistrate, and not be too busy in such cases with their own
Power So suppose Rome be a Prince, yet her Subjects must be tried by Gods Law,
the Scripture: And suppose her a Mother; yet there is, or ought to be Remedy
against her for her Children that are grown up, if she forget all good Nature,
and turn Stepdame to them.

Well; the Reason why the Jesuit asked the Question, Quo Iudice? Who should be
Judge? He says was this; Because there is no equity in it, that the Protestants
should be Judges in their own Cause. But now upon more Deliberation A. C.
tells us (as if he A. C. p. 57.
knew the Jesuits mind as well as himself, as sure I think he does) That
the Jesuit directed this Question chiefly against that speech of mine, That
there were Errors in Doctrine of Faith, and that in the General Church, as the
Jesuit understood my meaning. The Jesuit here took my meaning right. For I
confess I said there were Errors in Doctrine, and dangerous ones too in the
Church of Rome. I said likewise that when the General Church could not, or
would not Reform such, it was Lawful for Particular Churches to Ref^rme
themselves. But then I added, That the General Church (not universally taken,
but in these Western parts) fell into those Errors, being swayed in these
latter Ages by the predominant Power of the Church of Rome, under whose
Government it was for the most part forced. And all men of understanding know
how often, and how easily an Over-potent Member carries the whole with it, in any
Body, Natural, Politic, or Ecclesiastical.

Yea but A. C. tells us, That never any Competent A. G. p. 57.
on Earth, or in Hell it self, can so far prevail against the General
Church as to make it Err generally in any one Point of Divine Truth, and much
less to teach any thing by its full Authority to be a Matter of Faith, which
is contrary to Divine Truth expressed, or involved in Scriptures rightly
understood. And that therefore no Reformation of Faith can be needful in the
General Church, but only in Particular Churches. And for proof of this he
cites S. Mat. 16. and 28. S. Luke 22. S. John 14. and 16. In this trou^lesome
and quarrelling Age, I am most unwilling to meddle with the Erring of the
Church in general. The Church of England is content to pass that over. And
though Art. 19.
She tells us, That the Church of Rome has Erred even in matters of Faith; yet
of the Erring of the Church in general She is modestly silent. But since A. C.
will needs have it: That the whole Church did never generally Err in any one
Point of Faith, he should do well to Distinguish, before he be so peremptory.
For if he mean no more then that the whole Universal Church of Christ cannot
universally Err in any one Point of Faith simply necessary to altmens
salvation, he fights against no Adversary, that I know, but his own fiction.
For the most Si demus errare non posse Ecclesiam in rebus ad salutem
necessariis, hic sensus noster est: Idco hoc esse, quia abdicata omni sua
sapientia, a Spiritu Sancto doceri se per Uerbum Dei patitur. Calv. L. 4. Inst
c. 8.. 13. And this also is our sense. Uide sup.. 21. Nu. 5.
Learned Protestants grant it. But if he mean, that the whole Church cannot
Err in any one Point of Divine Truth in general, which though by sundry
Consequences deduced from the Principles, is yet a Point of Faith, and may
prove dangerous to the Salvation of some, which believe it, and practice after
it, (as his words seem to import) especially, if in these the Church shall
presume to determine without her proper Guide, the Scripture, as Nostra
sententia est, Ecclesiam absolute non posse errare, nec in rebus absolute
necessariis, nec in aliis quae credenda vel facienda nobis proponit, sive
habeantur express in Scripturis, sive non. Bellar. L. 3. dc Eccl. Mil. c. 14..
5.
Bellarm. says She may, and yet not Err. Then perhaps it may be said, and
without any wrong to the Catholic Church, that the Whole Militant Church has
erred in such a Point of Divine Truth and of Faith. Nay A. C. confesses
expressly in his very next A. C. p. 58.
words, That the Whole Church may at some time not know all Divine Truths,
which afterward it may learn by study of Scripture, and otherwise. So then in
A. Cs. judgment, the Whole Militant Church may at some time not know all
Divine Truths. Now that which knows not all, must be ignorant of some; and that
which is ignorant of some, may possibly err in one Point or other; The rather
because he confesses the knowledge of it must be got by Learning; and Learners
may mistake and err; especially where the Lesson is Divine Truth out of
Scripture, out of Difficult Scripture. For were it of plain and easy Scripture
that he speaks, the Whole Church could not at any time be without the
knowledge of it. And for ought I yet see, the Whole Church Militant has no
greater warrant against Not erring in, then against Not knowing of the Points
of Divine Truth. For in S. Ioh. 16. S. John 16. 13.
There is as large a Promise to the Church of knowing all Points of Divine
Truth, as A. C. or any Jesuit can produce for Her Not erring in any. And if
She may be ignorant, or mistaken in learning of any Point of Divine truth,
Doubtiesle in that state of Ignorance she may both E^re, and teach her Error,
yea and teach that to be Divine Truth, which is not: Nay perhaps teach that as
a Matter of Divine Truth, which is contrary to Divine Truth; Always provided
it be not in any Point simply Fundamental, of which the Whole Catholic Church
cannot be Ignorant, and in which it cannot Eire, as has. 21. Nu. 5.
before been prooved.

As for the Places of Scripture which A C. cites to Wh^l Church cannot Err
Generally in A. C p. 57.
any one Point of Divine Truth, be it Fundamental or not, they are known
Places all of them, and are alleged by A. C. three several times in this
short Tract, and to three several purposes. Here to prove, That A. C. p. 57.
the Universal Church cannot err. Before this to prove, A. C. p. 53.
that the Tradition of the present Church cannot Err. After this to prove,
that the Pope cannot Err. He should A. C. p. 5. and 73
have done well to have added these Places a fourth time, to prove that
General Councels cannot Err. For so does both Staple. Relect. praef a^
L^ctore^.
Stapleton and Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c. 2.
Bellarmine. Sure A. C. and his fellows are hard driven, when they must fly to
the same Places for such different purposes. For A Pope may Err, where a
Council does not. And a General Council may Er^e, where the Catholic Church
cannot. And therefore it is not likely that these Places should serve alike for
all. The first Place is Saint Matthew 16. There Christ told Saint Peter, S.
Mat. 16. 18.
and we believe it most assuredly, That Hell Gates shall never be able to
prevail against his Church. But that is, That they shall not prevail to make
the Church Catholic Apostatize, and fall quite away from Christ, or Err in
absolute (...), which amounts to as much. But the Promise reaches not to this,
that the Church shall never Err, no not in the lightest matters of Faith. For
it will not follow: Hell Gates shall not prevail against the Church; Therefore
Hellish Devils shall not tempt, or assault, and batter it. And thus Saint
Pugnare potest, Expugnari non potest. S. Aug. L. de Symb. ad Catecum. c. 6.
Augustine understood the place. It may fight (yea and be wounded too) but it
cannot be wholly overcome. And Bellarmine himself applies it to prove, Bellar
L. 3. de Eccl Milit. c. 13.. 1. and 2.
That the Visible Church of Christ cannot deficere, Err so, as quite to fall
away. Therefore in his judgment, this is a true, and a safe sense of this Text
of Scripture. But as for not Erring at all, in any Point of Divine Truth, and
so making the Church absolutely Infallible, that is neither a true, nor a safe
sense of this Scripture. And it is very remarkable, that whereas this Text has
been so much beaten upon by Writers of all sorts, there is no one Father of
the Church for twelve hundred years after Christ (the Counterseit or Partial
Decretalls of some Popes excepted) that ever concluded the Infallibility of the
Church out of this Place: but her Non deficiency, that has been, and is
justly deduced hence. And here I challenge A. C. and all that party to show
the contrary, if they can. The next Place of Scripture is Saint Matthew 28. S.
Mat. 28. (...).
The Promise of Christ that he will be with them to the end of the World.
But this in the general voice of the S, Hill. in Psalm. 124. Prosp. L. 2. de
Vocat. Gent. c. 2.

Leo. Ser. 2. de Resur. Dom. c. 3. and Ep. 31. Isidor. in Iosu. 12.


Fathers of the Church is a promise of Assistance and Protection, not of an
Infallibility of the Church. And In omnibus quae Ministris suis commisit
exequenda. S. Leo. Epist. 91. c. 2.
Pope Leo himself enlarges this presence and providence of Christ to all those
things which he committed to the execution of his Ministers. But no word of
Infallibility is to be found there. And indeed since Christ according to his
Promise is present with his Ministers in all these things; and that one and a
Chief of these All is the preaching of his Word to the People. It must follow
That Christ should be present with all his Ministers that Preach his word, to
make them Insallible, which daily Experience tells us, is not so. The third
Place urged by A C is S. Luke 22. Where the Prayer of Christ S. Luke 22. 3^.
will effect no more then his Promise has performed; neither of them implying
an Insallibility for, or in the Church against all Errors whatsoever. And this
almost all his own side confess is spoken either of S. Peter's person only, or
of him, and his Successors, Bellar. L. 4. de To. Pont c 3.. Est igitur tertia.
He understood the place of both S. Peter and his Successors.
or both. Of the Church it is not spoken, and therefore cannot prove an
unerring Power in it. For how can that Place prove the Church cannot Err,
which speaks not at all of the Church? And it is observable too, that when the
Divines of Paris expounded this Place, that Christ here prayed for S. Peter, as
he represented the Whole Catholic Church, and obtained for it that the Faith
of the Catholic Church nunquam deficeret, should never so err, as quite to
fall away; Quae Expositio falsa est, Primo quia etc. Bell. ibid.. 2. And he
says it is false because the Parisi^ns expounded it of the Church only. Uolunt
enim prosola Ecclesiae esse ^ratum. Ibid.. 1.
Bellarmine is so stiff for the Pope, that he says expressly, This Exposition
of the Parisians is false, and that this Text cannot be meant of the Catholic
Church. Not be meant of it? Then certainly it ought not to be alleged as
Proo^e of it, as here it is by A. C. The fourth Place named by A. C. is S. John
14. And the consequent Place to it A. C. p. 57, S. Ioh. 14. 16. 17. S. John 10.
13.
S. John 16 These Places contain an other Promise of Christ concerning the
coming of the Holy Ghost. Thus: That the Comforter shall abide with them
forever. That this Comforter is the Spirit of Truth. And That this Spirit of
Truth will lead them into all Truth. Now this Promise as it is applied to the
Church consisting of all Believers which are and have been since Christ
appeared in the Flesh, including the Apostles, is Field. L. 4. de Eccles. c. 2.
free from all err^ur and ignorance of Divine things
absolute, and without any Restriction. For, the Holy Ghost did lead them into
all Truth, so that no Error was to be found in that Church. But as it is
appliable to the whole Church Militant in all succeeding times, so the Promise
was made with a Limitation, And Theodoret proceeds farther, and says, Neque
divini Prophetae, neque mirabiles Apostoli omnia praesciverunt. Quae cunque
enim expediebant, ea illis significavit gratia Spiritus. Theod. in 1. Tim. 3.
v. 14, 15.
namely, that the Blessed Spirit should abide with the Church for ever, and
lead it into all Truth; but not simply into all Curious Truth, no not in or
about the Faith, but into all Truth necessary to Salvation. And against this
Truth the Whole Catholic Church cannot err, keeping her self to the Direction
of the Scripture, as Christ has appointed her. For in this very Place where
the Promise is made, That the Holy Ghost shall teach you all things, it is
added, that He shall bring all things to their remembrance. What? simply all
things? No: But all things which Christ had told them, S. Joh. 14. So there is
a Limitation S. Ioh. 14. 26.
put upon the words by Christ himself. And if the Church will not err, it
must not ravell Curiously into unnecessary Truths, which are out of the
Promise, nor follow any other Guide then the Doctrine which Christ has left
behind him to govern it. For if it will come to the End, it must keep in the
Way. And Christ who promised the Spirit should lead, has no where promised
that it shall follow its Leader into all Truth, and at least Infallibly,
unless you will Limit, as before. So, no one of these Places can make good A.
Cs. Assertion, That the Whole Church cannot err Generally in any one Point of
Divine Truth. In Absolute Foundations. 21. Nu. 5.
she cannot: in Deductions and Superstructures she may.

Now to all that I have said concerning the Right which Particular Churches
have to Reform themselves, when the General Church cannot for Impediments, or
will not for Negligence, which I have prooved at large 24 N 1, 2 etc. A. C. p.
57.
before, All the Answer that A. C. gives, is, First, Quo Judice? Who shall be
Judge? And that shall be the Scripture, and the Si de modica Quaestione
Disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret in Antiquissimas recurrere Ecclesias, in
quibus Apostoli conversati sunt, and ab its de praesenti Quaestione sumere quod
certum and liquidum est? Quid autem si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas
reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat Ordinem sequi Traditionis? etc. Irenaeus.
L. 8. advers. Hares. c. 4.
Primitive Church. And by the Rules of the one, and to the Integrity of the
other, both in Faith, and Manners, any Particular Church may safely Reform it
self.

Secondly, That no Reformation in Faith can be needful in the General Church,
but only in Particular Churches. In which Case also (he says) Particular
Churches may not A. C p. 58.
take upon them to Judge and Condemn others of Errors in Faith: Well, how
far forth Reformation even of Faith may be necessary in the General Church,
I have expressed. 25. Nu. 4.
already. And for Particular Churches, I do not say, that they must take upon
them to Judge or Condemn others of Error in Faith. That which I say, is, They
may Reform themselves. Now I hope, to Reform themselves, and to Condemn
others, are two different Works, unless it fall out so, that by Reforming
themselves, they do by consequence Condemn any other, that is guilty in that
Point, in which they Reform themselves; and so far to Judge and Condemn
others, is not only lawful, but necessary. A man that lives religiously, does
not by and by sit in Judgment, and Condemn with his mouth all Profane
Livers. But yet while he is silent, his very Life condemns them. And I hope in
this Way of Judicature, A. C. dares not say it is unlawful for a particular
Church or man to Condemn another. And farther, whatsoever A. C. can say to the
contrary, there are diverse Cases, where Heresies are known, and notorious, in
which it will be hard to say (as he does) That A. C. p. 58.
one Particular Church must not Judge or Condemn another, so far forth at
least, as to abhor and protest against the Heresy of it.

Thirdly, If one Particular Church may not Judge A. C. tells us, That Particular
Churches must in A. C. p. 58.
that Case (as Irenaeus intimates) have recourse to the Church of Rome, which
has more powerful Principality, and to And after he says, p. 58. that the
Bishop of Rome is, and ought to be the Judge of particular Churches in this
Case.
her Bishop, who is chief Pastor of the whole Church, as being S. Peter's
Successor, to whom Christ promised the keys, S. Matthew. 16. for whom he prayed
that his Faith might not fail, S. Luke 22. And whom he charged to seed and
govern the whole Flock, S: John 21. And this (A. C. tells us) he shall never
refuse to do in such sort, as that this neglect shall be a Just Cause for any
Particular Man, or Church, under Pretense of Reformation in Manners, or Faith,
to make a Schism or Separation from the Whole General Church.

Well; first you see where A. C. would have us. If any Particular Churches
differ in Points of Divine Truth, they must not Judge, or Condemn each other,
(says he) No, take heed of that in any case; That Is the Office of the
Universal Church. And yet he will have it, That Rome, which is but a
Particular Church, must and ought Judge all other Particulars.

Secondly, he tells us this is so; Because the Church of Rome has more
Powerful Principality, then other Particular Churches, and that her Bishop is
Pastor of the Whole Church. To this I answer, that it is most true indeed; the
Church of Rome has had, and has yet, more Powerful Principality, then any
other Particular Church. But she has not this Power from Christ. The Roman
Patriarch, by Ecclesiastical Constitutions, might perhaps have a Primacy of
Order; But for Principality of Power, the Patriarchs were as even, as equal,
as the Summa Potestas Ecclesiastica non est data solum Petro, sedetiam aliis
Apostolis. Omnes enim poterant dicere illud S. Pauli: Solicitu la omnium
Ecclesiarum, etc. 2. Cor. 11. 28. Bellar. L. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 9.. Respond^
Pontificatum. Where then is the difference between S. Peter and the rest? In
this, says Bellarmin. Ibid. Quta hec Potestas data est Petro, ut Ordinario
Pastori, cui perpetuo succederetur, Aliis vero, tanquam Delegatis, quibus non
succederetur. This is handsomely said to men easy of belief. But that the
Highest Power Ecclesiastical confessed to be given to the other Apostle., as
well as to S. Peter, was given to S. Peter only, as to an Ordinary Pastor,
whose Successors should have the same Power, which the Successors of the rest
should not have, can never be prooved out of Scripture. Nay (I will give them
their own Latitude) it can never be proved by any Tradition of the whole
Catholic Church. And till it be proved; Bellarmines handsome Expression cannot
be believed by me. For S. Cyprian has told me long since, that Episcopatus
Vnus est, (for as much as belongs to the Calling) as well as Apostolatus. L. de
simp. Praelato.
Apostles were before them. The Truth is, this more Powerful Principality the
Roman Bishops. 25. Nu. 12.
got under the Emperors after they became Christian; and they used the matter
so, that they grew big enough to oppose, nay to depose the Emperors, by the
same power which they had given them. And after this, other Particular
Churches, especially here in the West, submitted themselves to them for succor
and Protections sake. And this was one maine Cause which swelled Rome into this
more Powerful Principality, and not any Right given by Christ to make that
Lib. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 9.. Augustmu; Epistola.
Prelate, Pastor of the whole Church. I know Bellarmine makes much ado about
it, and will needs fetch it out of S. Aug. Epist. 162. In Romana Ecclesi^ emper
Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit Principatas.
S. Augustine, who says indeed, That in the Church of Rome there did always
flourish the Principality of an Apostolic Chair: Or, if you will, the
Apostolic Chair, in relation to the West and South parts of the Church, all
the other four Apostolic Chaires being in the East. Now this no man denies,
that understands the state and story of the Church. And Quia Opinio invaluit
fund^tam esse hanc Ecclesiam a S. Pet^; Jtaque in Occidente Seeds Apostolica
Honoris (...). Calv. L. 4. c. 6.. 16.
Calvin confesses it expressly. Nor is the Word Principatus so great, nor were
the Bishops of those times so little, as that Principes and Principatus are not
commonly given them both by the Princeps Ecclesiae S. H. lar. 18. de Trin.
Prin. And he speaks of a Bi^hop in general. Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 17.
Ascribuntur Episcopo (...). Imperium, Thronus, and Principatus ad regim^n
A^imarum. Et (...) hujusmodi Imperium. And he also speaks of a Bishop. Greg.
Nazian. Orat. 20. Nor were these any Titles of pride in Bi^hops then. For S.
Greg. Nazianz. who challenges these Titles to himself, Orat. 17. was so
devout, so mild, and so humble, that rather then the Peace of the Church should
be broken, he freely resigned the Great Patriarchate of Constantinople, and
retired, and this in the First Council of Constantinople, and the Second
General.
Greek and the Latin Fathers of this great and Learnedest. Age of the Church
made up of the fourth and fist hundred years, always understanding
Principatus of their Spiritual Power, and within the Limits of their several
Jurisdictions, which perhaps now and then they did occasionally exceed. And
there is not one word in S. Augustine, That this Principality of the Apostolic
Chair in the Church of Rome was then, or ought to be now exercised over the
whole Church of Christ, as Bellarmine insinuates there, and as A. C. would have
it here. And to prove that S Augustine did not intend by Principatus here to
give the Roman Bishop any Power out of his own Limits (which God knows were
far short of the whole Church) I shall make it most manifest out of the very
same Epistle. For afterward (says S. Augustine) when the pertinacy of the
Donatists could not be restrained by the African Bishops only, Pergant ad
Fratres and Collegas nostros transmarinarum Ecclesiarum Episcopos, etc. S. Aug.
Ep 162.
they gave them leave to be heard by foreign Bishops. And after that he has
these words. An forte non debuit Romanae Ecclesiae Melciades Episcopus cum
Collegis transmarinis Episcopis illud sibi usurpare judicium quod ab Afris
septuaginta, ubi Primas Tigisitanus praesedit, fuerit terminaetum. Quid quod
nec ipse usurp^vit: Rogatus quippe Imperator, Iudices misit Episcopos, qui cum
^o sederent, and de tota illa Causa, quod justum videretur, statuerent, etc. S.
Aug. Ibid.
And yet peradventure Melciades the Bishop of the Roman Church, with his
Colleagues, the Transmarine Bishops, non debuit, ought not usurp to himself
this Judgment which was determined by seventy African Bishops, Tigisitanus
sitting Primate? and what will you say if he did not usurp this Power? For the
Emperor being desired, sent Bishops Judges, which should sit with him, and
determine what was just upon the whole Cause. In which Passage there are very
many things Observeable. As first, that the Roman Prelate came not in, till
there was leave for them to go to Transmarine Bishops. Secondly, that if the
Pope had come in without this Leave, it had been an Usurpation. Thirdly, that
when he did thus come in, not by his own Proper Authority, but by Leave, there
were other Bishops made Judges with him. Fourthly, that these other Bishops
were appointed, and sent by the Emperor, and his Power; that which the Pope
will least of all endure. Lastly, least the Pope and his Adherents should say
this was an Usurpation in the Emperor, Ad cujus Cuvan^ds qua rationem Deo
redditurus est, res illa maxim pertinebat. S. Aug. Epist. 162.
S. Augustine tells us a little before, in the same Epistle still, that this
does chiefly belong ad Curam ejus, to the Emperors Care and charge, and that
He is to give an Account to God for it. And Melciades did sit and Judge the
Business with all Christian Prudence and Moderation. So at this time the
Roman Prelate was not received as Pastor of the whole Church, say A. C. what
he please. Nor had he any Supremacy over the other Patriarchs: And for this
were all other Records of Antiquity silent, the Civil Law is proof enough,
(And that is a Monument of the Primitive Church.) The Text there is, Nam contra
horum Antistitum (de Patriarchis loquitur) Sententias, non esse locum
Appellationi a Majoribus nostris ^itutum est. ^od. L 1. Tit. 4. L. 29. ex
^ditions Gothofredi. Si non rata habuerit ^traque Pars, qua judicata sunt, tunc
Beatissimns Patriarcha Dioceseos illius, ^ter eos audiat, etc. Nulla part ejus
Sententiae contradicere valente. Authen. Co^at. 9. Tit. 15. C. 22.
A Patriarcha non datur Appellatio. From a Patriarch there lies no Appeal. No
Appeal. Therefore every Patriarch was alike Supreme in his own Patriarchate.
Therefore the Pope then had no Supremacy over the whole Church. Therefore
certainly not then received as Universal Pastor. And S. Gregory himself
speaking of Appeals, and expressly citing the Laws themselves, says plainly,
Et ille (scilicet Patriarcha) secundum Canones, and Leges pr^bent finem. And
there he cites the Novell its self. S. Greg. L. 11. Judict. 6. Epist. 54.
That the Patriarch is to put a final end to those Causes, which come before
him by Appeal from Bishops and Archbishops: but then he adds, Si dictum fu^it,
quod nec Metropolitanum habeat, nec Patriarcham: dicendum est, quod a Sede
Apostolica, quae omnium Ecclesiarum Caput est, causa andienda est, etc. S.
Greg. Ibid.
That where there is nor Metropolitan, nor Patriarch of that Diocese, there
they are to have recourse to the Sea Apostolic, as being the Head of all
Churches. Where first this implies plainly, That if there be a Metropolitan,
or a Patriarch in those Churches, his Judgment is final; and there ought to
be no Appeal to Rome. Secondly, It Is as plain, That in those Ancient times of
the Church Government, Britain was never subject to the Sea of Rome. For it
was one of the Notitia Provinciarum Occidentalium, per Guidum Pancirolum. l. 2.
c. 48.
Six Diocesses of the West Empire, and had a Primate of its own: Nay Hunc
cunctis Liberalium Artium disciplinis eruditum pro Magistro teneamus, and quasi
Comparem, velut alterius Orbis Apostolicum and Patriarcham, etc. Io. Capgravius
de Vitis Sanctorum, in vita S. Anselmi. Et Guil. Malmesburiens. de Gestis
Pontificum Anglorum. p. 223. Edit. Francof. 1601.
John Capgrave, one of your own, and Learned for those times, and long before
him William of Malmesburie tell us, That Pope Urbane the second, at the
Council held at Bari in Apulia, accounted my Worthy Predecessor S. Anselme,
as his own Compeere, and said, he was as the Apostolic, and Patriarch of the
other world. (So he then termed this Island.) Now the Britains having a Primate
of their own (which is greater then a Metropolitan) yea a Ibi (Cantuariae id
est) prima Seeds Archiepiscopi habetur, qui est totius Anglia Primas and
Patriarcha. Guil. Malmesburiensis in Prolog. Lib. 1. de Gestis Pontificum
Anglorum. p. 195.
Patriarch, if you will, He could not be Appealed from, to Rome, by S.
Gregorie's own Doctrine. Thirdly, it will be hard for any man to prove, there
were any Churches then in the World, which were not under some either
Patriarch, or Metropolitan. Fourthly, if any such were, it is gratis dictum,
and impossible to be proved, that all such Churches, where ever seated in the
world, were obliged to depend on Rome. For manifest it is, that the Bishops
which were Ordained in places without the Limits of the Roman Empire (which
places they commonly called praterea and qui sunt (...), in Ba^barico, Episcopi
a Sanctissimo Throno Sanctissima Constantinopolitanae Ecclesia Ordinentur.
Codex Canonum Ecclesia universae. Can. 206. And Iustellus proves it there at
large, that by in Barbarico, in that Canon, is meant In Solo Barbarorum. Annot.
Ibid.
Barbarous) were all to be Ordained, and therefore most probable to be governed
by the Patriarch of Constantinople. And for Rome's being the Head of all
Churches, I have said enough to that in diverse parts of this Discourse.

And since I am thus fallen upon the Church of Africa, I shall borrow another
reason from the Practice of that Church, why by Principatus, S. Augustine
neither did, nor could mean any Principality of the Church, or Bishop of Rome
over the Whole Church of Christ. For as the Acts of Councels and Stories go,
the African Prelates finding that all succeeding Popes were not of Melciades
his temper, set themselves to assert their own Liberties, and held it out
stoutly against Zozimus, Boniface the first, and Caelestine the first, who were
successively Popes of Rome. At last it, was concluded in the sixth Council of
Carthage (wherein were assembled two hundred and seventeene Bishops, of which
S. Augustine himself was one) that they would not give way to such a manifest
incroachment upon their Rights and Liberties, and thereupon gave present notice
to Pope Coelestine to forbear sending his Officers amongst them, Ne f^mosum
typhum seculi in Ecclesiam Christi videatur inducere, etc. Epist. Conc. Afric.
ad Papam Coelestinum primum. Apud Nicolin. To. 1. Council. p. 844.
least he should seem to induce the swelling pride of the world into the
Church of Christ. And this is said to have amounted into a formal Separation
from the Church of Rome, and to have continued for the space of somewhat more
then one hundred years; Now that such a Separation there was of the African
Church from Rome, and a Reconciliation after, stands upon the Credit and
Authority of two public Instruments extant both, among the Ancient Councels.
The one is an Epist. Bonifacii 2. apud Nicol. To. 2. Council. p. 544.
Epistle from Boniface the second, in whose time the Reconciliation to Rome is
said to be made by Eulalius then Bishop of Carthage, but the Separation,
Instigante Diabolo, by the Temptation of the Divil. The other is an Exemp.
Precu^ apud Nicolin. Ibid. p. 525.
Exemplar Precu^, or Copy of the Petition of the same Eulalius, in which he
damnes and curses all those his Predecessors which went against the Church of
Rome. Amongst which Eulalius must needs Curse S. Augustine; And Pope Boniface
accepting this Submmission, must acknowledge that S. Augustine and the rest of
that Council deserved this Curse, and dyed under it, as violating Rectae Fidei
Regulam, the Rule of the Right Faith (so the Exemplar Precum begins) by
refusing the Popes Authority. I will not deny, but that there are diverse
Reasons given by the Learned Romanists, and Reformed Writers for and against
the Truth and Authority of both these Instruments. But because this is too long
to be examined here, I will say but this, and then make my use of it to my
present purpose, giving the Church of Rome free leave to acknowledge these
Instruments to be true, or false, as they please. That which I shall say, is
this: These Instruments are let stand in all Editions of the Councels and
Epistles Decretall. As for Example in the Old Edition by Isidor, Anno. 1524.
And in another Old Edition of them Printed Anno. 1530. And in that which was
published by P Crabbe, Anno. 1538. And in the Edition of Valentinus Ioverius,
Anno. 1555. And in that by Surius, Anno. 1567. And in the Edition at Venice by
Nicolinus, Anno. 1585. And in all of these without any Note, or Censure upon
them. And they are in the Edition of Binius too, Anno. 1618. but there is a
Censure upon them to keep a quarter it may be with Baron. Annal. An. ad. 4 9.
Nu. 93. 94.
Baronius, who was the first (I think) that ever quarrelled them, and he does
it tartly. And since Ualde mihi illa Epistola suspecta sunt. Bellar. L. 2. de
To. Pont. c. 25. Respondeo primum. Sed si forte illa Epistola verae sunt, nihil
enim affirm^ etc. Ibid. ult.
Bellarmine follows the same way but more doubtfully. This is that which I had
to say. And the Use which I shall make of these Instruments, whether they be
true or false, is this. They are either true or false, that is of necessity. If
they be false, then Boniface the Second, and his Accomplices at Rome, or some
for them are notorious Forgers, and that of Records of great Consequence
concerning the Government and Peace of the whole Church of Christ, and to the
perpetual Infamy of that Sea, and all this foolishly and to no purpose. For if
there were no such Separation, as these Records mention of the Africane
Churches from the Roman, to what end should Boniface, or any other counterfeit
an Epistle of his own, and a Submission of Eulalius? On the other side, if
these Instruments be true (as the sixth Council of Carthage against all other
Arguments makes me incline to believe they are, in Substance at least, though
perhaps not in all Circumstances) then it is manifest, that the Church of Africa
separated from the Church of Rome; That this Separation continued above one
hundred years; That the Church of Afric made this Separation in a National
Council of their own, which had in it two hundred and seventeene Bishops:
That this Separation was made (for ought appears) only because they at Rome
were too ready to entertain Appeals from the Church of Afric, as appears
in the Case of And so the Council of Carthage sent word to Pope Calestine
plainly, that in admitting such Appeals, he brake the Decrees of the Council
of Nice. Epist. Council. Africa. ad Calestinum. c. 105. Apud Nicolin, Tom. 1.
Council. p. 844.
Apiarius, who then appealed thither; That S. Augustine, Eugenius, Fulgentius,
and all those Bishops, and other Martyrs which suffered in the Uandalike
Persecution; dyed in the time of this Separation, That if this Separation were
not just, but a Schism, then these Famous Fathers of the Church dyed (for
ought appears) in Actual and unrepented Schism, Plane ex Ecclesiae
Catholicae albo Exp^ngenda f^issent S^nctorum Africanorum Martyrum Ag^ina qui
in persecutione Vandalica pro Fide Catholica etc. Baron. Ann. 419. Number. 93. Et
Binius. In Notis ad Epist. Bomfacii 2. ad Eulalium.
and out of the Church. And if so, then how comes S. Augustine to be, and be
accounted a Saint all over the Christian world, and at Rome it self? But if
the Separation were just, then is it far more lawful for the Church of
England by a National Council to cast off the Popes Usurpation (as. 24. Nu. 5.
She did) then it was for the African Church to separate; Because then the
African Church excepted only against the Pride of Rome Bel^. 2. de To. Pont. c.
25.. 2.
in Case of Appeals, and two other Canons less material; But the Church of
England excepts (besides this Grievance) against many Corruptions in Doctrine
belonging to the Faith, with which Rome at that time of the African Separation
was not tainted. And I am out of all doubt, that S. August. and those other
Famous men in their generations, durst not thus have separated from Rome, had
the Pope had that powerful Principality over the whole Church of Christ; And
that by Christ's own Ordinance, and Institution, as A. C. pretends he had. A.
C. p. 58.


I told you a little. 25. Nu. 10.
before, that the Popes grew under Emperors till they had overgrown them And
now lest A. C. should say, I speak it without proof, I will give you a brief
touch of the Church-story in that behalf: And that from the beginning of the
Emperors becoming Christians, to the time of Charles the Great, which
contains about five hundred years. For so soon as the Emperors became
Christian, the Church (which before was kept under by persecutions) began to be
put in better order. For the calling and Authority of Bishops over the
Inferior Clergy, that was a thing of k^owne use, and benefit for Preservation
of Unity and Peace in the Church. And so much Quod autem postea Vxus electus
est qui cateris praporer^ur, in Schismatis remedium fallum est, ne unusquisque
ad se trahens Christi Ecclestam rumperet. Nam and Alexandriae a Marco
Evangelista ^resbyteri semper unum ex seclectum in excellenttori gradu col
ocatum, Episcopum nominabant, etc. S. Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagrium. So even
according to S. Hiero^, Bishops had a very ancient and honorable descent in
the Church from S. Mark the Evangelist. And about the end of the same Epistle,
he acknowledges it. Traditionem esse Apostolicam. Nay mo e then so, He afhimes
plainly, That Vli non est Saccrdos non est Ecclesia, S. Hieron. advers.
Luciferian. And in that place most manifelt i^ is that S. Icrom by Sacerdos
means a Bishop: For he speaks de Sacerdote qui potestatem habet Ordinandi,
which in S. Ienomes own Judgment no mere Priest had, but a Bishop only. S.
Hier. Epist ad Evagrium. So even with him, no Bishop, and no Church.
S. Jerome tells us. Though being none himself he was no great friend to
Bishops. And this was so settled in the minds of men from the very Infancy of
the Christian Church, as that it had not been to that time contradicted by any.
So that then there was no Controversy about the Calling; all agreed upon that.
The only Difficulty was to accommodate the Places and Precedencies of Bishops,
among themselves, for the very Necessity of Order and Government. To do this,
the most equal and impartial way was, That as the Church is in the
Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in it (as Non ^nim Respub. est in
Ecclesia: sed Ecclesia in Repub. Optat. L. 3.
Optatus tells us.) So the Honors of the Church should Conc. Calced, Can. 9.
and Actio 16.
follow the Hon urs of the State. And so it was insinuated, if not Ordered (as
appears) by the Canons of the Councels of Chalcedon and Antioch. And this was
the very fountain of Papal Greatness, the Pope having his Residence in the
great Imperial City. But Precedence is one thing, and Authority is another. It
was thought fit therefore, though (as S. Cyprian. L. de Simp Pralat.
S. Cyprian speaks) Episcopatus unus est; the Calling of a Bishop be one and
the same, that yet among Bishops there should be a certain Subordination, and
Subjection. The Empire therefore being cast into several Divisions (which they
then called Diocesses) every Diocese contained several Provinces, every
Province several Bishoprics. The Chief of a Dioc sse (in that larger sense)
was called (...), and sometimes a Patriarch. The Chief of a Province, a
Metropolitan. Next the Bishops in their several Diocesses (as we now use that
word) Among These there was effectual subjection respectively grounded upon
Canon, and Positive Law in their several Quarters. But over them none at all.
All the Difference there, was but Honorary, not Autoritative. If the Ambition
of some particular persons did attempt now and then to break these Bounds, it
is no marvel. For no Calling can sanctify all that have it. And Socrates
t^lles us, That in this way the Bishops of Alexandria and Rome advanced
themselves to a great height (...), even beyond the quality of Bishops. Now
upon view of Story it will appear, that what advantage accrewed to Alexandria,
was gotten by the violence of Theophilus, Patriarch there. A man of exceeding
great Learning, and of no less violence; and he made no little advantage, out
of this, That the Empress ^udoxia used his help for the casting of S.
Chrylostome out of Constantinople. But the Roman Prelates grew by a steady and
constant watch. fullness upon all Occasions to increase the Honor of that Sea.
Interposing and (...)) ut alunt sivese jaclat esse. Greg. Naz. Carm. de vitasua
p. 26.
assuming to themselves to be Uindices Canonum (as S. Gregory Naz. speaks)
Defenders and Restorers of the Canons of the Church, which was a fair
pretense, and took extremely well. But yet the world took notice of this their
aim. For in all Contestations between the East and the West, which were nor
small, nor few, the Western Bishops objected Levity to the Eastern; And they
again Arrogance to the Bishops of the West, as Orientalibut levitas, Occidet
alibus arrogantia invicem objecta est. Bilius. Annot. in S. Gregor. Naz. Vitam.
Na. 153. Quid oput est Occidentali superciliolex Sa^cto Basil. etc.
Bilius observes, and upon very warrantable testimonies. For all this, the
Bishop of Rome continued in good Obedience to the Emperor, enduring his
Censures and Judgments: And being chosen by the Clergy and People of Rome, he
accepted from the Emperor the Ratification of that choice. Insomuch that about
the year 579. when all Italy was on fire with the Lombards, and Hac una suit
causa quare l'elagius injussu Principis Pontisex creatus sit, quum extra
obsessam ab host vrbe^ mitti quispia^ non posset etc. Postea itaque ad
placandum Imperatore^ Gregorius Diaconus. etc. Platina in vita Pelagii 2. and
Onuph. ibid.
Pelagius the second constrained through the necessity of the times contrary to
the Example of his Predecessors to entere upon the Popedom without the
Emperors leave, S. Gregory then a Deacon was shortly after sent on Embassy to
excuse it. About this time brake out the Ambition of Onuph. In Plat. in vi^a
Bonif. 3.
John Patriarch of Constantinople affecting to be Universal Bishop. He was
countenanced in this by Mauricius the Emperor, but sowerly opposed by Pelagius
and S. Gregory. Insomuch, that S. Gregory says plainly, That this Pride of In
hac ejus superbia quid aliud nisi propinqua jam ^ntichristi esse tempora
designatur. S. Greg. L. 4. Epist. 78.
his shows that the times of Antichrist were near. So as yet (and this was
now upon the point of six hundred years after Christ) there was no Universal
Bishop, No One Monarch over the whole Militant Church. But Mauricius being
deposed and murdered by Phocas; Phocas conferred upon It may be they will say
S. Gregory did not inveigh against the Thing, but the Person. That John of
Constantinople should take that upon him, which belonged to the Pope. But it is
manifest by S. Gregory's own text, that he speaks against the Thing it self,
that neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any other, ought to take on him that
Title. Cura totius Ecclesia and Principatus S. Petro committitur, and tamen
Vniversalis Apostolus non vocatur. S. Greg. L. 4. Epist. 76. (Therefore neither
is his successor, Universal Bishop.) Nunquid ego hac in re propriam causam
defendo? nunquid specialem injuriam Uindico? and non magis causam Omnipotentis
Dei and Vniversalis Ecclesiae? where he plainly denies, that he speaks in his
own Cause, or in the Cause of his Sea. Per Venerandam Chalcedonensem Synodum
hoc Nomen Ro^. Pontifici oblatum est, sed nullus eorum unquam hoc
singularitatis Uocabulum assumpsit, nec uti consensit, ne dum privatum aliquid
daretur Vni, honor debito Sacerdotes privarentur Vniversi, etc. Where he
plainly says, the Roman Bishops rejected this Title. Ibid. And yet for all
this, Pope Gregory the seventh delivers it as one of his Dictates in a Council
held at Rome about the year 1076. Quod solus Romanus Pontifex jure dicatur
Vniversalis. Baron. ad An. 1076. N. 31. and. 32.
Boniface the third that very honor, which two of his Predecessors had
declaimed against as Absit a Cordibus Christianorum Nomen istud Blasphemia. S.
Greg. L. 4. Epist. 76. In isto (...) ^cabulo ^onsentire, nihil est aliud quam
fidem perdere. S. Greg. L. 4. Epist. 83.
Monstrous and Blasphemous, if not Antichristian. Where, by the way either
these two Popes, Pelagius and S. Gregory erred in this weighty business about
an Universal Bishop over the whole Church. Or if they did not Err, Boniface,
and the rest which after him took it upon them, were in their very
Predecessors judgment, Antichristian. But to proceed. Uana tunc habebatur Cl^ri
and Populi Electio, nisi aut Imperatores, aut little Exa^chi confirmassent.
Plat. in vita Severini. 1.
As yet the right of Election or Ratification of the Pope continued in the
Emperor. But then the Lombards grew so great in Italy, and the Empire was so
infested with Saracens; and such changes happened in all parts of the world, as
that neither for the present, the Hom ge of the Pope was useful to the
Emperor; nor the Protection of the Emperor availaeble for the Pope. By this
means the Bishop of Rome was left to play his own game by himself. A thing
which as it pleased him well enough; So both he, and his Successors made great
Advantage by it. For being grown to that Eminence by the Emperor, and the
greatness of that City and Place of his abode, He found himself the more
free, the greater the tempest was, that beat upon the other: And then first,
Quum Theophylactus Exarchus Imperatoris Itali^m peteret, Milites Itali, veriti
ne quid mali ejus Adventus (...), quod superioribus temporibus f^re magis cum
Pontisicibus quam cum imperatoribus sensissent, ingressurum Romam interficere
constituerant (And the Emperors own Governer was feign to be defended from the
Emperors own soldiers by the Popes power, who had gotten interest in them
against their own Master) Platina in vita Johan. 6. Absimarus was then Emperor.
He set himself to alienate the hearts of the Italians from the Emperor. Next
he Opposed himself against him. And about the year seven hundred and ten,
Po^e Constantine the first did also first of all openly confront Ph^ppicus the
Emperor in defense of Images. As Primus omnium Romans Pontisicum Imperatort
Graeco Philippico in os resistere palam ausus st. Onuph in Plat. in vita
Constantini 1.
Onuphrius tells us. After him Gregory the second, and the third took up his
example, and did the like by Leo Isaurus. By this time the Lombards began to
pinch very close and to vex on all sides not It^ly only, but Pla^a in vita
Gregor. 2. and 3.
Rome too This drives the Pope to seek a new Patron. And very fitly he meets
with Charles Martell in France, that famous warrior against the Saracen's. Vt
laboranti Rome and Ecclesiae primo quoque tempore auxiliu^ ferret etc. Plati^a.
in vita Greg. 3.
Him he implores in defense of the Church against the Lombar^s. This add esse
seems very advised y taken, atleast it proves very fortunate to them both.
Quares semel incaep^ta cum Longobardi^ Regni excidio finit a est Onuph. in
Plat. in vita Constanti^ primi.
For in short time it dissolved the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, which
had then stood two hundred and four years, which was the Popes security; And
it brought the Crown of France into the House of Charles, and shortly after the
Western Empire. And now began the Pope to be great indeed. for by the Bounty
of Reddi^ itaque Romany Exarchatus est, quicquid Padum and Apenninum
interjacet. etc. Plat^. in vita Stephan. secundi.
Pipin son of Charles, that which was taken from the Lombards was given to
the Pope. So that now of a Bishop, he became a Temporal Prince. But when
Charles the Great had set up the Western Empire, then he resumed the Ancient
and Original Power of the Emperor, to govern the Church, to call Counsels,
to order Papal Elect^. And this Power continued in his Posterity. For this
Right of the Emperor was in force and use in Gregory the seventh's time,
Imperator in Gratiam cum Gregorio red^, cundemque in Pontificatu confirmavit,
ut tum Imperatorum mos erat. Plat. in vita Gregor. septim.
Who was confirmed in the Popedom by Henry the fourth, whom he afterward
deposed. And it might have continued longer, if the succeeding ^mperors had had
abilities enough to secure, or vindicate their own Right. But the Pope keeping
a strong Council about him, and meeting with some Weak Princes, and they often
times distracted with great and dangerous wars, grew stronger, till he got
the better. So this is enough to show how the Popes climed up by the Emperors,
till they over-topped them, which is all I said before, and have now proved.
And this was about the year, 1073. (For the whole Popedom of Greg. the
seventh was begun and ended within the Reign of William the Conqueror.) Yet
was it carried in succeeding times with great changes of fortune and different
success. The Emperor sometimes plucking from the Pope, and the Multi deinde
fuerunt Imperatores Hen. similiores, quam Iu. Caesar's, quos subig^re non suit
difficile, dum d^i revum omnium securi etc. Call. L. 4 Instit. c. 11.. 13.
Pope from the Emperor, winning and loosing ground, as their Spirits,
Abilities, Aids and Opportunities were, till at the last the Pope settled
himself upon the Grounds laid by For in a Synod at Rome about the year 1076.
Pope Greg the seventh establi^hed certain brief Conclusions, twenty seven in
number, upon which stands almost all the Greatness of the Papacy These
Conclusions are called Dictatus Papae. And they are reckoned up by Baronius in
the year 1076. Nu. 31, 32, etc. But whether this Dictatorship did now first
invade the Church, I cannot certainly say. The chief of these Propositions
follow here. Quod solus Romans Pontifex jure dicatur Vniversalis.
Quod solius Papae pedes omnes Principes deosculentur.
Quod liceat illi Imperatores Deponere.
Quod null t Synodus absque praecepto ejus debet Generalis vocari.
Quod nullum Capitulum, nullusque Liber Canonicus habeatur absque illius
Authoritate.
Quod sententia illius a nullo debet retractari, and ipse omnium solus
retractare potest.
Quod Romans Ecclesia nunquam erravit, nec in perpetuum, Scriptura testante,
errabit.
Quod Romans Pontifex, si Canonic e suerit ordinatus, meritis B. Petri indubit
ant er efficitur sanctus.
Quod a fidelitate Iniquorum subditos potest absolvere.

Gregory the seventh, in the great power which he now uses in and over these
parts of the Christian world.

Thirdly, A. C. knowing it is not enough to say this, That the Pope is Pastor
of the whole Church, labors to prove it. And first he tells us, that Irenaeus
intimates so much; but he does not tell us where. And he is' much scanted of
Ancient Proof, if Irenaeus stand alone. Besides, Irenaeus was a Bishop of the
Gallicane Church, and a very unlikely man to Captivate the Liberty of that
Church under the more powerful Principality of Rome. And how can we have
better evidence of his Judgment touching that Principality, then the Actions
of his Life? When Pope Victor Excommunicated the Asian Churches (...) Eusebius. L.
5. c. 25.
all at a blow, was not Irenaeus the Chief man that reprehended him for it? A
very unmeet and undutifull thing, sure, it had been in Irenaeus, in deeds to
tax him of rashness and inconsiderateness, whom in words A. C. would have to
be acknowledged by him, The Supreme and Infallible Pastor of the Universal
Church. But the Place of Irenaeus, which A. C. means, (I think) is this, wh^
^he uses these words indeed, but short of A. Cs. sense of it. Adhanc Ecclesiam,
propter potentiorem Principalitatem, necesse est ^mnem convenire Ecclesiam. 1.
e. eos qui sunt undique sideles: In qua semper ab his qui sunt undique,
conservata est ea quae est ab Apostolu Traditio. Iren. L. 3. c. 3.
To this Church (he speaks of Rome) propter potentiorem principalitatem, for
the more powerful Principality of it, it is necessary that every Church, that
is, the faithful, undique, round about should have recourse. Should have
recourse, so A. C. translates it. And what does this avail him? A. C. p. 58.
Very great reason was there in Irenaeus his time, That upon any Difference
arising in the Faith omnes undique Fideles, all the Faithful, or, if you will,
all the Churches round about, should have recourse, that is, resort to Rome,
being the Imperial City, and so a Church of more powerful Principality, then
any other at that time in those parts of the world. Well: Will this exalt Rome
to be the Head of the Church Universal? What if the States and Policies of the
world be much changed since, and this Conveni^ncy of resorting to Rome be quite
ceased? Then is not Rome divested of her more powerful Principality? But the
meaning of A C. is, We must so have recourse to Rome, as to submit our Faith to
hers: And then not only in Irenaeus his time, but through all times reform
Our selves by her Rule: That is, all the Faithful, not undique, round about,
but ubique, every where, must agree with Rome in point of Faith. This he
means, and Rome may thank him for it. But this Irenaeus says not, nor will
his words bear it, nor durst A C. therefore construe him so, but was content to
smooth it over with this ambiguous phrase of having recourse to Rome. Yet this
is a place as much stood upon by them, as any other in all Antiquity. And
should I grant them their own sense, That all the faithful everywhere must
agree with Rome (which I may give, but can never grant) yet were not this
saying any whit prejudicial to us now. For first here is a powerful
Principality ascribed to the Church of Rome. And that no man of learning doubts
but the Church of Rome had within its own Patriarchate and Jurisdiction; and
that was very large, containing Ed. Brierwood, of the Jurisdiction and Limits
of the Patriarchs, in the time of the Nicen Council. Ad. Qu. 1. M. S.
all the Provinces in the Diocese of Italy (in the old sense of the word
Diocese) which Provinces the Lawyers and others term Suburbicarias. There
were ten of them. The three Islands, Sicily, Corsica, and Sardinia; and the
other seven upon the firm land of Italy. And this (I take it) is plain in
Ruffinus. For he living shortly after the Nicene Council, as he did, and being
of Italy, as he was, he might very well know the Bounds of that Patriarchs
Jurisdiction, as it was then practiced: Apud Alexandriam, ut in urbe Roma
vetusta consuetudo servetur, ut ille Aegypti, ut hic Suburbicariarn^
Ecclesiarum selicitudinem gerat. Russin. L. 1. Eccles. Hist. c. 6.
And he says expressly, That according to the old Custom, the Roman
Patriarchs Charge was confined within the Limits of the Suburbicarian Churches.
To avoid the force of this Testimony, Peron L. 2. of his Reply. c. 6.
Cardinal Peron lays load upon Ruffinus. For he charges him with Passion,
Ignorance, and Rashness. And one piece of his Ignorance is, That he has ill
translated the Canon of the Council of Nice. Now be that as it may, I neither
do, nor can approve his Translation of that Canon; nor can it be easily proved,
that he purposely intended a Translation. All that I urge is, that Ruffinus
living in that time and Place, was very like well to know and understand the
Limits and Bounds of that Patriarchate of Rome, in which he lived. Secondly
here is, That it had potentiorem, a more powerful Principality then other
Churches had. And that the Protestants grant too; and that not only because
the Roman Prelate was Ordine primus, first in Order, and Degree, which some
One must be, to avoid Confusion; Quia cum Orientales and Gracae Ecclesiae, and
Afrcanae etiam, multis inter se Opinionum dissentionibus (...), haec sedatior
aliis, and minus turbulenta fuerit. Calv. L. 4. Justit. c. 6.. 16.
But also because the Roman Sea had won a great deal of Credit, and gained
a great deal of Power to it self in Church Assaires: Because while the
Greek, yea and the African Ch^rches too, were turbulent, and distracted with
many and dangerous Opinions, the Church of Rome all that while, and a good
while after Irenaeus too, was more calm, and constant to the Truth. Thirdly,
here is a Necessity (say they) required, That every Church, that is, the
faithful, which are every where, agree with that Church. But what? simply with
that Church, what ever it do, or believe? No, nothing less. For Irenaeus
adds, with that Church, in qua, in which is conserved that Tradition which was
delivered by the Apostles. And God forbid but it should be necessary for all
Churches, and all the faithful to agree with that Ancient Apostolic Church in
all those Things, in which it keeps to the Doctrine and Discipline delivered
by the Apostles. In Irenaeus his time it kept these better then any other
Church, and by this in part obtained potentiorem Principalitate, a Greater
power then other Churches, but not over all other Churches. And (as they
understand Irenae) a Necessity lay upon all other Churches to agree with this:
but this Necessity was laid upon them by the Then Integrity of the Christian
Faith there professed, not by the Universality of the Roman Jurisdiction now
challenged. And let Rome reduce it self to the Observation of Tradition
Apostolic, to which it then held, and I will, say as Irenaeus did; That it
will be then necessary for every Church, and for the Faithful every where, to
agree with it. Lastly, let me Observe too, That Irenaeus made no doubt, but
that Rome might fall away from Apostolical Tradition, as well as other
Particular Churches of great Name have done. For he does not say, in qua
servanda semper erit, sed in qua servata est: Not, in which Church the Doctrine
delivered from the Apostles shall ever be entirely kept: That had been home
indeed: But in which, by God's grace and mercy, it was to that time of Irenaeus
so kept and preserved. So we have here in Irenaeus his Judgment, the Church
of Rome then Entire, but not Infallible. And endowed with a more powerful
Principality then other Churches, but not with an Universal Dominion over all
other Churches; which is the Thing in Question.

But to this place of Irenaeus A. C. joins a reason Bishop of Rome is A. C. p.
58.
S. Peter's Successor, and therefore to Him we must have recourse. The Fathers
I deny not, ascribe very much to S. Peter: But it is to S. Peter in his own
person. And among them, Epiphanius is as free, and as frequent in extolling S.
Peter, as any of them: And yet did he never intend to give an Absolute
Principality to Rome in S. Peter's right. There is a Noted Place in that
Father, where his words are these: Ipse autem Dominus constituit ^um Primum
Apostolorum, Petram firmam super quam Ecclesia Dei adificat a est, and portae
inferorum non valebunt adversus illam, etc. Juxta omnem enim modum in Ipso
firmata est fides, qui accepit Clavem Coelorum, etc. In hoc enim omnes
Questiones ac Subtilitates fidei inveniuntur. Epiphan. in Ancorato. Edit.
Paris. Lat. 1564. fol. 497. A. Edit, vero Grace. Latin. To. 2. p. 14.
For the Lord himself made S. Peter the first of the Apostles, a firm Rock,
upon which the Church of God is built, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it, etc. For in him the Faith is made firm every way, who received the
Key of Heaven, etc. For in him all the Questions and Subtilties of the Faith
are found. This is a great Place at first sight too, and deserves a Marginall
Note to call young Readers eyes to view it. And it has this Note in the Old
Latin Edition at Paris, 1564. Petri Principatus, and Praestantia, Peter's
Principality, and Excellency. This Place, as much show as it make for the
Roman Principality, I shall easily clear, and yet do no wrong, either to S.
Peter, or the Roman Church. For most manifest it is, That the authority of S.
Peter is (...) For there b^gins the Ar^ument of Epiphanius.
urged here to prove the Godhead of the Holy Ghost. And then follow the
Elogyes given to S. Peter, the better to set off, and make good that Authority;
As that he was (...)
Princeps Apostolorum, the Prince of the Apostles, and pronounced bl^ssed by
Christ; because as God the Father revealed to him the Godhead of the Son, so
did the Son the Godhead of the Holy Ghost. After this Epiphanius calls Him
(...).
solidam Petram, a solid Rock, upon which the Church of God was founded, and
against which the Gates of Hell should not prevail. And adds, That the Faith
was rooted, and made firm in him (...), etc.
every way, in him who received the Key of Heaven. And after this, he gives the
Reason of all: (...) etc. S. M^. 16. 17.
Because in Him: (mark I pray, it is still in Him, as he was blessed by that
Revelation from God the Father S. Matthew 16.) were found all the (...) the
very Niceties and exactness of the Christian Faith. For he prosess^d the
Godhead of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; And so Omni modo every Point of
Faith was (...) in Him. And this is the full meaning of that Learned Father in
t^is passage. Now therefore Building the Church upon Saint Peter, in Epiphanius
his sense, is not, as if He and his Successors were to be Monarchs ov^r it for
ever: But it is the edifying and establishing the Church in the true Faith of
Christ by the Confession which S. P^ter made. And so (...). Qui factus est
nobis rever a solida Petra firmans fidem Domini. In qua (Petra) aedificata est
Ecclesia juxta omnem modum. Primo, quod confessus est Christum esse Filium Dei
vi vi, and statim audivit super hanc Petram soli^ (...) adisicabo Ecclesiam
(...). -- Etiam de Sp. Sancto idem etc. Epipha. L. 2. Hares. 59. contra
Catharos. To. 1. p. 500. Edit. Graeco-Lat.
He expresses himself elsewhere most plainly: Saint Peter (says he) who was
made to us indeed a solid Rock firming the Faith of our Lo^d On which (Rock)
the Church is built juxta omne^ modum, every way. First that he Confessed
Christ to be the Son of the Living God, and by and by he heard: Upon this
Rock of solid Faith I will build my Church. And the same Confession he made of
the Holy Ghost. Thus was S. Peter a solid Rock upon which the Church was
founded omni modo, every way. That is, the Faith of the Church was (...). Ibid.
confirmed by him in every Point. But that S. Peter was any Rock, or
Foundation of the Church, so as that he and his Successors must be relied on
in all matters of Faith, and govern the Church like Princes, or Monarchs, that
Epiphanius never thought of. And that he did never think so, I prove it thus.
For beside this apparent meaning of his Context (as is here expressed) how
could he possibly think of a Supremacy due to S. Peter's Successor, that in
most express terms, and that Ille primus (speaking of S. James the Lords
Brother) Episcopalem Cathedram capit, quum ei ante ^teros omnes suum in terris
Thronum Dominus tradidisset. Epiphan. L. 3. Hares. 78. To. 2. p. 1039. Et fere
similiter. To. 1. L. 1. Hares. 29.
twice repeated, makes S. James the brother of our Lord, and not S. Peter,
succeed our Lord in the Principality of the Church. And Epiphanius was too full
both of Learning, and Industry, to speak contrary to himself in a Point of
this moment.

Next, since A. C. speeds no better with Irenaeus, he A. C. p. 58.
Bishop of Rome is S. Peter's Successor. Well. Suppose that. What then? What?
Why then he succeeded in all S. Peter's Bellar. L. 1. de To. Pont. c. 9..
Respondeo Pontificatum.
Prerogatives which are Ordinary, and belonged to him as a Bishop, though not
in the Extraordinary, which belonged to him as an Apostle. For that is it which
you all say,. 25. Nu. 10.
but no man proves. If this be so, yet then I must tell A. C. S. Peter in his
Ordinary Power was never made Pastor of the whole Church: Nay in his
Extraordinary, he had no Bellar. Ibid.
more powerful Principality then the other Apostles had. A The Fathers gave
three Prerogatives to S. Peter. Of Authority. Of Primacy. And of Principality.
But not of Supremacy of Power. Raynold. cont. Heart. c. 5. Divis. 3. And he
proves it at large.
Primacy of Order was never denied Him by the Protestants: And an Universal
Supremacy of Power was never granted him by the Primitive Christians. Yea but
Christ promised the keys to S. Peter, S. Mat. 16 18.
S. Mat. 16. True, but so did he to all the rest of the Apostles, S. Mat. 18.
18. S. Ioh. 20. 22.
S. Mat. 18. and S. Ioh. 20. And to their Successors, as much as to His. So
it is Tibi, and Illis, not Tibi, non Illis. I give the Keys to thee and them,
not to thee to exclude them. Unless any man will think Heaven Gates so easy,
that they might open and shut them without the Keys. And S. Augustine Si hoc
Petro tantum dictum est, non sacit hoc Ecclesia, etc. S. Aug. Tract. 50. in S.
Ioh.
is plain: If this were said only to S. Peter, then the Church has no power
to do it; which God forbid! The Keys therefore were given to S. Peter, and
the rest in a Figure of the Church, to whose power, and for whose use They were
given. But there is not one Key in all that Bunch, that can let in S. Peter'
Successor, to a more powerful Principality universal the the Successors of
the other Apostles had.

Yea but Christ prayed, That S. Pete^ Faith might A. C. p. 58.
not fail. S. Luke 22. 32.
S. Luke 22. That Is true. And ^n that sense, that Christ prayed, S. Peter's
Faith faile^ not; That is, in Application to his person for his Perseverance in
the Faith, as Deum dare, ut in fide perseveretur. S. Prosper. L. 1. de Vocat.
Gent. c. 24.
S. Prosper applies it. Which Perseverance yet he must owe and acknowledge to
the grace of Christ's Prayer for him, not to the power and ability of his own
Free Will, as Rogavi ut non deficeret, etc. Et certe juxta vos in Apostoli erat
positum potestate si voluisset, ut non deficeret fides ejus, etc. S. Hieron. L.
2. adversus Pelagianos.
S. Jerome tells us. Aliquid speciale. Bellar. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3..
Secundo, quia sine.
Bellarmine likes not this: Because (says he) Christ here obtained so^e
special Privilege for S. Peter, whereas Perseverance in Grace is a Gift
common to all the Elect. And he is so far right. And the Special Grace which
this Prayer of Christ obtained for S. Peter was, That he should not fall into a
final Apostasy; no not when Satan had sisted him to the branne, that he fell
most horribly even into a threefold Denial of his Master, and that with a
Curse. And to recover this, and Persevere, was aliquid speciale I trow, if any
thing ever were. But this will not down with Bellarmine. No, The Vt nec ipse ut
Pontifex doceret unquam aliquid contra fidem, sive ut in Sede ejus inveniretur
qui doceret. Bellar. L. 4 de Romans Pont. c. 3.. Alterum Privilegium est.
Aliquid speciale, the special Thing here obtained was (says he) That neither
S. Peter himself, nor any other that should sit in his Seat should ever teach
any thing contrary to the true Faith. That S. Peter after his recovery should
preach nothing either as Apostle or Bishop contrary to the Faith, will easily
be granted him; But that none of his Successors should do it, but be all
Infallible, that certainly never came within the Compass of Rogavi pro te
Petre, I have prayed for thee Peter. And Bellarmines Proof of this is his just
Confutation. For he prooves this Exposition of that Text only by the Testimony
of seven Popes in their own Cause. And then takes a leap to Theophylact, who
says nothing to the purpose. So that upon the matter Bellarmine confesses
there is not one Father of the Church disinteressed in the Cause, that
understands this Text as Bellarmiue does, till you come down to Theophylact.
So the Popes Infallibility appeared to no body but the Popes themselves, for
above a Thousand years after Christ. For so long it was before Theophylactus
floruit circa An. Dom. 1072.
Theophylact lived. And the spite of it is, Theophylact could not see it
neither. For the most that Bellarmine makes him say, is but this: Quia (...)
habco Principem, dis^ipuloru^, confirma caeteros. Hoc enim decet Te qui post me
Ecclesia Petraes and Fundamentum. Bellar. L. 4. De Romans Pont. c. 3.. Praeter
hos. Ex Theophyl. in 21. S Luc.
Because I account thee as chief of my Disciples, confirm the rest; for this
becomes Thee, which art to be a Rock and Foundation of the Church after me. For
this is ^ersonall too, and of S. Peter, and that as he was an Apostle. For
otherwise then as an Apostle, he was not a Rock or Foundati^n of the Church,
no not in a Secondary sense. The special privilege therefore which Christ
prayed for, was personal to S. Peter, and is that which before I mentioned.
And Bellarmine himself says, That Christ Impetravit. etc. ibid.. Est igitur
tertia.
obtained by this Prayer two Privileges, especial ones for S. Peter. The one,
That he should never quite fall from the true Faith, how strongly soever he
were tempted. The other, That there should never be found any sitting in his
Seat, that should teach against it. Now for the first of these, Ex quibus pri
vilegiis primum fortasse non manavit ad posteros, at secundum sine dubio
manavit ad Posteros sive Successores. Bellar. Ibid.. Alterum Privilegium.
Bellarmine doubts it did not flow over to his Successors. Why then it is true,
which I here say, That this was Personal to S. Peter. But the second he says,
Out of all doubt passed over to his Successors. Nay, that is not out of all
doubt neither. First, because many Learned men have challenged many Popes for
teaching Heresy; and that is against the true Faith. And that which so many
Learned Men have affirmed, is not out of all doubt. Or if it be, why does
Bellarmine take so much pains to confute and disproove them, as Bellar. L. 4.
de To. Pont. c. 8.
he does. Secondly, because Christ obtained of his Father every thing that he
prayed for, if he prayed for it absolutely, and not under a Condition: Father I
know thou hear me always S. John 11. Now Christ here prayed absolutely for
S. Peter; Therefore whatsoever he S. John. 11. 42.
asked for him was granted. Therefore if Christ intended his Successors as well
as himself, his Prayer was granted for his Successors as well as for himself.
But then, if Bellarmine will tell us absolutely, as he does, Donum hoc loco
Petro impetratum, etiam ad Successores pertinet. Bell. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c.
3.. Quarto, Donum hoc.
That the whole Gift obtained by this Prayer for S. Peter did belong to his
Successors; and then by and by after break this Gift into two parts, and call
the first part into doubt, whether it belongs to his Successors or no, he
cannot say the second part is out of all doubt. For if there be reason of
doubting the one, there is as much reason of doubting the other, since they
stand both on the same foot, The Ualidity of Christ's Prayer for Saint Peter.

Yea, but Christ charged S. Peter to govern, and feed his whole flock. S.
John. 21. Nay soft. It Is but his Sheep S. John 21. 15.
and his Lambs; and that every Apostle, and every Apostles Successor has
charge to doc. Mat. 28. 29 and S. Mat. 10. 17. The same power and charge is
g^en to them al. A. C. p. 58.
S. Matthew. 28. But over the whole Flock (...) find no one Apostle or Successor
set. And it is a poor shift to say, as A C does, That the Bishop of Rome is set
over the whole Flock, because both over Lambs, and Sheep, For in every flock
that is not of barren Weathers, there are Lam^s and Sheep, that is, And this
seems to me to all^de to that of S. Paul, 1 Corinthians 3 2. and Heb. 5. 12. Some
are sed with milk, and some with stronger meat. The Lambs with milk, and the
Sheep with stronger meat. But here A. C. follows Pope Hildebrand close, who
in the Case of the Emperor then, asked this Question: Quando Christus Ecclesiam
suam Petro commisit, and dixit, Pasce Oves meas, excepitne Reges? Plat. in vita
Greg 7. And certainly Kings are not exempted from being fed by the Church: But
from being spoiled of their Kingdoms by any Churchmen, that they are.
weaker and stronger Christians; not People and Pastors, Subjects and
Governou^s, as A. C. expounds it to bring the Necks of Princ^s under Roman
Pride And if Kings be meant, yet then the command is Pasce, feed them, But
Deponere, or Occiure, to depose, or kill them; is not Pascere in any sense;
Lanii id est, non Pastori, that is the Butchers, not the Shepherds part. If a
Sheep go astray never so far, it is not the Shepherds part, to kill him; at
least if he do, non pascit, dum occidit, he does not certainly feed, while he
killes.

And for the Close, That the Bishop of Rome shall never refuse to feed and
govern the whole stock in such sort, as A. C. p. 58.
that neither particular Man, nor Church shall (...) just Cause under p^etence
of Reformation in Manners or Faith to make a S^paration from the whole Church.
By A. Cs. favor, this is mere begging of the Question. He says, the Pope
shall ever govern the Whole Church, so as that there shall be no just Cause
given of a Separation. And that is the very Thing, which the Protestants charge
upon him; Namely that he has governed, if notthe Whole, yet so much of the
Church as he has been able to bring under his Power, so as that he has given
too just Cause of the present continued separation. And as the Corruptions in
the Doctrine of Faith, in the Church of Rome were the Cause of the first
Separation; so are they at this present day the Cause why the separation
continues. And further, I for my part, am clear of Opinion, that the Errors
in the Doctrine of Faith, which are charged upon the whole Church, at least so
much of the whole, as in these parts of Europe has been kept under the Roman
Jurisdiction, have had their Original and Continuance from this, that so much
of the Universal Church (which indeed they account All) has forgotten her
own Liberty, and submitted to the Roman Church and Bishop; and so is in a
manner forced to embrace all the Corruptions, which the Particular Church of
Rome has contracted upon itself. And being now not able to free her self from
the Roman Jurisdiction, is made to continue also in all her Corruptions. And
for the Protestants, they have made no separation from the General Church
properly so called (for therein A. C. said well, the Popes Administration can
give no Cause to separate from that) but A. C. p. 58.
their Separation is only from the Church of Rome, and such other Churches, as
by adhering to her, have hazarded themselves, and do now miscall themselves,
the Whole Catholic Church. Nay even here the Protestants have not left the
Church of Rome in her Essence, but in her Errors; not in the Things which
Constitute a Church, but only in such Abuses and Corruptions, as work toward
the Dissolution of a Church.


F. I also asked, who ought to judge in this Case? The B. said a General
Council.


B. And surely, What greater or surer Judgment you can have, where sense of
Scripture is doubted, General Council, I do not see: Nor do you doubt. And
A. C. grants it to be a most Competent A. C. p. 59.
Judge of all Controversies of Faith, so that all Pastors be gathered together,
and in the Name of Christ, and pray unanimously for the promised assistance of
the Holy Ghost, and make great and diligent search and examination of the
Scriptures, and other Grounds of Faith, And then Decree what is to be held for
Divine Truth. For then (says he) it is Firm, and Insallible, or else there is
nothing firm upon earth. As fair as this Passage seems, and as freely as I
have granted, that a General Council is the best Judge on earth, where the
sense of Scripture is doubted; yet even in this passage there are some things
Considerable. As first, when shall the Church hope for such a General
Council, in which all Pastors shall be gathered together? there was never any
such General Council yet, nor do I believe such can be had. So that is
supposed in vain; and you might have learned this of Siomnes, nullum fuit
hactenus Concilium Generale, neque etiam videtur deinceps suturum. Bcl. 1. de
Co^c. c. 17.. 1.
Bellarmine: if you will not believe me. Next (says he) If all these Pastors
pray unanimously for the promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost. Why, but if all
Pastors cannot meet together, all cannot pray together, nor all search the
Scriptures together, nor all upon that Search Decree together. So that is
supposed in vain too. Yea but Thirdly, If all that meet do pray unanimously.
What then? All that meet are not simply All. Nor does the Holy Ghost come, and
give his Assistance upon every Prayer, that is made unanimously, though by very
many Prelates or other Faithful People met together, unless all other
Requisites as well as, Unanimity, to make their prayer to be heard and
granted, be observed by them; So that an Unanimous Prayer is not adequately
supposed, and therefore Concludes not. But lastly how far a General Council,
if all A. Cs. Conditions be observed, is firm, and Infallible, that shall be
more fully discussed at. 33. Consil 1.
after. In the mean time, these two words Firm, and Infallible are ill put
together as Synonima's. For there are some things most Infallible in
themselves, which yet could never get to be made firm among men. And there are
many things made firm by Law, both in Churches and Kingdoms, which yet are not
Infallible in themselves. So to draw all together; to settle Controversies in
the Church, there is a Visible Judge and Infallible, but not living. And that
is the And this was thought a sufficient judge too, when Christians were as
humble as learned. I am sure Optatus thought so. Quaeren li sunt Iudices. Si
Christiani de utraque part dari non possunt, quia stud^s veritas impeditur, De
forts quaerendus est Iudex. Si Paganus, non potest nosse Christiana Secreta. Si
Iudaeus inimicus est Christiani Baptismatis. Ergo in terris de hac re nullum
poterit reporiri Iudiciis. De Caelo quaerendus est Iudex. Sed ut quid pulsamus
ad Coelum, quum habemus hic in Evangelio? Testamentum inquam, quia hoc loco
rec^e possunt terrena coelestibus comparari) talc est, quod quivis hominum
habens numerosos siltos, his quamdiu pater praesens est, ipse imperat singulis;
non est adhuc necessarium Testam^ntu^ Sic and Christus, quamdiu praesens in
terris suit, (quamvis nec modo desit) pro tempore quicquid necessarium crat,
Apostolis Imperavit. Sed quomodo terrenus Pater dum se in consinio senserit
mortis, timens ne post mortem suam, rupta pace litigent fratres, adhibitis
Testibus Uoluntatem suam de Pectore morituro, transfert in Tabulas diu
duraturas. Et si fu^rit inter fratres contentio nata, non itur ad Tumulum, sed
quaeritur. Testamentu^; and qui Tumulo quiescit, tacitus de Tabulis loquitur.
Vivus, cujus est Testamentu^, in caelo est. Ergo Voluntas ejus, velut in
Testamento sic in Evangelio inquiratur. Opt. l. 5. adv Parm.

This pregnant Place of Optatus, (That the Scripture is the Judge of Divine
Truth, when ever it is questioned,) though Baldwin dare not deny, yet he would
feign slide both by it, and by a parallel place as full in S. Aug. in Psalm. 21.
Expositione (...). with this shift that S. Augustine in another place had
rather use the Testimony of Tradition, that is the Testimony Nuncupativi potius
quam Scripti Testamenti, of the Nuncupative, rather then the Written Will of
Christ. Baldwin in Optat. L. 5. But this is a mere shift. First, because it is
Petitio principii the mere begging of the Question. For we deny any Testament
of Christ, but that which is written. And A. C. cannot thew it in any one
Father of the Church, that Christ ever left behind him a Nuncupative obligatory
Will. Secondly, because nothing is more plain in these two Fathers Optatus and
S. Augustine, then that both of them appeal to the Wrrtten Will, and make that
the Judge without any Exception, when a matter of Faith comes in Question. In
Optat. the words are Habemus in Evangelio, we have it in the Gospel. And in
Evangelio inquiratur, Let it be inquired in the Gospel: And Christ put it in
tabulas diu duraturas into Written and lasting Instruments. In S. Augustine the
words are: Our Father did not dye intestate; etc. And Tabulae aperiantur, Let
his Will, his written Instruments be opened. And Legantur Uerbamortui let the
words of him that dyed, be read. And again Aperi, Legamus, Open the Will. and
let us read. And Legamus, quid litigamus? Why do we strive? Let Us read the
Will. And again, Aperi Testamentum, lege, Open the Will read. All which
Passages are most express and full for his Written Will, and not for any
Nuncupative Will, as Baldwin would put upon us. And Heart who takes the same way
with Baldwin is not able to make it out, as appears by. D. Reynolds in his
Conference with Heart. c. and divis. 1. p. 396. etc.


Scripture pronouncing by the Church. And there is a visible and a Living
Judge, but not Infallible; And that is a General Council, lawfully called,
and so proceeding. But I know no formal Confirmation of it needful (though A.
C. require it,. 28. N. 1. And so plainly S. Augustine speaking of S. Cyprians
Error about Rebaptization and c. says. Illis temporibus antequam Plenarii
Concilii sententiae quid in hac re sequendum esset, t ot ius Ecclesiae
Consensio confirmasset, Uisum est ei cum etc. L. 1. de Bapt. cont. Donatist. c.
18. So, here is first Sententia Concilii: And then the Confirmation of it is
totius Ecclesiae Consensio, the Consent of the whole Church yielding unto it.
And so Gerson. Concurrente Universally totius Ecclesiae consensu. etc. In
Declaratione Ueritatum quae credenda sunt. etc.. 4. For this, that the Pope
must confirm it, or else the General Council is invalid, is one of the
Roman Novelties. For this cannot be showed in any Antiquity void of just
Exception. The truth is, the Pope as other Patriarchs and great Bishops used to
do, did give his assent to such Councels as he approoved. But that is no
Corroboration of the Council, as if it were invalid without it: but a
Declaration of his consenting with the rest.. 33. Consid. 4. Nu. 6.
but only that after it is ended, the Whole Church admit it, be it never so
tacitly.

In the next Place, A. C. interposes new matter Conference. And first in case
of Distractions, A. C. p. 59, 60.
and Disunion in the Church, he would know, what is to be done to Reunite,
when a General Council (which is acknowledged a fit Judge) cannot be had by
reason of manifold impediments: Or if being called, will not be of one mind?
Has Christ our Lord (says he) in this Case provided no Rule, no Judge
Infallibly to determine Controversies, and to procure Unity, and Certainty of
Belief? Indeed the Protestants admit no Infallible Means, Rule, or Judge, but
only Scripture, which every man may interpret, as he pleases, and so all
shall be uncertain. Truly, I must confess, there are many Impediments to
hinder the Calling of a General Council. You know in the Ancient Church
there was Christianitas in diversas Haereses scissa est, quia non er at
licentia Episcopis in unum convenire, persecutione saeviente usque ad tempora
Constantini etc. Isidor. praefat. in Council. Edit. Uenetiis. 1585.
hinderance enough, and what hurt it wrought. And afterward though it were long
first, there was provision made for Frequens Generalium Conciliorum celebratio
est praecipua cultura Agri Dominici. etc. Et illorum neglectus, Errores,
Hareses, and Schismata disseminat. He prateritorum temporum recordatio and
praesentium consideratio ante oculos nostros ponunt. Itaque sancimus, ut amodo
Concilia Generalia celebrentur; it a quod Primum a fine hujus Concilii in quin
ju^nnium immediate sequens, Secundum vero a fine illius in septennium, and
deinceps de decennio in decennium perpetuo celebrentur etc. Council. Constan.
Sess. 39. Et apud Gerson. Tom. 1. p. 230. Et Pet. de A^aco Card Cameracensis
libellum obtulit in Council. Constant. de Reformatione Ecclesiae contra
Opinionem eorum qui putarunt Concilia Generalia minus necessariaesse, quia
Omnia been a P^tribus nostris ordinata sunt. etc. In fascic. Rerum
expetendarum. fol. 28. Et Schismatibus debet Ecclesia cito per Concilia
Generalia provideri, ut in Primitiva Ecclesia docuerunt Apostoli. Ut Act. 6.
and Act. 15. Ibid fol. 204. A.
frequent calling of Councels, and yet no Age since saw them called according
to that Provision in every Circumstance; therefore Impediments there were
eenough, or else some declined them wilfully, though there were no Impediments.
Nor will I deny, but that when they were called, there were as many In Council.
Arimincusi multis paucorum fraud deceptis etc. S. Aug. L. 3. cont. Maximinum
c. 14.
Practices to disturb or pervert the Councels. And these Practices were able
to keep many Councels from being all of one mind. But if being called, they
will not be of one mind, I cannot help that; Though that very not agreeing is
a shrewd sign, that the other Spirit has a party there against the Holy
Ghost.

Now A. C. would know, what is to be done for Re-uniting of a Church divided in
Doctrine of the Faith, when this Remedy by a General Council cannot be had;
Sure Christ our Lord (says he) has provided some Rule, some Judge in such and
such like Cases to procure unity and certainty of belief. I believe so too;
for he has left an Infallible Rule the Scripture. And that by the manifest
Places in it (which need no Dispute, no External Judge) is Non per difficiles
nos Deus ad Beat am vitam Quaestiones vocat, etc. In absoluto nobis and facili
est aeternitas; Iesum suscitatum a mortuis per Deum Credere, and Ipsum esse
Dominum consiteri, etc. S. Hilar. L. 10. de Trin. ad finem.
able to settle Unity and Certainty of Belief in Necessaries to Salvation; And
in Non necessariis, in and about things not necessary, there ought not to be
a Contention to a Cyprianus and Collegae ip^us credentes Haereticos and
Schismaticos Baptismum non habere, sine Baptismo receptis, etc. iis tamen
communicare quam separari ab Vnitate maluerunt. S. Aug L. 2. de Baptis. cont.
Donatist. c 6. Et hi non contaminabant Cyprianum. Ibid. sine.
Separation.

And therefore A. C. does not well, to make that Protestants admit no
Infallible Rule, but the Scripture only: Or as he (I doubt not without some
scorn) terms it, beside only Scripture. For what need is there of another,
since this is most Infallible; and the same which the Recensuit cuncta sanctis
Scripturis consona. Eusebius. L. 5. Hist. c. 20. De Irenaeo.

Regula Principalis de qua Paracletus agnitus. Tert. de Monogam c. 2. And this
is true, though the Author spoke it, when he was Lapsed.

Ipsas Scripturas apprime tenens. S. Hieron, ad Marcellum adversus Montanum.
To. 2. Hoc quia de Scripturts non habet authoritatem, eadem facilitate
contemnitur, qua probatur. S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 23.

Manifestus est fidei lapsus, and liquidum superbiae vitium, vel respuere
aliquid eorum quae Scriptura habet, vel inducere quicquam quod scriptum non
est. S. Basil. S^rm. de Fide. To. 2. p. 154. Edit. Basileae. 1565.

Contra insurgentes Hareses saepe pugnavi Agraphis, verum non alienis a pia
secundum Scripturam sententia. Ibid. p. 153.

And before Basil, Tertul. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, etc. si non est
scriptum, timeat Hermogenes, Vae illud adjicientibus vel detrahentibus
destinatum. Tertul. advers. Hermog. c. 22.

And Paulinus plainly calls it Regulam Directionis. Epist. 23.

De hac Regula tria observanda sunt. 1. Regula est, sed a tempore quo scripta.
2. Regula est, sed per Ecclesiam applicanda, non per privatum Spiritum. 3.
Regula est, and mensurat omnia quae continet: continet autem omnia necessaria
ad salutem vel mediate vel immediate. Et hoc tertium habet Biel. in 3. D. 25.
q. unica. Conclus. 4. M. And this is all we say. Hook. L. 5. Eccles: Pol.. 22.


Ancient Church of Christ admitted. And if it were sufficient for the Ancient
Church to guide them, and direct their Councels, why should it be now held
insufficient for us, at least, till a free General Council may be had? And
it has both the Conditions which Regula Catholica sidei debet esse certa and
nota. Si certa non sit, non erit Regula. Si nota non sit, non erit Regula
nobis. Bellar. L. 1. de Verbo Dei. c. 2.. 5. Sed nihil est vel certius vel
notius sacra Scriptura. Bellar. ibid.. 6. Therefore the Holy Scripture is the
Rule of Catholic Faith, both in it self, and to us also; For in things simply
Necessary to Salvation, it is abundantly known and manifest, as. 16. Nu. 5.
Bellarmine requires to a Rule. Namely, that it be Certain, and that it be
Known; For if it be not certain, it is no Rule, and if it be not known,
it is no Rule to us. Now the Convenit inter nos and omnes omnino Haereticos,
Verbum Dei esse Regulam fidei, ex qua de Dogmatibus judicandum sit. Bellarm.
Praefat. To. 1. fine. And (...) there perhaps he includes Traditions, yet tha^
(...) (...) proved yet. N^ther indeed can he include (...) For he speaks of
that Word of God, upon (...) (...) re^cks consent: But concerning Traditions,
they ^ll consent not: That they are a Rule of Faith. Ther^ he speaks not of
them.
Romanists dare not deny, but this Rule is ^aine; and that it is (...) ^ntly
Known in (...) ^lest Places of (...) ^uch as are (...) to Salvation, none of
the Ancients did ever (...) (...) ^here's an Infallible Rule.

Nor need there be such fear. (...) Private Spirit in manifest things, which
be^ (...) read, or heard teach themselves. Indeed you (...) had need of some
other Judge, and he a p^opitious one, to crush the Pope's more powerful
^rincipality out of Pasce oves, feed my sheep. And yet this must be the
meaning (if you will have it) whether Gideon's fleece be wet, or dry, Judge. 6.
that is, whether there be dew Judge. 6.
enough in the Text, to water that sense or no. But I pray, when God has left
his^ Church this Infallible Rule, what warrant have you to seek another? You
have showed us none yet, what e're you think you have. And I hope A. C. cannot
think, it follows, that Christ our Lord hat^ provided no Rule to determine
necessary Controversies, because he has not provided the Rule, which he would
have.

Besides, let there be such a living Judge, as A. C. For so he affirms. p. 58.
Pope be he, yet that is not sufficient against the malice of the Devil, and
impious men, to keep the Church at all Times from Renting, even in the
Doctrine of Faith; or to soder the Rents which are made. For Oportet esse
Haereses, 1. Cor. 11. Heresies there will be, and Heresies properly there
cannot 1. Cor. 11. 19.
be, but in Doctrine of the Faith. And what, will A. C. in this Case do? Will
he send Christ our Lord to provide another Rule then the Decision of the Bishop
of Rome, because he can neither make Unity, nor Certainty of Belief. And (as
it is most apparent) he cannot do it de facto; so neither has he power from
Christ over the Whole Church to do it, nay out of all doubt, it is not the
least reason, why de facto he has so little success, because de Iure he has
no power given. But since A. C. requires another Judge besides the Scripture,
and in Cases, when either the time is so difficult, that a General Council
cannot be called; or the Council so set, that they will not agree; Let Us see,
how he proves it.

It Is thus; every earthly kingdom (says he) when matters cannot be composed
by a Parliament (which cannot A. C. p. 60.
be called upon all Occasions, why does he not add here, And which being
called, will not always be of one mind, as he did add it in Case of the
Council) has, besides the Law Books, some living Magistrates and Judges, and
above all, one visible King, the Highest Judge, who has Authority sufficient
to end all Controversies, and settle Unity in all Temporal Affairs. And shall
we think that Christ the wisest King has provided in his kingdom the Church
only the Law-bookes of the Holy Scripture, and no living visible Judges, and
above all, one Chief, so assisted by his Spirit, as may suffice to end all
Controversies for Unity and Certainty of Faith; which can never be, if every
man may interpret Holy Scripture, the Law-Bookes, as he list? This is a very
plausible Argument with the Many. But the foundation of it is but a Qua
subtilissime de hoc disputari possunt, ita ut non similitudinibus quae
plerunque fallunt, sed rebus ipsis satisfiat, etc. S. Aug. L. de Quant. Animae.
c. 32. Whereupon the Logicians tell us rightly, that this is a Fallacy, unless
it be taken reduplicative. i. e. de similibus qua similia sunt. And hence
Arist. himself 2. Top. Loc. 32. says, (...). Rursum in Similibus. si similiter
se habent.
Similitude, and if the Similitude hold not in the maine, the Argument's
nothing. And so I doubt, it will prove here. I Will observe Particulars, as they
lie in order.

And first, he will have the whole Militant Church (for of that we speak) a
Kingdom. But this is not certain; For they are no mean ones, which think
our Savior Christ left the Church Militant in the Hands of the Apostles, and
their Successors, in an Aristocraticall, or rather a Mixed Government, and that
the Church is not When Gerson writ his Tract De Auferibilitate Pape, sure he
thought the Church might continue in a very goo^ Being, without a Monarchical
Head: Therefore, in his Judgment, the Church is not by any Command or
Institution of Christ, Monarchical. Gerson. par. 1. page 154.

When S. Uierom. wrote thus: (Ubicuaque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive
Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegit sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis;
ejusdem meriti, cjusdem est and Sacerdotii. S. Hieron. Epist. ad Evagrium)
doubtless he thought not of the Roman Bishops Monarc^y. For what Bishop is of
the same Merit, or of the same Degree in the Priesthood with the Pope, as
things are now carried at Rome? Affirmamus etiam, Patribus and Graecis and
Latinis, ignot as esse voces de Petro aut Papa Monarcha and Monarchia. Namquod
in superioribus obscrvabamus reperiri obs^rvabamus dictiones positas pro
Episcopatu, nihil hoc ad r^m facit. (...). Casaub. Excrcitatione 15. ad Annals
Eccles. Baron.. 12. p. 378. and. 11 p. 360. diserte asserit and probat
Ecclesiae Regimen Aristocraticum fuisse.


Monarchical otherwise then the Trumphant, and Militant make one Body under
Christ the Head. And in this sense indeed, and in this only, the Church is a
most absolute Kingdom. And the very Expressing of this sense is a full Answer
to all the Places of Scripture, and other Arguments brought by Bellar. L. a. de
Council. c. 16.. 1, 2, 3.
Bellarmine, to prove that the Church is a Monarchy. But the Church being as
large as the world, Christ thought it fitter to govern it Aristocratically, by
Diverse, rather then by One Vice Roy. And I believe this is true. For all the
time of the first three hundred years, and somewhat better, it was governed
Aristocratically, if we will impaitially consider, how the Bishops of those
times, carried the whole Business of admitting any new consecrated Bishops or
others to, or rejecting them from their Communion. For I have carefully
Examined this for the first six hundred years, even to, and within the time
of S. Gregory the great. S. Greg. L. 9. Epist. 58. and L. 12. Epist. 15.
Who in the beginning of the seventh hundred year sent such Letters to
Augustine then Archbishop of Canterbury, and to S. Greg. L. 9. Epist. 61.
Quirinus, and other Bishops in Ireland; And I find, That the Literae
Communicatoriae which certified from one Great Patriarch to another, who were
fit or unfit to be admitted to their Communion, if they upon any Occasion
repaired to their Seas, were sent mutually. And as freely, and in the same
manner from Rome to the other Patriarchs, as from them to it. Out of which, I
think, this will follow most directy, That the Church Government then was
Aristocraticall. For had the Bishop of Rome been then accounted Sole Monarch of
the Church, and been put into the Definition of the Church (as he is now by
Bellar. L. 3. de Eccles. c. 2.. Nostra autem.
Bellarmine) all these Communicatorie Letters should have been directed from
him to the rest, as whose admittance ought to be a Rule for all to Communicate;
but not from others to him, or at least not in that even, equal, and Brotherly
way, as now they appear to be written. For it is no way probable, that the
Bishops of Rome, which even then sought their own Greatness too much, would
have submitted to the other Patriarchs voluntarily, had not the very Course of
the Church put it upon them.

Besides, this is a great and undoubted Rule, given Non ^im R^publica est in
Ecclesia: sed Ecclesia in Republica: i. e. in Imperio Romano. Optat. L. 3.
Optatus, That wheresoever there is a Church, there the Church is in the
Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the Church. And so also the Church was
in the Roman Empire. Now from this Ground I argue thus: If the Church be
within the Empire or other Kingdom, it is impossible the Government of the
Church should be Monarchical. For no Emperor or King will endure another King
within his Dominion that shall be greater then himself, since the very
enduring it, makes him that indures it, upon the matter, no Monarch. Nor will
it disturb this Argument: That two Great Kings in France and Spain permit
this. For he that is not blind, may see, if he will, of what little value the
Pope's power is in those Kingdoms, farther then to serve their own turns of
Him, which They do to their great advantage. Nay farther, the Ancient Canons
and Fathers of the Church seem to me plain for this: For the Conc. Antioch. c.
9. p. 507.
Council of Antioch submits Ecclesiastical Causes to the Bishops. And what
was done amiss by a Bishop, was corrigible by a Conc. Nic. 1. c. 5. and
Antioch. c. 12.
Synod of Bishops, but this with the Conc. Nie. 1. c. 4. and Antioch. can. 9.
Metropolitan. And in Case these did not agree, the Conc. Antioch. c. 14.
Metropolitan might call in other Bishops out of the neighboring Provinces.
And if Things settled not this way, a General Council ( Sed praeponitur
Scriptura, S. August. L. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 3.
under the Scripture, and directed by it) was the Highest Remedy. And Nam cum
Statutum sit omnibus nobis, etc. and singulis Pastoribus portio gregis etc. S.
Cypr. L. 1. Ep 3.
S. Cyprian even to Pope Cornelius himself says plainly: That to every
Bishop is ascribed a portion of the flock for bim to govern. And so not all
committed to One. In all this the Government of the Church seems pla^nely
Aristocraticall. And if all other Arguments fail, we have one left from
Bellarmine, who opposes it as much as any, Bellar. L. 1 de To. Pont. c. 8. and
L. 2. de Council. c. 16.
twice for failing. And yet, where he goes to Exclude Secular Princes from
Church-Governement, Bellar. L. 1. de To. P^nt. c. 7.
all his Quotations, and all his Proofs run upon this Head, to show, That the
Government of the Church was ever in the Bishops. What says A. C. now to the
Confession of this great Adversary, A. C. p. 64, 65.
and in this great Point, extorted from him by force of Truth? Now if this be
true, then the whole foundation of this Argument is gone. The Church Militant
is no Kingdom; and therefore not to be Compared, or Judged by One. The
Resemblance will not hold.

Next, suppose it a Kingdom: yet the Church Militant Kingdoms; and cannot
well be ordered like any one particular Li^et sit (...) quod uni Popul^ (...)
(...) (...) sit unus Episcopus; non expedit ta^n (...) toti p^pulo fideli
praesit unus s^lus. Tum quia omnia Negotia (...) pop^li partialis potest
sustinere unus s^us: Nullus autem unus potest sustinere omnia Negotia etiam
majora omnium Christianorum: Tum quia minus (...) est, ut populus partialis and
parvus in^iatur ab (...) Epis^opo, quam ut totus, vel fere totus populus
Christ^ insiciatur ab uno Capite, quod omnibus praesit. (...). L. 2. Dial.
tract. 1. p. 3. c. 30. ad 8. And besides this of Ockam. To that Common
Argument, That Monar ^call Government is the best, and therefore und^dly that
which Christ instituted for his Church, (...) (...) to Answer, That a Monarchy
is the best form of Government in one City or Country. Arist. L. 8. Mo^l c.
10. But it follows not, That it is the best in respect of the whole world,
where the Parts are so remote, and the Dispositions of men so various. And
therefore Bellarm. himself confesses: Monarchiam Aristocratiae and Democratiae
admixtam utiliorem esse in hac vita, quam simplex Monarchia est. L. 1. de To.
Pont. c. 3.. 1.
Kingdom. And therefore, though in one particular Kingdom there be many
Visible Judges, and one Supreme: yet it follows not, That in the Universal
Militant Church there must be one Supreme. For how will he enter to Execute his
Office, if the Kings of those Kingdoms will not give leave?

Now here, though A. C. expresses himself no farther, Kings in their several
Dominions. No: they would have one Emperor over all the Kings, as well as One
Pope over all the Bishops. And then you know In the first Gloss ascribed to
Isidore in Genesis 1. 16. 'Ti^ Per Solemn intelligitur Regnum; per Lunam,
Saceidotium. But Innocent the third, almost six hundred years after Isidore's
death, perverts both Text and Gloss. Thus. Ad firmamentum Coeli. i. e.
Vniversalis Ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo magna Luminaria, hoc est, d^us in^ituit
Potestates, Pontificalem, and Regalem, etc. (...) quantainter Solemn and Lanam,
tanta (...) (...) and Reges differentia cognoscatur, Epist. ad Impera^
^nopolitanum. Decret. L. 1. de Majoritate and Ob^ntia. Tit. 33. cap. Solitae.
who told us of two great Lights to govern the world, the Sun and the Moon,
that is the Pope and the Emperor. At the first it began with more modesty, The
Emperor and the P^pe. And that was somewhat Tolerable. For (...) Mili^ (...)
S^ripturis (...) (...) (...) (...) etc S. Au^. ^pist. 119 c. 6.
S. Augustine tells us, That the Militant Church is often in Scripture called
the Moon, both for the many Changes it has, and for its obscurity in many
times of its peregrination. And he tells us too, That if we will understand
this place of Scripture in a Spiritual Sense: Intelligimus spiritualiter
Ecclesiam, etc. Et hic ^uis est Sol, nisi Sol lustits^? etc. S. Aug. in Psalm.
103.
Our Savior Christ is the Sun, and the Militant Church, as being full of
changes in her estate, the Moon. But now it must be a Triumphant Church here;
Militant no longer. The Pope must be the Sun, and the Emperor but the Moon.
And least Innocents own power should not be able to make good his Decretall;
^p. ^op. L. dicto E clesia^us, c. 145.
Gasper Schioppius does not only avow the Allusion or Interpretation, but is
pleased to express many Circumstances, in which he would feign make the world
believe the Resemblance holds. And lest any man should not know how much the
Pope is made greater then the Emperor by this Comparison; the Igitur cum terra
sit septies major Luna: Sol autem octies major terra, restat ergo ut
Fontificalis dignitas quadragesies septics sit major Realidignitate. Gloss. in
Decret, praedict. Where first the Gloss is out in his Latin. He might have
said Quadragies: for Quadragesies is no word. next he is out in his
Arithmetic. For eight times seven makes not forty seven, but fifty six. And
then he is much to blame for drawing down the Pope's power from fifty six, to
47. And lastly, this Allusion has no ground of Truth at all. For the Emperor,
being Solo Deo minor: Tertul. ad Scap. cannot be a Moon to any other Sun.
Gloss furnishes us with that too: and tells us, that by this it appears, that
since the Earth is seven times greater then the Moon, and the Sun eight times
greater then the Earth, it must needs follow, that the Pope's power is forty
seven times greater then the Emperor's. I like him well, he will make odds
enough. But what, does Innocent the third give no Reason of this his Decretall?
Yes. And it is (says he) Sed illa Potestas, quae praeest diebus i. e. in
spiritualibus, major est; quae vero Carna^ibus, mi^or. Inn cent. 3. ubi supra.
because the Sun, which rules in the day, that is, in Spiritual things, is
greater then the Moon, which rules but in the night, and in carnal things.
But is it possible that Innocentius the third, being (...) wise, and so able,
as ^t post ejus mortem nihil eorum quae in hac vita egerit laudaverit, aut
inprobaverit, imm^um sit. Platina in vita (...).
that nothing which he did, or commended, or disproved in all his life, should
after his death be thought fit to be changed, could think that such an
Allusion of Spiritual things to the Day, which the Sun governes, and Worldly
Business to the Night, which the Moon governes, should carry weight enough
with it to depresse Imperial power lower then God has made it? Out of doubt
he could not. For he well knew that Omnis Anima, every soul was to be Romans 13.
1.
subject to the Higher Power, Romans 13. And the Patres veteres, and praecip^
Aug. Epist. 54. Apostolum interpretantur de Potestate seculari tantum loqui,
quod and ipse Textus subindicat etc. Salmer on. Disput. 4. in Romans 13.. Porro
per Potestatem.
Higher Power there mentioned is the Temporal. And the (...) etc. Omnibus ista
imperantur. and Sacerdotibus and Monachis. etc. Et postea. Etiamsi Apostolus
sis, fi Evangelista, si Propheta, sive quisquis tandem fueris. S. Chrysostom.
Hom. 23. in Romans Sive est Sacerdos, sive Antistes, etc. Theodoret, in Romans 13.
Si omnis Anima, and vestra. Quis vos excipit ab Universitate? etc. Ipsi sunt
qui vobis dicere solent, servate vestrae Sedis honorem etc. Sed Christus aliter
and Iuss^, and G^ssit. etc. S. B. r. Epist. 42. ad Henricum Senonensem
Archiepiscopum. Et Theophilact. in Romans 13. Where it is very observable, that
Theophilact. lived in the time of Pope Gregory the seventh. And S. Bernard
after it, and yet this Truth obtained then. And this was about the year, 1130.
Ancient Fathers come in with a full consent, That Omnis Anim^, every soul,
comprehends there all without any Exception: All Spiritual men even to the
Highest Bishop, and in spiritual Causes too, so the Foundations of Faith and
Good Manners be not shaken. And where they are shaken, there ought to be
Prayer, and Patience, there ought not to be Opposition by force. Nay he knew
well that An forte de Religione fas non est ut dicat Imperator, vel quos
miserit Imperator? cur ergo ad Imperatorem vestri ven^re Legati? cur enim
fecerunt Causae suae Iudicem, non secuturi quod ille judicaret? etc. S. Aug. L.
1. cont. Epist. Parmen. c. 9. Et quaestio fuit, au pertineret ad Imperatorem
adv^ eos aliquid statuere qui prava in Religione sectantur, Ibid Nor can this
be said to be usurpation in the Emperor. Nam S. August. alibi sic. Ad
Imperatoris cur^m, de qua rationem Deo redditurus est, Res ^lla maxim
p^rtinebat. S. Aug. Epist. 162. and Epist. 50. Quis mente sobrius Regibus
dicat: Nolite cu^are in Regno vestro a quo teneatur, vet oppugnetur Ecclesia
Domini vestri? etc. Antiqui (...) recte dixit, Magistratus est custos legis,
silicet primae and secundae Tabulae, quod ad disciplinam attinet. Confessio
Saxonica.. 23. and Gerardus To. 6. Locorum c. 6., 5. Membro 1. probat ex Deuteronomy.
17. 18.
Emperors and Kings are Custodes utriusque Tabulae: They, to whom the custody
and preservation of both Tables of the Law for worship to God, and duty to man
are committed. That a Book of the Law was by Gods own Command in Moses his
time, to be given the King Deuteronomy. 17. 18
Deuteronomy. 17. That the Kings under that Law, but still according to it, did
proceed to Necessary Reformations in Church Businesses; and therein Commanded
the very Priests themselves, as appears in the Acts of ^ron. 29. 4.
Hezechiah and 4. R^. 23. 2.
Josiah, who yet were never Censured to this day for usurping the High Priests
Office. Nay he knew full well, That the greatest Emperors for the Churches
Honor, Theodosius the Elder, and Justinian, and Charles the Great, and diverse
other, did not only meddle now and then, but did inact Laws to the great
Settlement and Increase of Religion in their several times. But then if this
could not be the Reason, why Innocentius made this strange Allusion, what was?
Why truly, I Will tell you. The Pope was now grown to a great, and a firm
height. Hic Maximus Pontifex totius Ecclesiasticae Libertatis Vnicus Assertor.
Onuph. in Plat. in Greg. 7. For taking Occasion by the war which Henry the
fourth had with the Saxons and their neighbors, and the complaint of the
Saxons made to the Pope (of which Platina in the l^e of Gregory the seventh)
the Pope wise enough for his own advantages sought not only to free himself
from the Emperor, but to make the Emperor subject to him, and for this the
History is plain enough.
Gregory the seventh had set the Popedom upon a broad bottom before this
Innocents time. So that now it is the less wonder, if he make so bold with the
Emperor, as to depresse him as low as the Moon, upon no better ground, then a
groundless Resemblance. But beside this prime Reason, there are diverse other,
which may easily be drawn out of the same Resemblance. For since Innocentius
his maine aim was to publish the Popes greatness over Kings and Emperors: why
does he not tell us, That the Pope is as the Sun: and the Emperor as the
Moon. Because as the Moon borrowes all her light from the Sun: So the
Emperor borrowes all ^is true light from the Pope. Or because as the Moon
still increases in light solong as she follows the Sun, but so soon as ever
she steps before the Sun she waines presently, and her light decreases: So
the Emperor, so long as he is content to follow the Pope, and do all that he
would have him, his light, and his power increase, but if he do but offer to
step before though that be his proper place) then his light, and honor, and
power, and all decrease. And this Pope Gregory the seventh made too good upon
the Emperor Henry the fourth. And Pope Adrian the fourth, and Alexander the
third, and Lucius the third with some others, upon Frederick Barbarossa. And
some other Emperors were alike served, where they did not submit. And I hope no
man will blame the Popes Holiness for this. For if the Emperors kept the Popes
under for diverse years together, whereas Papa utpote Regis Regum Vicariut
nunquam erat de jure subditus Imperatoribus terrcnis: sed quia tum Potestas
ejus non erat nota: -- and quia viribus temporalibus destitutus erat, vellet,
nollet, subjectus esse cogebatur. Bellar. in Apologiac. 15. Respon. ad
Mendacium, 10. And Bellarmine is at the same Argument for Deposing of Kings
too. Quia deerant vires temporales Christianis, Bellar. L. (...). de Romans Pont
(...). 7. Quoa si Christiani, Now this is a most loud untruth as appears in
Tertull^an, who lived about the the year 200. under Severus. And the
Christians then had strength enough against the Emperor, had they had right
enough with it.
Bellarmine tells us it was against all right they should so do, the Pope being
never rightfully subject unto them, I hope the Pope having now got power
enough, may keep the Emperors under, and not fuffer them any more to step
before the Sun, lest like Moons as they are they loose all their Light. Or
because as the Moon is but Uicaria Solis, the Vicar or Substitute of the Sun
as L. de Mo^?
Philo tells us: So the Emperor, at least in all Spiritual Causes is but the
Popes Substitute, and that for the Night, that his Holiness may sleep the
quieter on the other side of the Sphere. Or lastly (if you will abuse the
Scripture, as you too often do, and as Innocentius did in the Decret all very
grossly) you may say it is, because the Woman, which all grant represented the
Church. Revel. 12. 1.
Revel. 12. is clothed with the Sun, that is, with the glorious rays of the
Pope, and had the Moon, that is, the Sic ^nim Alexander tertius collu^
Friderici primi pede comprimebat, and dixit. Scriptu^ est. Super aspidem and
basiliscum etc. Io. Nauclerus Chro: Generations 40. circa An. 1170. Genesis 1. 16.
Emperor under her feet. For this is as good, as litterall as proper an
interpretation of these words, as that of Innocentius is of the words Genesis 1.
God made two great Lights, the greater light to Rule the day, and the less to
rule the night. Thus he or you may give your wits leave to play, if you will,
for the Popes Decretall is a mere fancy. But the true reason indeed, why
Innocentius made it, was that above mentioned. He was now in that greatness,
that he thought he might pass any thing upon the Christian world, that pleased
him: And was therefore resolved to bring it into the Body of the Canon, that
after times might have a Law to legitimate and make good their Predecessors
usurpation over Emperors and Kings. And rather then fail of this, ho would not
spare the abusing of Scripture it self. Where by the way, dares A. C. say this
Pope did not err in Cathedra, when he was so dazzled between the Sun and the
Moon, that he wanted light in the midst of it, to expound Scripture? Well, I
would have the Jesuits leave their practicing, and remember, First, that one
Emperor will not always be able to establish and preserve one only Uniform
practice and Exercise of Religion. Secondly, that supposing he both can and
will so do, yet the Jesuits cannot be certain, that that one Uniform
Exercise of Religion shall be the Roman Catholic. And Thirdly, That as there
is a Body of Earth, a world of Confusion, to Eclipse their Moon the Emperor: so
in the same way, and by like interposition, the Moon when it is grown too
near in conjunction, may Eclipse their Sun the Pope And there is no great
doubt but he will, considering what some great Kings make of the Popes power at
this day, when it pleases them.

And since we are in this Comparison between the Sun and the Moon, give me
leave a little farther to examine, who A. C. and his fellow Jesuits with some
others would have to be this one Emperor. I am not willing to meddle with any
the secret Designs of Foreign States: but if they will express their Designs
in print, or publish them by Great and Full Authority, I hope then it shall be
neither unlawful, nor unfit for me, either to take notice, or to make use of
them. Why then you may be pleased to know, They would have another Translation
of the Empire from Germany to Spain. They think belike this Emperors line,
though in the same House, is not Catholic enough. And if you ask me, how I
know this secret, I will not take it up upon any common report, though I well
know what that says. But I Will tell you how I know it. Somewhat above four
hundred years after Innocentius made his Comment upon the two great Lights,
the Sun, and the Moon, the Pope, and the Emperor: John de Puente La
Convenientia de las d^s Monarquias Catolicas la de la Iglesia Romana, y la del
Imperi^ Espaniol. y (...) de la pr^dentia de los Reyes Catolicos de Espania a
t^dos los Reyes d^l mund^,
a Spanish Friar follows the same resemblance between the Monarchies of Rome
and Spain, in a Tract of his, entitled: The Agreement of the two Catholic
Monarchies, and Printed in Spanish in Madrid Anno 1612. In the Frontispice or
Title Page of this Book there are set out two Scutchions: The one bearing the
Crosse-Keyes of Rome: The other the Arms of Castile and Leon, both joined
together with this Motto; In vinculo pacis, in the bond of peace. On the one
side of this there is a Portraiture resembling Rome, with the Sun shining
over it and darting his beams on S. Peter's Keys, with this Inscription:
Luminare Majus, ut pr^sit Vrbi^ and Orbi.
Luminare Majus, the greater Light that it may govern the City (that is Rome)
and the whole world. And on the other side there is another Image designing
Spain, with the Moon shining over that and spreading forth its Rays upon the
Spanish Scutchion, with this Impresse: Luminare Minus, ut subdatur Vrbi, and
dominetur Orbi.
Luminare minus, the less Light, that it may be subject to the City (of Rome
he means) and so be Lord to govern the whole world besides. And over all this
in the top of the Title Page there is Printed in Capital Letters, Fecit Deus
duo Luminaria magna, God made two great Lights. There follows after in this
Author a Discovery at large of this Blazoning of these Arms, but this is the
Substance of it, and abundantly enough to show what is aimed at, by whom, and
for whom. And this Book was not stolen out without the will and consent of
the State. For it has Printed before it all manner of License, that a Book
can well have. For it has the approbation of Father Pedro de Buyza, of the
Company of the lesuites. Of John de Arcediano, Provincial of the Dominicans.
Of Diego Granero, the Licencer appointed for the supreme Council of the
Inquisition. And some of these revised this book by Por Orden de los Seniores
del Conseso Supremo.
Order from the Lords of that Council. And last of all the Por Mandade del Rey
nucstro Senior.
Kings Privilege is to it, with high Commendation of the Work. But the
Spaniards had need look to it for all this, least the French deceive them. For
now lately Friar Campanella has set out an Eclogue upon the Birth of the
Dolphin, and that Permissu Superiorum, by License from his Superiors. In which
he says expressly, Quum Gallia alat 20000000 hominum. Ex singulis centenis
sumendo unum colligit 200000. strenuorum militum stipendiatorum, commode,
perpetuoque. Propterea omnes terrae Principes metuunt nunc magis a Gallia, quam
unquam ab aliis; Paratur enim illi Regnum Universal. F. Tho. Campanellae
Ecloga in Principis Galliarum Delphini Nativitatem, cum Annot. Discip. Parisiis
1639. cum permissu Superiorum.
That all the Princes are now more afraid of France then ever, for that there
is provided for it Regnum Universal, The Universal Kingdom, or Monarchy.

But it is time to Return. For A. C. in this passage Parliament, A. C. p. 60.
and of Living Magistrates and Judges besides the Law-Bookes. Thirdly,
therefore the Church of England (God be thanked) thrives happily under a
Gracious Prince, and well understands that a Parliament cannot be called at all
times; And that there are visible Judges besides the Law-Bookes, and One
Supreme (long may he be, and be happy) to settle all Temporal differences
(which certainly, he might much better perform, if his Kingdoms were well rid
of A. C. and his fellows) And she believes too, That our Savior Christ has
left in his Church, besides his Law-booke the Scripture, Visible Magistrates,
and Judges, that is, Archbishops and Bishops, under a gracious King, to govern
both for Truth and Peace according to the Scripture, and her own Canons and
Constitutions, as also those of the Catholic Church, which cross not the
Scripture, and the Just Laws of the Realm. Non est necesse, ut sub Christo sit
Unus Rector totius Ecclesi^, sed sussicit quod sint plures regentes diversas
provincias, sicut sunt plures Reges gubernantes plura regna. Ocham. Dial. L. 2.
Tract. x. p. 1. c. 30. ad. 1.
But she does not believe there is any Necessity to have one Pope, or Bishop
over the Whole Christian world, more then to have one Emperor over the whole
World. Which were it possible, She cannot think fit. Nor are any of these
intermediate Judges, or that One, which you would have Supreme, Infallible.

But since a Kingdom, and a Parliament please A. C. Church by, I Will follow him
in the A. C. p. 60.
way he goes, and be bold to put him in mind; that in some Kingdoms there are
diverse Businesses of greatest Consequence, which cannot be finally and
bindingly ordered, but in and by Parliament: And particularly the Statute Laws
which must bind all the Subjects, cannot be made, and ratified, but there.
Therefore according to A. Cs. own Argument, there will be some Businesses also
found, (Is not the settling of the Divisions of Christendom one of them?) which
can never be well settled, but in a Propter defectum Conciliorum Generalium
totius Ecclesi^, qua sola audet intrepide corrigere omnes, ea mala qua
Vniversalem tangunt Ecclesiam, manentia diu incorrecta crescunt. etc. Gerson.
Declar at. Defectuum Uir^ (...). To. 1. p. 209.
General Council: And particularly the making of Canons, which must bind all
Particular Christians, and Churches cannot be concluded, and established, but
there. And again, as the Supreme Magistrate in the State Civil, may not
abrogate the Laws made in Parliament; though he may Dispense with the
Sanction, or penalty of the Law quoad hic and nunc, as the Lawyers speak. So
in the Ecclesiastical Body, no Bishop, no not the Pope (where his Supremacy
is admitted) has power to Sunt enim Indissolubilia Decreta, quibus reverentia
debita est. Prosper. cont. Collatorem. c. 1. And Turrecremata, who says every
thing that may be said for the Popes Supremacy, yet dares not say, Papam posse
revocare and tollere omnia Statuta Generalium Conciliorum, sed, Aliqua tantum.
Io. de Turrecre. Summa de Ecclesia, L. 3. c. 55. Et postea. Papa non potest
revocare Decreta primorum quatuor Conciliorum, quia non sunt nisi Declarativa
Articulorum Fidei. Ibid. c. 57. ad 2um.
disanull, or violate the true and Fundamental Decrees of a General Council,
though he may perhaps dispense in some Cases with some Decrees. By all which it
appears, though somewhat may be done by the Bishops and Governors of the
Church, to preserve the unity and certainty of Faith, and to keep the Church
from renting, or for uniting it, when it is rent; yet that in the ordinary way
which the Church has hitherto kept, some things there are, and upon great
emergent Occasions may be, which can have no other help, then a lawful, fre;
and well composed General Council. And when that cannot be had, the Church
must pray that it may, and expect till it may, or else reform its self per
parts, by National or Provincial Synods, (as has been said. 24. N. 1.
before.) And in the mean time, it little beseemes A. C. or any Christian to
check at the wisdom of And shall we think that Christ the wisest king has not
provided etc. A. C. p. 60. Where I cannot commend either A. C. his Modesty,
that he does not, or his cunning, that he will not go so (...) as some have
done before him, though in these words (shall we think: etc) he goes too
far. Non videretur Dominus discretus fuisse (ut cum reverentia ejus loquar)
nisi unicum post se talem Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia potest. Fuit
autem ejus Vicarius Petrus. Et idem dicendum est de Successoribus Petri, cum
cadem absurditas sequeretur, si post mortem Pet^i, Humanam Naturam a se creatam
sine regimine Vnius Personae reliquisset. Extravagant. Com Tit de Majoritate
and Obedientia c. Vuam Sanctam. In addition. D. P. Bertrands Edit. Paris. 1585.
Christ, if he have not taken the way they think fittest to settle Church
Differences. Or if for the Churches sin, or Trial, the way of Composing them
be left more uncertain, then they would have it, that they which are approved
may be known. (...) Cor. 11. 19. But the Jesuit had told me before, that a
General Council had adjudged these things already. For so he says.


F. I told him, that a General Council, to wit, of Trent, had already Judged,
not the Roman Church, but the Protestants to hold Errors. That (says the B.)
was not a Lawful Council.


B. It is true, that you replied for the Council of Trent. And my Answer was,
not only, That the Legal, in the necessary Conditions to be observed in a
General Council; but also, That it was no General Council; which again you
are content to omit. Consider it well. First, is that Council Legal, the
Abettors whereof maintain publicly, That it is lawful for them to conclude
any controversy, and make it be de fide, and so in your Judgment
Fundamental, though it have not, I do not say now, the Written Word of God
for warrant, either in express Letter, or necessary sense, and deduction (as
all unerring Councels have had, and as all must have that will not err) but
not so much as Etiamsi non confirmetur, ne probabili Testimonio Scripturarum.
Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. Q. 1. Ar. 3.
Probable Testimony from it, nay quite extra, without the Scripture? Nay
secondly, Is that Council Here A. C. tells us, that doubtless the Arrians
also did mislike, that at Nice the Pope had Legates to carry his messages, and
that one of them in his place sat as President. Why but first, it is manifest,
that Hosius was president at the Council of Nice, and not the Bishop of Rome,
either by himself or his Legates. And so much Athanasius himself, (who was
present, and surely understood the Council of Nice, and who presided there, as
well as A. C.) tells us: Hosius hic est Princeps Synodorum. (So belike He
presided in other Counsels as well as at Nice) Hic formulam Fidei in Nicaena
Synodo concepit. And this the Arrians themselves confess to Constantius the
Emperor, then seduced to be theirs. Apud S. Atbanas. Epist. ad solitar. vitam
agentes. But then secondly I do not except against the Popes sitting as
President, either at Nice, or Trent. For that he might do, when called, or
chosen to it, as well as any other Patriarch, if you consider no more but his
sitting as President. But at Nice the Cause was not his own, but Christ's,
against the Arrian: whereas at Trent, it was merely his own, his own
Supremacy, and his Churches Corruptions, against the Protestants. And therefore
surely not to sit President at the Trial of his own Cause, though in other
Causes he might sit as well other Patriarchs. And for that of Bellarmine, L.
1. de Council. c. 21.. Tertia conditio, Namely, That it is unjust to deny the
Roman Prelat his Right (Ius suum) in Calling General Counsels, and Presiding
in them, in possession of which Right he has bin for 1500. years: That Is but
a bold Assertion of the Cardinals by his leave. For he gives us no proof of
it, but his bare word. Whereas the very Authenticke Copies of the Counsels,
published, and printed by the Romanists themselves, affirm clearly, they were
called by Emperors, not by the Pope; And that the Pope did not preside in all
of them. And I hope Bellarmine will not expect, we should take his bare word
against the Counsels. And most certain it is, that even as Hosius Presided
the Council at Nice, and no way that, as the Popes Legate: so also in the
second General Council, which was the first of Constantinople, Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople Presided. Council. Chalced. Act. 6. p. 136. apud
Binium. In the third, which was the first at Ephasus, S. Cyril of Alexandria
Presided. And though Pope Coelestine was joined with him, yet be sent none out
of the West to that Council, til many things were therein finished, as appears
apud Act. Council. To. 2. c. 16. 17. In the fourth, at Chalcedon, the Legates of
the Bishop of Rome had the Prime place. In the fifth, Eutychius Bishop of
Constantinople was President. In the six and seventh, the Legates of the Pope
were President, yet so as that almost all the duty of a Moderator or President
was performed in the seventh by Tharasius Bishop of Constantinople, as appears
manifestly in the Acts of that Council. And since these seven are all the
General Counsels, which the Greeks and Latins jointly acknowledge; And that
in these other Patriarchs and Bishops Presided, as often at least as the Bishops
of Rome; what is become of Bellarmines Brag, That the Pope has been possessed of
this Right of Presiding in General Counsels for the space of 1500. years?
Legal, where the Pope, the Chief Person to be Reformed, shall sit President
in it, and be chief Judge in his own Cause, against all Law, Divine, Natural,
and Humane? In a place not free, but in, or too near his own Dominion? To
which all were not called, that had Deliberative, or Consultative Voice? In
which none had Suffrage, but such as were sworn to the Pope and the Church of
Rome, and professed Enemies to all that called for Reformation, or a free
Council. And the Leo 10. Bull. Inn. 8. 1520.
Pope himself, to show his Charity, had declared, and pronounced the
Appellants, Heretics, before they were Condemned by the Council, I hope an
Assembly of Enemies are no Lawful Council; and I think the Decrees of such a
one, are omni jure nulla, and carry their Nullity with them through all Law.

Again, is that Council General, that has none Eastern Churches Consent,
nor presence there? Are all the Greeks so become Non Ecclesia, no Church, that
they have no Interest in General Councels? I^ numbers indeed among the
Subscribers, six Greeks; They might be so by Nation, or by Title, purposely
given them; but dare you say they were actually Bishops of, and sent from the
Greek Church to the Council? Or is it to be accounted a General Council,
that in many Sessions had scarce Ten Archbishops, or Forty, or Fifty Bishops
present? And for the West of Christendom, nearer home, it reckons one English,
S. Assaph. But Cardinal Poole was there too: And Fnglish indeed he was by
birth, but not sent to that Council by the King, and Church of England, but as
one of the Council. Trid. Sess. 5.
Popes Legates; And so we find him in the fifth Session of that Council; but
neither before, nor after. And at the beginning of the Council, he was not
Bishop in the Church of England; and after he was Archbishop of Canterbury, he
never went over to the Council. And can you prove, that S. Assaph went thither
by Authority? There were but few of other Nations, and, it may be, some of them
reckoned with no more truth, then the Greeks. In all the Sessions under Paul
the third, but two Frenchmen, and sometimes none; as in the sixth under Julius
the third; when Henr. 2. of France protested against that Council. And in the
end, it is well known, how all the French (which were then a good part) held
off, till the Cardinal of Loraigne was got to Rome. As for the Spaniards, they
labored for many things upon good Grounds, and were most unworthily over-borne.

To all this A. C. has nothing to say, but That it is not Necessary to the
Lawfulness, and Generalnesse of a A. C. p. 61.
Council, that all Bishops of the World should be actually present, subscribe,
or consent, but that such Promulgation be made, as is morally sufficient to
give notice, that such a Council is called, and that all may come, if they
will; and that a Major part, at least, of those that are present, give assent
to the Decrees. I will forget, that it was but p. 59. in which A. C. p. 59.
A. C. speaks of all Pastors, and those not only summoned, but gathered
together. And I will easily grant him, that it is not necessary that all Bishops
in the Christian world be present, and subscribe; But sure it is necessary to
the Generalnesse of a Council, that some be Ut aliqui mittantur, and
advcniant, and conveniant, etc. Bellar. L. 1. de Council. c. 17.. Quarta, ut
saltem.
there, and authorized for all Particular Churches. And to the freedom of a
Council, that all that come, may come safe. And to the Lawfulness of a
Council, that all may come uningaged, and not fastened to a fide, before they
sit down to argue, or deliberate. Nor is such a Promulgation as A. C.
mentions, sufficient, but only in Case of Contumacy, and that where they which
are called, and refuse to come, have no just Cause for their not coming, as
too many had in the Case of Trent. And were such a Promulgation sufficient for
the Generalnesse of a Council; yet for the Freedom and the Lawfulness of it,
it were not.


F. So (said I) would Arrians say of the Council of Nice. The B. would not
admit the Case to be like.


B. So indeed you said. And not you alone: It is Council of Nice, famous
through all the Christian world. In the mean time, nor you, nor they consider,
that the Case is not alike, as I then told you. If the Case be alike in all,
why do not you admit that which was held at Ariminum, and the second of
Ephesus, as well as Nice? If you say (as yours do) It was because the Pope
approved them not. That Is a true Cause, but not Adequate, or full. For it was,
because the Whole Church refused them;. 26. N. 1.
with whom the Roman Prelate (standing then entire in the Faith) agreed, and
so (for his Patriarchate) refused those Councels. But suppose it (...), that
these Sy^s were not admitted, because the Pope refused them, yet this ground is
gamed, That the C^e is not alike for men's Assent to all Counsels. And if you
look to have this granted, That the Pope must come, or the Councel's not
lawful; we have far more reason to look, that this be not denied, That
Scripture must not be departed from, in Here A. C. tells us, that the (...)
thought so of the (...) of (...) (...). Namely, that they departed from (...)
and Sense of Scripture. They said to ^deed. But the Testimony of the whole
Clutch, both then, and sin^, went w^ the Council against the Arrian. So is it
not ^ere against the Protestant ^or I r^t. For they offer to be t^ed by that
very Council of Nice, and all the (...) Counsels and Fathers of the Ch^
within the first four hundred years, and somewhat farther.
letter, or necessary sense, or the Council is not lawful. For the Consent
and Confirmation of Scripture is of far greater Authority to make the
Council Authentical, and the Decisions of it de fide, then any Confirmation
of the Pope can be. Now of these two, the Council of N^e, we are sure, had
the first, the (...) of (...), and you say it had the second, the (...)
Confirmation. The Council of Trent, we are able to prove, had not the first,
and so we have no reason to respect the second. And to what end do your Lear^
Men maintain that a Council may make a Conclusion de s^e though it be simply
So Stapl^ often, but the Fathers quite otherwise. (...) extra Evangeli^m s^nt
(...) s^am. H^. L. 2. (...) C^.
extra, out of a^l and o^ Scr^ure; but out of a Jealousy at least, that this
of Trent, and some others have in their Determin^s left both ^ter, and Sense of
Scripture. Show this against the Council of Nice and I will grant so much of
the Case to be like. But what will you say, if (...) (...) (...) (...). L. 2.
(...) Sy^. (...) (...) Ni^linum.
Const^ required, That (...) thus brought into Question, (...) (...) (...), and
(...) by Testimony out of Scripture? And the (...) of the (...) Council never
refused that ^e. And what will you say, if they profess they depart not from
it, (...) Ib. i^ (...) p. 517. ^
by many Test^s of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^ith? Is the Case then
alike betwixt (...), and (...)? Surely no. But you say that I pretended
something else, for my not admitting the Case to be alike.


F. Pretending that the Pope made Bishops of purpose, for his side. But this
the Bishop proved not.


B. No: Nor had I reason to take on me to Pope's Heart. For if it be proved
that he made Bishops at that time; that some of them were Titular only, and
had no Livelihood to subsist, but out of his purse (and so must hang their
Judgment at the strings of it;) That some of these thus made were sent to the
Council; and sure not without their Errand: yet if the Pope will say, he
neither made, nor sent them to over rule the Holy Ghost at that Meeting, or of
purpose for his side (as no question but it will be said) who can prove it,
that is not a Surveyor of the heart? But though the Pope's heart cannot be
seen, yet if these, and the like Presumptions be true, it is a great sign
that Trent was too corrupt, and factious a Meeting for the Holy Ghost to be at.
And sure the Case Nice.

That which I said was, That Trent could be no Indifferent Council to the
Church, the Pope having made himself a strong Party in it. And this I proved,
though you be here not only content to omit, but plainly to deny the Proof.
For I proved it thus (and you Here A. C. is angry, and says: This Was no
Proof, nor worthy of any Answer, or looking into the Book for it. First,
because it is only a Surmise of Adversaries. Who are apt to interpret to the
Worst. Secondly, because there might be more Italian Bishops there, as being
nearer, yet without any factious Combination with the Pope: As in the Greek
Councels more Grecians were present. A. C. p. 62. No proof, or a weak one.
Let the Reader Judge that. But why no Proof? Because a surmise of Adversaries.
Is that a Surmise of Adversaries, that is taken out of the Council it self?
Is that Council then become Regnum divisum, and apt to interpret the worst of
it self? Yea but there were more Italian Bishops, as being nearer. Most true.
Neater a great deal then the Grecian Bishops. But the Bishops of France and of
some parts of Germany were almost as near as the Italians themselves. And why
then came no more of These, that were near enough? Well: A. C. may say what he
will. But the Pope remembered well the Councels of Constance, and Basil, and
thought it wisdom to make sure work at Trent. For in later times (for their
own fears no doubt) the Bishops of Rome have been no great friends to
General Councels, especially Free ones. Multi suspicantur, quod hac
dissimulaverit Romana Curia, and Concilia fieri neglexerit, ut possit ad su^
voluntatis libitum before dominari, and Iura aliarum Ecclesiarum liberius
usurpare. Quod non assero esse verum, sed quia bujusmodi labor at infamia, ideo
etc. Pet de Aliaco. Card. Cameracensis L. de Reformat. Eccles. in fascic, rerum
expetend. f^. 204. A.
answered not) That there were more Italian Bishops there, then of all
Christendom besides. More? Yea more then double. And this I proved out of the
Council it self, which you had in your hand in Decimo sexto; but had no great
heart to look it. For, where the number of Praelates is expressed, that had
Suffrage and Vote in that Council, the Italians are set down to be 187. and
all the rest make but 83. So that there were more Italian Bishops by 104. then
of all the rest of Christendom. Sure the Pope did not mean to be overreached
in this Council. And whatsoever became of his Infallibility otherwise, he
might this way be sure to be Infallible in whatsoever he would have Determined:
And this without all doubt, is all the Infallibility he has. So I proved this
sufficiently, I think. For if it were not to be sure of a side, give any
satisfying reason, why such a potent Party of Italians, more then double to the
whole Christian world, should be there? Show me the like for Nice, and I will
give it, that the Case is alike between these two Councels.

Here Bellarmine comes in to help: But sure it Nice, as I have urged against
that at Trent. For he tells us, In Concilio Nicano prime ex Occidente solum
fuerunt duo Presbyteri missi ex Italia, unus Episcopus ex Gallia, unus ex
Hispania, and unus ex Africa, Bellar. L. 1. de Council. c. 17. S. Antepenult.
That in the Council at Nice, there were as few Bishops of the West present,
as were of the East at Trent, but five in all. Be it so. Yet this will not make
the Case alike between the two Councels. First, because I press not the
disparity in number only; but with it the Pope's carriage, to be sure of a
Major part. For it lay upon the Pope to make sure work at Trent, both for
himself, and his Church. But neither the Greek Church in general, nor any
Patriarch of the East had any private interest to look to, in the Council at
Nice. Secondly, because I press not so much against the Council of Trent,
That there were so exceeding many Bishops of the West compared with those of
the East (for that must needs be, when a Council is held in the West) but that
there were so many more Italians, and Bishop obnoxious to the Pope's power,
then of all Germany, France, Spain, and all other Parts of the West besides
Thirdly, because both Bellarmine and A. C. seek to avoid the Dint of this
Argument, by comparing the Western with the Eastern Bishops, and are content
to say nothing about the Excessive number of Italians, to others of the West:
That will receive a fuller Answer then any of the rest. For though very few
Western Bishops were at the Council of Nice, being so remote: yet at the same
time Pope Sylvester held a Council at Rome, in which He with 275. Bishops of
the West confirmed the Nicene Creed; Omnes qui au^ si fu^rint dissol vere
Definitionem Sancti and Magnt Conc^i, quod apud Nicaeam congregatum est,
Anathematizamus. Council. Rom 3. sub Sylvestro. apud By nium. p. 449.
and Anathematized all those which should dare to dissolve the Definition of
that Holy, and Great Council. Now let Bellarmine, or A. C. or any else show,
That when the Council of Trent sat, there was another Council (though never
so privately in regard of their miserable Oppression) which sat in Greece, or
anywhere in the East, under any Patriarch or Christian Bishop, which did
confirm the Canons of the Council of Irent, and Anathematize them which
admitted them not, and I will confess they speak home to the Comparison
between the Councels, else a blind man may see the difference, and it is a vast
one.

But here A. C. makes account he has found a neither French, nor Spanish, nor
Schismatic Greeks did agree with Protestants A. C p. 62.
in those Points which were defined in that Council, especially after it was
Confirmed by the Pope, as appears by the Censure of Ieremias the Greek
Patriarch. Who agreed with the Protestants in the Points defined by that
Council, (as he speaks) or rather (^o speak properly) against the Points
there defined; I know not. And for ought A. C. knows, many might agree with
them in heart, that in such a Council durst not open themselves. And what
knows A. C. how many might have been of their Opinion in the maine before the
Council ended, had they been admitted to a fair, and a free Dispute? And it
may be too; some Decrees would have been more favorable to them, had not the
care of the Popes interest made them sowrer. For else what mean these words,
Especially after it was confirmed by the Pope? As for Ieremtas, it is true, his
Censure is in many things against the Protestants: But I find not that that
Censure of his is warranted by any Authority of the Greek Church: Or that he
gave the Protestants any hearing, before he passed his Censure. And at the
most, it is but the Censure of a Schismatic in A. C. own Judgment. And for
his flourish which follows, that East, and West would Condemn Protestants for
Heretics, I would he would forbear prophesying, till both parts might meet in
a free General Council, that sought Christ more then themselves. But I find
the Jesuit has not done with me yet, but adds:


F. In fine, the B. wished, That a Lawful General Council were called to end
Controversies. The Persons present said, That the King was inclined thereunto,
and that therefore we Catholics might do well to concur.


B. And what say you to my Wish? you pretend Truth, would you not have it
found? Can you, or any Christian be offended, that there should be a good end
of Controversies? Can you think of a better end, then by a General Council?
And if you have a most Gracious King inclined unto it (as you say it was
offered) how can you acquit your selves, if you do not consent? Now here A. C.
marvels what A. C. p. 62.
kind of General Council I would have, and what Rules I would have observed in
it, which are morally like to be observed, and make an end of Controversies
better then their Catholic General Councels. Truly I am not willing to leave
A. C. unsatisfied in any thing. Nor have I any meaning to trouble the Church
with any New Devisings of mine. Any General Council shall satisfy me, (and,
I presume, all good Christians) that is lawfully called, continued, and ended
according to the same course, and under the same Ex iis Conciliis quae omnium
consensu Generalia fuerunt, qualia sunt quatuor prima: Et ex consuetudine
Ecclesiae colligimus quatuor Conditiones requiri, and sufficere. Bellar. 1. de
Con. c. 17.. 2.
Conditions, which General Councels observed in the Primitive Church; which I
am sure were Councels General, and Catholic, what ever yours be. But I doubt
that after all noise made about these Requisite Conditions, A. C. and his
Fellows will be found as much, if not more defective in performance of the
Conditions, then in the conditions themselves. Well, the Jesuit goes on for
all this.


F. I asked the B. whether he thought a General Ccuncell might err? He said
it might.


B. I presume you do not expect I should enter into the Proof of this
Controversy, Whether a General Council may err in Determination, or not?
Your self brought no proof that it cannot, and till that be brought, my
speech is good that it can: and yet I hope to be found no Infringer of any
Power given by Christ to his Church. But it seems by, that which follows, you
did by this Question (Can a general Council Err?) but seek to win ground
for your other, which follows.


F. If a General Council may err, what nearer are we then (said I) to
unity, after a Council has determined? Yes (said he) although it may err;
yet we should be bound to hold with it, till another come to reverse it.


B Whether a General Council may err, or not, To say it cannot err, leaves
the Church not only without Remedy against an error once Determined. but also
without sense that it may need a Remedy, and so without care to seek it, which
is the misery of the Church of Rome at this day. To say it can err, seems to
expose the members of the Church to an uncertainty and wavering in the Faith,
to make unquiet Spirits, not only to disrespect former Councels of the Church,
but also to slight and contemn whatsoever it may now Determine; into which
Error some Opposers of the Church of Rome have fallen. And upon this is
grounded your Question, Wherein are we nearer to unity, if a Council may err?
But in relating my answer to this you are not so candid; For my words did not
sound as yours seem to do, That we should ^old with the Council, err, or
not err, till another came to reverse it. As if Grounds of Faith might vary at
the Racket, and be cast of each side, as a cunning hand might lay them.

You forget again, omit at least (and with what Caution which I added. For I
said, The Determination of a General Council erring was to stand in force,
and to have external Obedience at the least yielded to it, till. 33. Confid.
5. Nu. 1. 2. And the R^son of this is, Because to have a General Council
deceived, is not impossible; But altogether impossible it is, that
Demonstrati^e R^ason or Testimony Di^ine should dece^ve. Hooker L. 2. Ec. Pol.
7.
Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration to the Contrary made the Error
appear; and until thereupon In which case Maldo^ puts in the sh^ewdest Arg
meant. Namely, that this way we should never have a certain end of
Controversies. For to try whether any thing were Decreed according to the Word
of God by one General Council, we ^ould need another Cou^ll; And th^n another
to try that; And so in (...). So our faith should never have where to settle
and rest it self. Mal^n S. Mat. 1^. 20. But to this I answer, That the A^nt
Church took this way, as will afterward appear in S. Augustine. Next, here is
no unc^rtainty at all; For no (...) Co^cell lawfully called, and so pr^ng can
be questioned in another, unless it to tall out, that (...) Scriptu^, (...)
(...) appear against it. Bu^ e^t (...) (...) th^se a^e ^o (...) and man^t ^
and ^ving the ^ it is (...) (...) wh^ ^ or (...) wi^h (...) without a
Council.. 33. (...) 5. N^ 1. and 2.
another Council of equal authority did reverse it. And indeed I might have
returned upon you again: If a General Council not Confirmed by the Pope may
err (which you affirm) to what end then a General Council? And you may
Answer, yes: For although a General Council may err, yet the Pope as Head of
the Church, cannot. An excellent means of unity, to have all in the Church as
the Pope will have it, what ever Scripture say, or the Church think. And then
I pray, to what end a General Council? Will his Holiness be so holy, as to
confirm a General Council, if it Determine against him? And as for (...). L
4. d^ (...). P^t. ^7.. 3. etc.
Bellarmines reasons why a General Council should be useful, if not
necessary, though the Pope be I^fallible, they are so weak in Part, and in
part so unworthy; that I am sorry any necessity of a bad cause should force so
learned a man to make use of them.

Here A. C. tells me, The Caution mentioned, as omitted, makes my Answer werse
then the Jesuit related A. C. p. 63. ^4.
it. And that in two things. First, in that the Jesuit relates it thus:
Although it may err: but the Caution makes it, as if it did actually err.
Secondly, in that the Jesuit relates, That we are bound to hold it, till
another come to reverse it; that is, w^e not knowing whether it do err or
not, but only that it may err. But the Caution puts the Case so, as if the
Determination of a General Council actually erring were not ipso jure
invalid, but must stand in force, and have external Obedience yielded to it,
till not only moral Certainty, but Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration
to the Contrary make the error appear; And when it appears, we must yield
our Obedience, till a Council of equal Authority reverse it, which perhaps
will not be found in an whole Age. So either the Jesuit relates this speech
truly, or less disgracefully. And A. C. thinks, that upon better Judgment, I
Will not allow this Caution. Truly I shall not thank the Jesuit for any his
kindness here. And for the Caution, I must and do acknowledge it mine, even
upon advisement, and that whether it make my Answer worse, or better. And I
think farther, that the Jesuit has no great Cause to thank A. C. for this
Defense of his Relation.

First then the Jesuit (so says A. C.) does in his Relation supposition, That
a General Council A. C. p. 63
may err. But the Caution expresses it as actually erring. True, But yet I
hope this Expression makes no General Council actually err. And then it
comes all to one, whether I suppose that such a Council may err, or that it
do err. And it is fitter for clearing the Difficulties into which the Church
falls in such a Case to suppose (and more then a supposition it is not) a
General Council Synodum Generalem aliquoties errasse percepimus. Wald. L. 2.
de Doctrine. Fidri Art. 2. c. 19.. 1.
actually erring, then as only under a Possibility of Erring. For the Church
has much more to do to vindicate it self from such an Error actually being,
then from any the like Error that might be.

Secondly A. C. thinks, he has got great advantage A. C. p. 63.
by the words of the Caution; in that I say, A General Council erring is to
stand in force, and have external Obedience, at least so far as it consists
in silence, Patience, and forbearance yielded to it, till Evidence of
Scripture, or a Demonstration to the Contrary make the Error appear, and
until thereupon another Council of equal Authority did reverse it. Well! I say
it again. But is there any one word of mine in the Caution, that speaks of our
knowing of this Error? Surely not one (that's A. Cs. Addition) Now suppose a
General Council actually Erring in some Point of Divine Truth, I hope it will
not follow that this Error must be so gross, as that forthwith it must
needs be known to private men. And doubtless till they know it, Obedience
must be yielded; Nay when they know it (if the Error be not manifestly against
Fundamental verity, in which case a General Council can not easily err) I
would have A C. and all wise men Consider. Whether External Obedience be not
even then to be yielded. For if Controversies arise in the Church some end they
must have, or they will tear all in sunder. And I am sure no wisdom can think
that fit, Why then say a General Council Err, and an Erring Decree be ipso
jure; by the very Law it self invalid, I would have it wisely considered
again, whether it be not fit to allow a General Council that Honor and
Privilege, which all other Great Courts have. Namely, That there be a
Declaration of the Invalidity of its Decrees, as well as of the Laws of other
Courts, before private men can take liberty to refuse Obedience, For till such
a declaration, if the Council stand not in force, A. C: sets up Private Spirits
to control General Councels, which is the thing he so often, and so much cries
out against in the Protestants. Therefore it may seem very fit and necessary
for the Peace of Christendom, that a General Council thus erring should
stand in force, till Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration make the
Errourto appear, It is not long since A C. compared Councels to Parliaments;
it was but p. 60. And I hope a Parliament and the Acts of it must stand in
force, thoughsomthing bemistaken in them, or found hurtful till, another
Parliament of equal Authority reverse it and them. For I presume you will not
have any inferior Authority to abrogate Acts of Parliament.
as that another Council of equal Authority reverse it. For as for Moral
Certainty, that is not strong enough in Points of Faith. (which alone are spoken
of here) And if another Council of equal Authority cannot be gotten together
in an Age, that is such an Inconvenience, as the Church must bear, when it
happens. And far better is that inconvenience, then this other,. 33. Consid. 4.
N. 1.
that any Authority less then a General Council, should rescinde the Decr^es
of it, unless it err manifestly, and intolera'ly: Or that the whole Church
upon peaceable, and just complaint of this Error neglect or refuse to call a
Council, and examine it. And there come in National or Provincial Councels
to, 24. Nu. 1.
reform for themselves. But no way must lie open to private men to. 38. Nu. 15.
Refuse obedience, till the Council be heard, and weighed. as well as that
which they say against it; yet with Non est inferiorum judicare an Superiores
legitime procedant necne, nisi manifestiss i am constet intolerabilem Errorem
committ^. Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c 8.. Alii dicunt Concilium. Nisi manifest
constet, Jacob. Almaln in 3. sent. D. 24. q. unica, fine.
Bellarmines Exception still: so the error be not manifestly intolerable. Nor
is it fit for Private men, in such great Cases as this, upon which the whole
peace of Christendom depends, to argue thus; The Error appears, Therefore the
Determination of the Council is ipso jure invalid. But this is far the safer
way (I say still, when the Error is neither Fundamental, nor in it self
manifest) to argue thus: The Determination is by equal Authority, and that
secundum jus, according to Law declared to be invalid, Therefore the Error
appears. And it is a more humble and conscientious way, for any private man to
suffer a Council to go before him, then for him to outrunne the Council. But
weak and Ignorant men's outrunning both God, and his Church is as bold a fault
now on all sides, as the daring of the Times has made it Common. As for that
which I have added concerning the Possibility of a General Counsels erring, I
shall go on with it, without asking any farther leave of A. C.

For upon this Occasion I shall not hold it Consider the Point of General
Councels, How they may, or may not err, And a little to look into the Roman
and Protestant Opinion concerning them; which is more agreeable to the Power
and Rule which Christ has left in his Church; and which is most preservative
of Peace established, or ablest to reduce perfect unity into the Church of
Christ, when that poor Ship has her ribs dashed in sunder by the waves of
Contention. And this I will adventure to the World, but only in the Nature of a
Consideration, and with submission to my Mother, the Church of England, and the
Mother of us all, the Universal Catholic Church of Christ; As I do most
humbly All whatsoever else is herein contained.

First then, I Consider, whether all the Power, Consid. 1.
that an Oecumenicall Council has to Determine, and all the Assistance it
has, not to err in that Determination, it has it not all from the Si
Ecclesiae Vniversitati non est data ulla Authoritas, Ergo neque Concilio
Generali, quaten^ Ecclesiam Universalem repraesentat. Bellar. L. 2. de Council.
c. 16.. Quod si Ecclesia.
Catholic Universal Body of the Church, and Clergy in the Church, whose
Concilium Generale Ecclesiam reprasentans. Ia. Almain. in 3. Sent, D. 24.
Q^unica. Episcopi sunt Ecclesia reprasentative, ut nostri loquuntur. Bellar. L.
3. de Eccl. Milit. c. 14.. 3.
Representative it is? And it seems it has. For the Government of the Church
being not. 26. Nu. 8.
Monarchical, but as Christ is Head, this Principle is inviolable in Nature:
Every Body Collective that represents, receives power, and privileges from the
Body which is represented, else a Representation might have force without the
thing it represents; which cannot be. So there is no Power in the Council, no
Assistance to it, but what is in, and to the Church. But yet then it may be
Questioned, whether the Representing Body has Omnis repraesentatio virtute
minor est Reipsa, vel Veritate, cujus Reprasentatio est. Colligigitur aperte ex
Tho. 1. 2. q. 101. A. 2. ad. 2.
all the Power, Strength, and Privilege, which the Represented has? And
suppose it has all the Legal Power, yet it has not all the Natural, either
of strength, or wisdom, that the whole has. Now because the Representative
has power from the Whole, and the Maine Body, can meet no other way; therefore
the Acts, Laws, and Decrees of the Representative, be it Ecclesiastical, or
Civil, are Binding in their Strength. But they are not so certain, and free
from Error, as is that Wisdom which resides in the Whole. For in Assemblies
merely Civil, or Ecclesiastical, all the able and sufficient men cannot be
in the Body that Represents, And it is as possible, so many able, Posset enim
contingere quod Congregati in Concilio Generali essent pauci and viles, tam in
re, quam in hominum reputatione, respectu illorum qui ad illud Concilium
Generale minime convenissent, etc. Ockam. Dial par. 3. lib. 3. c. 13.
and sufficient men (for some particular business) may be left out, as that
they which are in, may miss, or mis apply that Reason, and Ground, upon which
the Determination is principally to rest. Here, for want of a clear view of
this ground, the Representative Body erres; whereas the Represented, by virtue
of those Members which saw and knew the ground, may hold the Principle
inviolated.

Secondly, I Consider, That since it is thus in Nature, Consid. 2.
and in Civil Bodies, if it be not so in Ecclesiastical too, some reason must
be given why, Ecclesia est tinum Corpus mystic^m per Similitud^nem ad Natural.
Durand. 3. D. 14. Q. 2. N. 5. Biel. Lect. 23. in Can. Miss.
For that Body also consists of men: Those men neither all equal in their
perfections of Knowledge and Judgment, whether acquired by Industry, or rooted
in Nature, or infused by God. Not all equal, nor any one of them perfect, and
absolute, or freed from passion and humane infirmities. Nor does their meeting
together make them Infallible in all things, though the Act which is hammered
out by many together, must in reason be perfecter, then that which is but the
Child of one man's sufficiency. If then a General Council have no ground of
Not erring from the Men, or the Meeting, either it must not be at all, or it
must be by some assistance and power upon them, when they are so met together:
And this, if it be less then the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, it cannot make
them secure against Error.

Thirdly, I Consider, That the Assistance of the Consid. 3.
Holy Ghost is without Error; That Is no Question, Whether all assistance of
the Holy Ghost be afforded in such a High manner, as to cause all the
Definitions of a Council in matters Fundamental in the Faith, and in remote
Deductions from it, to be alike infallible? Now the Romanists, to prove there
is Omnem veritatem infallibiliter docendi, etc. Stapl. Relect. Praf. ad
Lectorem.
infallible assistance, produce some places of Scripture; but no one of them
inferres, much less enforces an infallibility. The Places which Stapleton
there rests upon, are these: S. Ioh. 16. 13.
I will send you the Spirit of Truth, which will lead you into all Truth. And,
S. Ioh. 14. 16.
This Spirit shall abide with you for ever. And, S. Mat. 28. 20.
Behold I am with you to the end of the world. To these, others add, S. Mat.
16. 18.
The founding of the Church upon the Rock, against which the gaes of Hell
shall not prevail. And, Christ's Trayer for S. Peter, S. Luke 22. 32.
That his Faith fail not. And Christ's promise, That S. Mat. 18. 20.
where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the
midst of them. And that in the Act. 15 28.
Acts: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us.

For the first, which is, Leading into all truth, and that for ever. Prosp. de
vocat. Gent. L. t. c. 10.
All, is not always universally taken in Scripture. Nor is it here simply for
All Truth: For then a General Council could no more err in matter of Fact,
then in matter of Faith; in which yet Bellarm. 2. de Conc. c. S.. Respondeo,
quidam. Where he says, Vbi Queftio est de Facto, non de Iure, etc. In ejusmodi
Judiciu Concilium errare posse non est dubium.
your selves grant it may err. But into Alt Dubium est an illud docebit omnta,
S. Ioh. 14. 26. referendum sit ad illud, Quaecunque dixi vobis: quasi non aliud
docturum Spiritum Sanctum dicat, quam quod ipse ante a docuisset, non
repugnabo, si quis it a velit interpretari, etc. Maldonat. in S. Ioh. 14.
Truth, is a limited All: Into all Truth absolutely necessary to Salvation: And
this, when they suffer themselves to be led by the Blessed Spirit, by the Word
of God. And all Truth which Christ had before (at least fundamentally)
delivered unto them, S. Ioh. 16. 14.
He shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. And again, S. Ioh. 14. 26.
He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your Remembrance, which
I have told you. And for this necessary Truth too, the Apostles received this
Promise, not for themselves, and a Council, but for themselves, and the
Bellarm. 2. de Con. c. 9.. Alteram. Assistentia Sp. Sancti non est propter
Council. sed universam Ecclesiam.
Whole Catholic Church; of which a Council, be it never so general, is a
very little part. Yea, and this very Assistance is not so absolute, nor in that
manner to the whole Church, as it was to the Apostles; neither does Christ in
that place speak directly of a Council, but of His Apostles Preaching, and
Doctrine.

As for Christ's being with them unto the end of the world, the Fathers are so
various, that in the sense of the Ancient Church, we may understand him present
in S. Aug. Tr. ^0. in S. Ioh. Isidor. 1. Sent. cap. 14.
Majesty, in S. Hilar. in Psalm. 124. Justin. Martyr. Dial. cum Triphone.
Prosp. Epist. ad Demetriadem.
Power, in Aid and S Hilar. in Psalm. 124. Prosper. Lib. 2. de Voc. Gent. cap.
2. Leo Sermon. 2. de Resurrect. Dom. cap. 3. Isidor. in Ios. c. 12.
Assistance, against the Difficulties they should find for preaching Christ;
which is the native sense, as I take it. And this Promise was made to support
their weakness. As for his Presence, in teaching by the Holy Ghost, S. Cyril.
lib. 7. Dial. de Trin. Prosper. Epist. ad Demetriadem.
few mention it; and no one of them which does, speaks of any Infallible
Assistance, farther then the succeeding Church keeps to the Word of the
Apostles, as the Apostles kept to the Guidance of the Spirit. Besides, the S.
Hilar. in Psalm. 124. S. Cyril. L. 7. Dial. de Trin. S. Aug. 6. de Gen ad Lit.
c. 8. S. Leo Sermon. 10. de Not. Dom. c. 5. Isid. in Ios. c. 12. In all which
places, Vobiscum is either interpreted cum suis, or Fidelibus, or Universa
Ecclesia.
Fathers refer their Speech to the Church Universal, not to any Council, or
Representative Body. And Hoc colligi^ur, sed quaeritur non quid colligitur, sed
quid (...) voluit. Mal^. in S. Mat. 28.
Maldonate adds, That this His presence by teaching, is, or may be a Collection
from the place, but is not the Intention of Christ.

For the Rock upon which the Church is founded, next Place, we dare not lay
any other Foundation, then 1. Cor. 3. 11.
Christ: Christ laid his Ephesians. 2. 20.
Apostles, no question, but upon Himself. With these S. Peter was laid, no man
questions, and in prime place of Order (would his claiming Successors be
content with that) as appears, and diverse Fathers witness, by his Particular
designement, Tu es Petrus; But yet the Rock even there spoken of, is not S.
Peter's Person, either only, or properly, but the Faith which he professed.
And to this, besides the Evidence, which is in Text, and Truth, the S. Ignatius
Fp. ad Philadelph. Qui suam firmavit Ecclesiam super Petr^m, aedificatione
spirituali. S. Hilar. l. 6. d^ Trin. Super hanc igitur Confessionis Petram
Ecclesiae ad fi^atio est. Et paulo post: Haec Fid s Ecclesiae fundamentum est.
S. Greg. Nyss. de Trin. adversus Iudaeos. Super hanc Petram adificabo Ecclesiam
meam, super Confessionem videlicet Christi. S. Isid. Pelus. Epist. l. 1. Epist.
235. Vt hac ratione certam omnibus Confessionem traderet, quam ab eo inspiratus
Petrus tanquam Basin, ac Fundamentum ^ecit, super quod Dominus Ecclesiam suam
extruxit. S. Cyril. Alex. de Trin. L. 4. Petram opinor per agnominationem,
aliud nihil quam inconcussam and firmissimam Discipuli fidem vocavit, in qua
Ecclesia Christi ita fundata, and firmata esset, ut non laberetur, etc. B.
Theodor. in Cant. Petram appellat fidei pietatem, veritatis professionem, etc.
Et super hanc Petram adisicabo Ecclesiam meam. S. Greg. Ep. l. 3. Ep. 33. In
vera side pers^stite, and vitam vestram in Petram Ecclesiae, hoc est, in
Confessione B. Petri Apostolorum Principis solidate. Theophylact. in Matthew. 16.
Super cum adificavit Ecclesiam, quia enim confessus erat, etc. quod haec
Confessio fundamentum erit, etc. S. Aug. in 1. Ep. S. Ioh. tract. 10. Quid est,
super hanc Petram? Super hanc Fidem, super id quod dictum est, Tues, etc. S.
Bas. Seleuc. Orat. 25. Hanc Confessionem cum nominasset Christus Petram, Petrum
nuncupat eum qui primum illam est confessus, donans illi hanc appellationem
tanquam insigne, and monumentum hujus confessionis. Haec enim est revera
Pietatis Petra, haec salutis basis, etc. S. Jacob. Liturg. (...), p. 26. etc.
And some which join the Person of S. Peter, profess it is propter robur
confessionis. Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Psalm. 50.
S. Amb. L. 10. in S. Luc. c. 24. And S. Greg. gives it for a Rule, when Petra
is read in the singular number (and so it is here) Christus est, Christ is
signified.
Fathers come in with very full consent. And this, That the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, is not spoken of the Not erring of the Church
principally, but of the Not Non deficit. S. Bern. Ser. 79. in Cant. And
Bellarmine himself going to prove Ecclesiam non posse deficere, begins with
this very place of Scripture. L. 3. de Eccl. c. 13.
falling away of it from the Foundation. Now a Church may err, and dangerously
too, and yet not fall from the Foundation, especially if that of L. 3. de Eccl.
c. 14.. Quinto, si esset. Multa sunt de Fide, quae non sunt absolute necessaria
ad salutem.
Bellarmine be true, That there are many things, even de fide, of the Faith,
which yet are not necessary to Salvation. Besides, even here again, the
Promise of this stable edification, is to the whole Church, not to a Council;
at least no farther then a Council builds, as a Church is built, that is, upon
Christ.

The next Place is Christ's Prayer for S. Peter's Faith. The native sense of
which Place is, That Christ prayed, and obtained for S. Peter perseverance in
the grace of God, against the strong temptation, which was to winnow him above
the rest. But to conclude an Infallibility hence in the Pope, or in his Chair,
or in the Roman Sea, or in a General Council, though the Pope be President,
I find no one Ancient Father that dare adventure it. And Lib. 4. de Romans Pont.
cap. 3.
Bellarmine himself, besides some Popes, in their own Cause (and that in
Epistles counterfeit, or falsely alleged) has not a Father to name for this
sense of the Place, till he come down to Chrysologus, Theophylact, and S.
Bernard: of which Chrysologus his speech is but a flash of Rhetoric, and the
other two are men of yesterday, compared with Antiquity, and lived when (it was
God's great grace, and learned men's wonder) the corruption of the time, had not
made them corrupter then they are. And 2. 2 ae. q. 2. A. 3. Probat enim ex his
verbis, Fidem Ecclesiae Vniversalis non posse deficere.
Thomas is resolute, That what is meant here beyond S. Peter's Person, is
referred to the whole Church. And the Gloss upon the Canon Law is more
peremptory then he, even to the Denial, that it is Causa. 24. q. 1. C. A
Recta. Non de Papa, quia Papa potest errare.
meant of the Pope. And if this Place warrant not the Popes Faith, where is the
Infallibility of the Council that in your Doctrine depends upon it?

The next Place is Bellarmines choice one, and his first, Testimonia propria
sunt tria. Primum est Matthew. 18. etc. Bellar. L: 2. de Council. c. 2.. 4. Sed
contra, Firmitas Conciliorum proprie non innititur his verbis. Stapl. Relect.
Controvers. 6. q 4. A. 4 ad 4um. Locus hio non debet huc proprie accommodari.
Valentia in Tho. To. 3. Disput. 1. R. 1. Puncto 7.. 45.
proper place for Proof of the Infallibility of General Councels. This Place
is Christ's Promise. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I in the midst of them, S. Mat. 18. 19. 20.
S. Mat. 18. And he tells us, The strength of the Argument is not taken from
these words alone, but as they are continued with the former, and Addita
Argumentatione a Minori ad Majus, etc. Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c 2.. 4. Et
Stapl. Relect. Cont. 6. q. 3. A. 4.
that the Argument is drawn a M^nori ad Majus, from the less to the Greater.
Thus Siduo vel tres congregati in nomine meo obtinent semper quod petunt a Deo.
etc. Bellat. ibid.. 5.
If two or three gathered together in my Name do always obtain that which
they ask at God's hands, to wit, wisdom and knowledge of those things which
are necessary for them: How much more shall all the ^ops gathered together (in
a Council) always obtain wisdom and knowledge to Judge those things, which
belong to the Direction of the whole Church? I answer; First, it is most true,
that here is little strength in these words alone. For, though the Fathers make
different interpretations of this Place of Scripture, yet S. Chrysostom. Hom. 61. in
S. Mat. 18. ubi duo vel tres pari spiritu and voluntate collecti sunt, etc.
Theoph. in S. Mat. 18. S. Cyprian. L. 4. Epist. 4. S. Hil^. in S. Mat. 18.
most of them agree in this, That this Place is to be understood of Consent in
Prayer. And this is manifest enough in the Text it self Secondly, I think
there is as little strength in them by the Argument drawn A Minori ad Majus.
And that I prove two ways. First, because though that Argument hold in
Natural, and Necessary Things: yet I doubt it holds not either in Voluntary,
or Promised things, or things which depend upon their Institution. For he that
Promises the less, does not hereby promise the greater; and he which will do
the Less, will not always do the greater. Secondly, because this Argument
from the Less to the greater, can never follow, but where, and so far as the
thing upon which the Argument is founded, agrees to the less. For if it do not
always agree to the less, it cannot Necessarily pass from thence to the
greater. Now that upon which this Argument is grounded here, is Infallible
hearing, and granting the Prayers of two or three met together in the Name of
Christ. But this Infallibility is not always found in this Less Congregation,
where two or three are gathered together. For they often meet, and pray, yet
obtain not, because there are diverse other Conditions necessarily required
(as S. Chrysostom Quemodo igitur a Patre cuncta non consequentur? Quia multae
sunt Causae non impetrandi, etc. S. Chrysostom. Hom. in S Matthew. 18. Et Bellar.
ipse. Si congregari in nomine Christi sit Nota Ecclesiae, non erit
quomodocunque congregari. Sic enim onines Haereses, and Schismata congregantur
in nomine Christi. Sed, etc. L. 4. de Notis Ecclesiae. c. 2.. Tertius non.
observes) to make the Prayers of a Congregation heard beside their gathering
together in the Name of Christ. And therefore it is not extended to a greater
Congregation, or Council, unless the same Conditions be still observed.
Neither does Christ's Promise, Ero in Medio, I will be in the midst of them,
infer, That they, the greater, or the Less, three, or three hundred have
all, even ^tsi Christus adsit in medio talium, non adest tamen ad omnem
effectum, aut ad hunc qui est Iudicare de fide. Staple. Relect. Controv. 6. q.
3. A. 4. Sed nec illi semper ad Deum recipient qui in medio eorum est. Ne^
Deus sic adest ii^ qui recipient ad Ipsum, ut omnem veritatem doceat in
Instanti and omni tempore simul. etc. Iunius in Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c. 2.
necessary things infallibly granted unto them, as often as they ask, if they
ask not, as well as they ought, as what they ought. And yet most true it is,
that where more or fewer are gathered together in the Name of Christ, there is
he in the midst of them, but to assist, and to grant whatsoever he shall find
fit for them, not Infallibly whatsoever they shall think fit to ask for
themselves. And therefore S. Cyprian, though he use this very Argument A minori
ad majus, from the less to the greater, yet he presumes not to Extend it as
Bellarm. does, to the obtaining of Infallibility; but only uses it in the
General way, in which there neither is, nor can be doubt of the truth of it.
Thus. Si duo Vnanimes tantum possunt; Quid, si Vnanimit as apud omnes esset? S.
Cypr. L. 4. Epis. 4.
If two that are of one mind to Godward, can do so much, what might be done,
if there were Unanimity among all Christians? Undoubtedly more, but not All
whatsoever they should ask, unless all other Requisites were present.
Thirdly, in this their own Non ad I^fallibilem certitudinem alicujus
Sententiae, in quam plures in Nomine Christi consentiunt, locus hic Evangelii
proprie accomodari debet, sed ad efficaciam consensionis plurium ad id
impetrandum, quod unanimiter in Christi Nomine petunt, si id quidem ad eorum
salutem expediat. Secus onim non modo ex illo loco probabitur etc. Greg. de
Valen. To. 2. in Thom. Disput. 1. Q. 1. Puncto. 7.. 45. And although Stapleton
approves this Argument a Minori ad Majus, vet withal he says. Firmitas
Conciliorum illis Christi verbis proprie non innititur; Quia nec Christus ibi
de Conciliis Episcoporum loqui^ur, sed de quavis Fidelium unanimi
Congregatione. Nec etsi etc. Staple. Rel^ct. Contr. 6. q. 3 A. 4.
Great Champions disagree from Bellarmine, or he from them. For Gregory de
Valentia and Stapleton tell us, That this place does not belong properly to
prove an Infallible Certainty of any sentence in which more agree in the Name
of Christ: But to the efficacy of Consent for obtaining that which more shall
pray for in the Name of Christ, if at least that be for their souls health.
For else you may prove out of this Place, That not only the Definition of a
General Council; but even of a Provincial, n^y of two or three Bishops
gathered together is valid, and that without the Popes Assent.

The last Place mentioned for the Infallibility of General Counsels is that,
Acts, 15. where the Apostles say Act. 15. 28.
of themselves and the Council held by them: It seems good to the Holy Ghost,
and to Us. And They might well say it. For They had Infallibly the Assistance
of the Holy Ghost, and they kept close to his Direction. But I do not find,
that any General Council since, though they did implore (as they ought) the
Assistance of that Blessed Spirit, did ever take upon them to say in terminis,
in express terms of their Definitions: Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and Nobis.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Us. Acknowledging even thereby (as I
conceive) a great deal of Difference in the Certainty of those things, which a
General Council at after Determined in the Church; and those which were
settled by the Apostles, when They sat in Council. But though I do not find,
That They used this speech punctually, and in terms; yet the Fathers, when
They met in Council were Confident, and spoke it out, That They had Assistance
from the Holy Ghost; yet so, as that They neither took Themselves, nor the
Counsels They sat in, as Infallibly Guided by the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles
were. And Valentia is very right, Quintum Argumentum etc. Aut sunt ergo
Arrogantes, quod putandum non est, Aut infallibiliter definiunt. Respondet
Valentia concedendo neutrum, To. 3. in Thom. Disp. 1. Q. 1. Puncto 7.. 45.
That though the Council say they are gathered together in the Holy Ghost, yet
the Fathers are neither Arrogant, in using the speech, nor yet Infallible for
all that. And this is true, whether the Pope approve, or disapprove their
Definitions; Though Valentia will not admit that. The Pope must be (with him)
infallible, what ever come of it. Now though this be but an Example, and
include no Precept, yet both Firmit as eorum nititur Exemplo primi Concilii
Staple. Relect. Contro. 6. q. 3. A. 4. ad 3.
Stapleton and Et Bellarm. dicit Locum hunc esse tertium e Propriis. L. 2. de
Council. c. 2.. Tertius Locus.
Bellarmine make this Pla^e a proper Proof of the Infallibility of General
Councels. And Conciliorum Decreta sunt Spiritus Sancti Oracula. Stapl. ibid.
Sententia Orthodoxa, prima.
Stapleton says the Decrees of Councels are the very Oracles of the Holy
Ghost, which is little short of Blasphemy. and Si illud Concilium ex quo formam
acceperunt omnia alia Concilia asserit Decreta sua esse Decreta Sp. Sancti,
certe idem assercre possunt caetera legitima Concilia. etc. Bellar. ibid.
Bellarmine adds, that, Because all other Councels borrowed their form from
this, therefore other lawful Councels may affirm also, That their Decrees are
the Decrees of the Holy Ghost. Little considering therewhile, That it is one
thing to borrow the Form, and another thing to borrow the Certainty, and the
Infallibility of a Council For suppose that After-Councels did follow the Form
of that first Council exactly in all Circumstances, yet, I hope, no advised man
will say, There is the like Infallibility in other Councels, where no man sat
that was Inspired, as was in this, where all, that sat as Judges, were
Inspired. Or if any Jesuit will be so bold as to say it, he had need bring
very Good Proof for it, and far better then any is brought yet. Now that all
Councels are not so Infallible as was this of the Apostles, nor the Causes
handled in them, as there they were, is manifestby Vide quam prudenter agu^t,
non pracipita^t Sententia^, sed singula expendunt. In rebus ^nim Fidei and quae
conscientia^ tangunt, non satis est dicere, Volumus Mandamus. Vides igitur
quomodo Convenient Apostoli, simpliciter Convenient, nihil nisi Deum quaerunt,
and aliorum salutem expetunt etc. Quidigitur mirum si in hoc Concilio fuerit
Spiritus Sanctus? etc. Nos aliter Convenimus, (...) cum magna pomp^, n^sque
ipsos qu^rimus; atque nobispollicemur nihil nobis non licere de Plenitudine
Potestatis. Et quomodo Sp. Sanctus ejusmodi Concilia probare possit? Fetus in
Act. 15. 7
One of their own, who tells us plainly That the Apostles in their Council
dealt very prudently, did not precipitate their Judgment, but waighed all
things. For in Matters of Faith, and which touch the Conscience, it is not
enough to say, Volumus and Mandamus, We Will and Command. And thus the Apostles
met together in simplicity and singleness, seeking noth^ng but God, and the
Salvation of men. An^ what wonder if the Holy Ghost were present in such a
Council? Nos aliter. But we meet otherwise, in great pomp, and seek our
selves, and promise our selves that we may do any thing out of the Plenitude
of our power. And how can the Holy Ghost allow of such meetings? And if not
allow; or approove the Meetings, then certainly not concur to make every
thing Infallible, that shall be concluded in them.

And for all the Places together weigh them with Church (including the
Apostles) as all of them do; And then All grant the Uoyce of the Church is
Gods Voice, Divine and Infallible. Or else they are General unlimited, and
applyable to private Assemblies as well as General Councels, which none grant
to be Infalli^le, but some mad Enthusiasts. Orels they are limited, not simply
into All truth, but All necessary to salvation; in which I shall easily grant a
General Council cannot err, suffering it self to be led by this Spirit of
Truth in the Scripture, and not taking upon it to lead both the Scripture and
the Spirit. For Suppose these Places or any other, did promise Assistance even
to Infallibility, yet they granted it not to every General Council, but to
the Catholic Body of the Church it self, and if it be in the whole Church
principally, then is it in a General Council, but by Consequent; as the
Council represents the Whole. And that which belongs to a thing by consequent,
does not otherwise, nor longer, belong unto it, then it consents and cleaves to
that, upon which it is a consequent. And therefore a General Council has not
this Assistance, but as it keeps to the whole Church, and Spouse of Christ,
whose it is to hear His word, and determine by it. And therefore if a General
Council will go out of the Churches way, it may easily go without the Churches
Truth.

Fourthly, I Consider, That All agree, That the Consid. 4.
Church in General can never err from the Faith necessary to Salvation: No
Persecution, no Temptation, no S. Mat. 16, 18.
Gates of Hell (whatsoever is meant by them) can ever so prevail against it.
For all the Members of the Militant Church cannot err, either in the whole
Faith, or in any Article of it; it is impossible. For if all might so err,
there could be no union between them, as Members, and Christ the Head: And no
Union between Head and Members, no Body, and so no Church, which cannot be.
But there is not the like consent, That Ecclesia Vniversalis fide^ habet
indefectibilem etc. Non quidem in Generali Synodo congregata, quam aliquoties
errasse percepimus. etc. Wald. L. 2. Doct. Fid. Ar. 2. c. 19.. 1.. 38. N. 4.
General Councels cannot err. And it seems strange to me, the Fathers having
to do with so many Heretics, and so many of them opposing Church Authority,
that in the condemnation of those Heretics, this Proposition, even in terms
(A General Council cannot err) should not be found in any one of them, that
I can yet see. Now suppose it were true, That no General Council had erred in
any matter of moment to this day, which will not be found true; yet this would
not have followed, that it is therefore infallible, and cannot err. I have no
time to descend into Particulars, therefore to the General still. S. Augustine
Aug. L. 2. de Bapt. contra Donat. cap. 3.
puts a Difference between the Rules of Scripture, and the Definitions of men;
This Difference is; Praeponitur Scriptura, That the Scripture has the
Prerogative, That Prerogative is, That whatsoever is found written in
Scripture, may neither be doubted, nor disputed, whether it be true, or right.
But the Letters of Bishops may not only be disputed, but corrected by Bishops
that are more learned and wise then they, or by National Councels; and
National Councels by Plenary or General: And even Ipsaque Plenaria saep^
priora a posterioribus emendari.
Plenary Councels themselves may be amended, the former by the later. It seems
it was no news with S. Augustine, that a General Council might err, and
therefore inferior to the Scripture, which may neither be doubted, nor
disputed, where it affirms. And if it be so with the Definition of a Council
too (as Vox Ecclesia ^Word est, ut non de (...) judicenius rectene an secus
docuerit. So. Stap. Relect. c. 4 q. 1. A^
Stapleton would have it) That that may neither be doubted, nor disputed; Where
is then the Scriptures Prerogative?

I know there is much shifting about this Place, but De Regulis Morum and
Disciplina. Relect. Con. 6. q. 3. A. 4.
Stapleton says first, That S. Augustine speaks of the Rules of Manners, and
Discipline: And this is Bellarmines last shift. Both are out, and Bellarmine in
a Contradiction. Bellarmine in a Contradiction: For first he tells us, General
Councels cannot err in L. 2. de Council. c. 2. Princip.
Precepts of Manners; and then, to turn off Saint Augustine in this Place, he
tells us, That if Saint Augustine does not speak of matter of Fact, but of
Right, and of universal Questions of Right, then he is to be understood Ib.
cap. 7.. Potest etiam.
of Precepts of Manners, not of Points of Faith. Where he has first run
himself upon a Contradiction; and then we have gained this ground upon him,
That either his Answer is nothing; or else against his own state of the
Question, A General Council can err in Precepts of Manners. So belike when
Bellarmine is at a shift, A General Council can, and cannot err in Precept
of Manners. And Both are out: For the whole Dispute of Saint Augustine, is
against the Error of Saint Cyprian, followed by the Donatists, which was an
Error in Faith; Namely, That true Baptism could not be given by Heretics,
and such as were out of the Church. And the Proof which Stapleton and
Bellarmine draw out of the subsequent words ( Quando aliquo rerum experime^to,
quod clausum erat, aperitur.
When by any experiment of things, that which was shut, is opened) is too
weak: For experiment there is not of Fact; nor are the words, Conclusum est,
as if it were of a Rule of Discipline concluded, as Stapleton cites them; but a
farther experiment or proof of the Question in hand; and pertaining to faith
which was then shut up, and as Saint Augustine after speaks, Ib. c. 4. Ncbulis
involuta.
wrapped up in cloudy darkness.

Next Stapleton Sensus est, quod Concilia posteriora emendant, id est,
perfectius explicant fidem in semine antique Doctrina latentem. etc. Stapl.
Relect. Contr. 6. q. 3. A. 4.
will have it, That if Saint Augustine Cause of Faith, then his meaning is,
that later General Councels can mend, that is, explicate more perfectly that
Faith which lay hid in the seed of Ancient Doctrine. He makes instance, That
about the Divinity of Christ, the Council of Ephesus explicated the first of
Nice; Chalcedon, both of them; Constance, Chalceden. And then concludes: Qua in
re nihil erroneum ullum Concilium docuit. etc.
In all which things, none of (these) Councels taught that which was erroneous:
An excellent Conclusion: These Councels, and These in this thing, taught no
error, and were only explained: Therefore no Council can err in any matter
of Faith, Or therefore S. Augustine speaks not of an Emendation of error, but
of an Explanation of sense: whereas every eye sees neither of these can follow.

Now that S. Augustine meant plainly, That even Saepe.
often (for that is his word) and that in matter of Faith, and might and ought
so to be amended in a later Council, I think will thus appear. First his word
is, Emendari, to be amended, which properly supposes for error, and
faultiness, not Explanation; And Saint Augustine needed not to go to a word of
such a Not used but either for Corrigere, or Anferre; And so S. Augustine uses
the word, L. 20. cont. Faust. c. 21. and Bellarmine though he interpret it in
matter of Fact, yet equals the word with Correxit. 2. de Con. c. 8. Respond.
Quaest.
forced sense, nor sure would, especially in a Disputation against Adversaries.
Next, S. Augustines Dispute is against S. Cyprian and the Council held at
Carthage about Baptism by Heretics; in which Point, that National Council
erred (as now all agree) And S. Augustines Deduction goes on: Scripture cannot
be other then right; That is the Prerogative of it: but Bishops may, and be
Reprehend^.
Reprehended for it, if peradventure they Si qui lin iis forte a veritate
^eviatum est.
err from the Truth, and that either by more learned Bishops, or by
Provincial Councels. Here Reprehension, and that for deviation from the Truth,
is (I hope) Emendation properly, and not Explanation only. Then Provincial
Councels, they must Cedere.
yield to General: And to yield is not in case of Explanation only. Then it
follows, That even Plenary Councels themselves may be amended, the former by
the later; still retaining that which went before, If peradventure they erred,
or made deviation from the Truth. And if this be not so, I would feign know,
why in one and the same tenor of words, in one and the same continuing
argument, and deduction of S. Augustine, Reprehendi should be in proper sense,
and a veritate deviatum in proper sense, and Cedere in proper sense, and only
Emendari should not be proper, but stand for an Explanation? If you say the
Reason is, because the former words are applied to men, and National Councels,
both which may err, but this last to General Councels, which cannot err;
This is most miserable begging of the Principle, and thing in Question.

Again, S Augustine concludes there, That the General Quum cog^scitur quod
latebat.
When that is known which lay bid before. Not as Stapleton would have it, lay
hid as in the seed of Ancient Doctrine only, and so needed nothing but
explanation; but hid in some darkness or ambiguity, which led the former into
error, and mistaking, as appears: For S. Augustine would have this amendment
made without Sacrilegious Pride, doubtless, of insulting upon the former
Council, that was to be amended; and without swelling arrogance, sure, against
the weakness in the former Council; and without contention of envy, which
uses to accompany man's frailty, where his, or his friends Error is to be
amended by the later Council; and in holy Humility, in Catholic Peace, in
Christian Charity, no question, that a Schism be not made to tear the Church
(as here the Donatists did) while one Council goes to reform the lapse of
another, if any be. Now to what end should this learned Father be so zealous in
this work, this highest work, that I know in the Church, Reviewing and
Surveighing General Councels, to keep off Pride, and Arrogance, and Envy,
and to keep all in Humility, Peace, and Charity; if after all this noise, he
thought later Councels might do nothing, but amend, that is, explain the
former?

That shift, which Bellar. L. 2, de Council. c. 7.. Respondeo primo (...).
Bellarmine adds to these two of Stapleton, is poorest of all, namely, That S.
Augustine and it is no question, but they may be amended, as the second
Ephesine was at Chalcedon. For this Answer has no Foundation but a
peradventure; nor durst Bellar. rest upon it And most manifest it is, that S.
August. speaks of Councels in general, that they may err, and be amended in
Doctrine of Faith; and in case they be not amended, that then they be condemned
and rejected by the Church, as this of Ephesus, and diverse others were. And as
for that mere Trick, of the. 26. N. 1.
Popes Instruction, Approbation, or Confirmation, to preserve it from error,
or ratify it that it has not erred, the most ancient Church knew it not. He
had his Suffrage, as other great Patriarchs had, and his Uote was highly
esteemed, not only for his Place, but for worth too, as Popes were then. But
that the Whole Council depended upon him, and his confirmation, was then
unknown, and I verily think at this day not Believed, by the wise and Learned
of his Adherents.

Fifthly, it must be considered, If a General Council C^sid. 5.
may err, who shall judge it? S. Augustine is at Ibid.
priora a posterioribus, Nothing sure, that is less then a. 32. N. 5
General Council. Why, b^t this yet lays all open to uncertainties, and
makes way for a Whirlewind of a Private Spirit, to ruffle the Church. No,
neither of these. First, all is not open to uncertainties. For General
Councels lawfully called, and ordered, and lawfully proceeding, are a Great and
an Awful Representation, and cannot err in matters of Faith, keeping
themselves to God's Rule, and not attempting to make a New of their own; and
are with all submission to be observed by every Christian, where Scripture, or
evident Demonstration come not against them. Nor does it make way for the
Whirlewind of a private Spirit: For Private Spirits are too giddy to rest upon
Scripture, and too heady and shallow to be acquainted with Demonstrative
Arguments. And it were happy for the Church, if she might never be troubled
with Private Spirits, till they brought such Arguments. I know this is hotly
objected against Praefat. p. 29.
Hooker, the Dialogus ^ctus, Deus and Rex.
Author calls him a Cordatus Protestans.
Wise Protestant, yet turns thus upon him. If a Council must yield to a
Demonstrative Proof, Who shall Judge, whether the Argument that is brought, be
a Demonstration, or not? For every man, that will kick against the Church,
will say, the Scripture he urges, is evident, and his Reason a Demonstration.
And what is this, but to leave all to the wildenesse of a Private Spirit? Can
any ingenuous man read this Passage in Hooker, and dream of a Private Spirit?
For to the Question, Who shall judge? Hooker answers, as if it had been then
made; Praef. p. 29. And therefore A. C. is much to blame after all this, to
talk of a pretext of seeming evident Scripture, or Demonstration. As he does. p
59.
An Argument necessary and Demonstrative, is such (says he) as being proposed
to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly assent unto it.
So, it is not enough to think or say it is Demonstrative. The Light then of a
Demonstrative Argument, is the Evidence which it self has in it self to all
that understand it. Well; but because all understand it not, If a Quarrel be
made, Who shall decide it? No Question,, 32. Nu. 2.
but a General Council, not a Private Spirit: first, in the intent of the
Author; for Hooker in all that Discourse makes the Sentence of the Council
Praesat. p. 28.
binding: and therefore that is made Judge, not a Private Spirit. And then for
the Judge of the Argument, it is as plain: For if it be evident to any man,
then to so many Learned men as are in a Council, doubtless: And if they
cannot but assent, it is hard to think them so impious, that they will define
against it. And if that which is thought evident to any man, be not evident to
such a grave Assembly, it is probable it is no Demonstration, and the producers
of it, ought to rest, and not to trouble the Church.

Nor is this Hooker's alone, nor is it newly thought Nature, which Grace does
ever set right, never undermine. And 2 de Bapt cont. Don. cap. 4.
S. Augustine has it twice in one Chapter, That S. Cyprian, and that Council
at Carthage, would have presently yielded to any one that would Uni verum
dicenti, and demonstr anti.
demonstrate Truth. Nay, it is a Rule with Cont. Fund. cap. 4.
him, Consent of Nations, Authority confirmed by Miracles, and Antiquity, S.
Peter's Chair, and Succession from it, Motives to keep him in the Catholic
Church, must not hold him against Demonstration of Truth; Quae quidem si tam
manifesta mon^ratur, ut in dubtum ^enire non possit, praeponen^a est om^ibus
ills rebus, quiius in Catholica (...): (...) aciquid apertissim^ in Euangel^.
(...). c. 4.
which if it be so clearly demonstrated, that it cannot come into doubt, it
is to be preferred before all those things, by which a man is held in the
Catholic Church. Therefore an evident Scripture, or Demonstration of Truth
must take place every where, but where these cannot be had, there must be
Submission to Authority.

And does not Bellarmine himself grant this? For That Inferiors may not
judge, whether their Superiors (and that in a Council) do proceed lawfully,
or not. But then having bethought himself, that Inferiors at all times, and
in all Causes, are not to be cast off, he adds this Exception, L. 2 de Council.
c. 8.. Alii dicunt Cencilium. Nisi manifestissime constet intolerabilem Errorem
committi.
Unless it manifestly appear that an intolerable Error be committed. So
then, if such an Error be, and be manifest, Inferiors may do their duty, and
a Council must yield; unless you will accuse Bellarmine too of leaning to a
Private Spirit; for neither does he express who shall judge, whether the
Error be intolerable.

This will not down with you, but the Definition General Council is, and
must be infallible. Your Fellows tell us (and you can affirm no more) That
the Voice of the Church determining in Council, is not Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4.
Q. 3. Ar. 1.
Humane, but Divine. That is well; Divine, then sure Infallible; yea, but the
Proposition sticks in the throat of them that would utter it. It is not Divine
simply, but in a Divina suo modo. Ibid. And so A. C. too, who has opened his
mouth very wide to prove the Succession of Pastors in the Church, to be of
Divine, and infallible Authority; yet in the close is forced to add, At least
in some sort, p. 51.
manner Divine. Why but then sure not infallible, because it may speak lowdest
in that manner, in which it is not Divine. Nay more: The Church (forsooth) is
an infallible Foundation of Faith, In altiori genere, viz. in geners causae
efficientis, atque adeo aliqua exparte formalis. Ibid. Q. 4. Ar. 3.
in an higher kind then the Scripture: For the Scripture is but a Foundation
in Testimony, and Matter to be believed; but the Church as the efficient cause
of Faith, and in some sort the very formal. Is not this Blasphemy? Does not
this knock against all evidence of Truth, and his own Grounds, that says it?
Against all evidence of Truth: For in all Ages, all men that once admitted the
Scripture to be the Word of God (as all Christians do) do with the same
breath grant it most undoubted and infallible. But all men have not so judged
of the Churches Definitions, though they have in greatest Obedience submitted
to them. And against his own Grounds, that says it: For the Scripture is
absolutely, and every way Divine; the Churches Definition is but suo modo, in a
sort, or manner Divine. But that which is but in a sort, can never be a
Foundation in an Higher Degree, then that which is absolute, and every way
such: Therefore neither can the Definition of the Church be so infallible as
the Scripture; much less in altiori genere, in a higher kind then the
Scripture. But because, when all other things fail, you fly to this, That the
Churches Definition in a General Council, is by Inspiration, and so Divine
and infallible: My haste shall not carry me from a little Consideration of
that too.

Sixthly then, If the Definition of a General Council Consid. 6.
be infallible, then the infallibility of it is either Conclusion, and in the
Means that prove it; or in the Conclusion, not the Means; or in the Means,
not the Conclusion. But it is infallible in none of these. Not in the first,
The Conclusion and the Means: For there are diverse Deliberations in General
Councels, where the Conclusion is Catholic; but the Means by which they prove
it, not infallible. Not in the second, The Conclusion, and not the Means: For
the Conclusion must follow the nature of the Premises or Principles out of
which it is deduced; therefore if those which the Council uses be sometimes
uncertain, as is proved before, the Conclusion cannot be infallible. Not in
the third, The Means, and not the Conclusion: For that cannot but be true and
necessary, if the Means be so. And this I am sure you will never grant;
because if you should, you must deny the Infallibility which you seek to
establish.

To this (for I confess the Argument is old, but can never be worn out, nor
shifted off) your great Master Relect. Cont. 4. q. 2. ad Arg^. 1^.
Stapleton (who is miserably hampered in it, and indeed so are you all)
answers, That the Infallibility of a Council is in the second Course, that is,
And herein I must needs Commend your Wildome. For you have had many Popes so
ignorant, (...) ignorant, as that they have been ^o way able to sift, and
Examine the Means. And therefore you do most advisedly make them infallible
in the Conclusion without the Means.. 39. Nu. 8.
It is infallible in the Conclusion, though it be uncertain and fallible in
the Means, and Proof of it. How comes this to pass? It is a thing altogether
unknown in Nature and Art too, That fallible Principles can, either father, or
mother, beget, or bring forth an infallible Conclusion.

Well, that is granted in Nature, and in all Argumentation, Ibid. Not. 4.
First, because the Church is discursive, and uses the weights, and moments of
Reason in the Means; but is Prophetical, and depends upon immediate
Revelation from the Spirit of God, in delivering the Conclusion. It is but the
making of this appear, and all Controversy is at an end. Well, I will not
discourse here, To what end there is any use of Means, if the Conclusion be
Prophetical, which yet is justly urged; for no good cause can be assigned of
it. If it be Prophetical in the Conclusion (I speak still of the present
Church; for that which included the Apostles which had the Spirit of Prophecy,
and immediate Revelation, was ever Propheticke in the Definition, but then that
was Infallible in the Means too) Then since it delivers the Conclusion not
according to Nature and Art, that is, out of Principles which can bear it,
there must be some supernatural Authority which must deliver this Truth: That
(say I) must be the Scripture. For if you fly to immediate Revelation now, the
Enthusiasme must be yours. But the Scriptures, which are brought in the very
Exposition of all the Primitive Church, neither say it, nor enforce it.
Therefore Scripture warrants not your Prophecy in the Conclusion. And I know
no other thing, that can warrant it. If you think the Tradition of the Church
can, make the world beholding to you. Produce any Father of the Church, that
says, This is an Universal Tradition of the Church, That her Definitions in a
General Council are Prophetical, and by immediate Revelation. Produce any
one Father that says it of his own Authority, That he thinks so: Nay, make it
appear, that ever any Prophet, in that which he delivered from God, as
Infallible Truth, was ever discursive at all in the Means. Nay, make it but
probable in the ordinary course of Prophecy (and I hope, you go no higher, nor
will I offer at God's absolute Power) That that which is discursive in the
Means, can be Prophetic in the Conclusion, and you shall be my great Apollo
for ever. In the mean time, I have learned this from Prophetae audiebant a Deo
interius inspirante. Tho. 2. 24. q. 5. A. 1. ad 3.
yours, That all Prophecy is by Vision, Inspiration, etc. And that no Vision
admits Discourse: That all Prophecy is an Illumination, not always present,
but when the Word of the The word of the Lord came unto me, is common in the
Prophets.
Lord came to them, and that was not by Discourse. And yet you Stapl. Relect.
Cont. 4. q. 2. p. 473.
say again, That this Prophetic Infallibility of the Church is not gotten
without study and industry. You should do well to tell us too, why God would
put his Church to study for the Spirit of Prophecy, which never any Particular
Prophet was put unto. Propheticam Revelationem nullo pacto haberi posse, vel
open Naturae, vel studio, Contra Avicennam, Algazalem, Averrocm, etc. Fran.
Picus. 2. Praenot. c. 4.
And whosoever shall study for it, shall do it in vain, since Prophecy is a
1. Cor. 12. 10.
Gift, and can never be an acquired Habit. And there is somewhat in it, that
Bellarmine, in all his Dispute for the Authority of General Councels, dares
not come at this Rock. L. 2. de Conc. c. 12.
He preferres the Conclusion, and the Canon, before the Acts and the
Deliberations of Councels, and so do we: but I do not remember, that ever he
speaks out, That the Conclusion is delivered by Prophecy, or Revelation. Sure
he sounded the shore, and found danger here. He did sound it: For a little
before he speaks plainly (would his bad Cause let him be constant?) Concilia
no^ habent, neque scribunt immediatas Revelationes etc sed ex Verbo Dei per
ratiocinatione^ dcducunt Conclusiones. Bellar. l. 2 de Council. A. 12.. At
Concilia non.
Councels do deduce their Conclusions. What? from Inspiration? No: But out of
the Word of God, and that per ratiocinationem, by Argumentation: Neither have
they, nor do they write any immediate Revelations.

The second Reason, why Stap. Jb. p. 374
Stapleton will have it Propheticke in the Conclusion, is, Because that which
is determined by the Church, is matter of Faith, not of Knowledge: And that
therefore the Church proposing it to be believed, though it use Means, yet it
stands not upon Art, or Means, or Argument, but the Revelation of the Holy
Ghost: Else when we embrace the Conclusion proposed, it should not be an Assent
of Faith, but an Habit of Knowledge: This for the first part (That the Church
uses the Means, but follows them not) is all one in substance with the former
Reason. And for the later part, That then our admitting the Decree of a
Council, would be no Assent of Faith, but an Habit of Knowledge; what great
inconvenience is there, if it be granted? For I think it is undoubted Truth,
That one, and the same Conclusion may be Faith to the Believer, that cannot
prove, and Knowledge to the Learned, that can. And Cont. Fund. c. 4.
S. Augustine, I am sure, in regard of one, and the same thing, even this, the
very Wisdom of the Church in her Doctrine, ascribes Understanding to one sort
of men, and Belief to another weaker sort. And Tho. p. 1. q. 2. A. 2. ad 1.
Nihil prohibet illud, quod secundum se demonstrabile est, and scibile, ab
aliquo acciti ut Credibile, qui Demonstrationem non capit.
Thomas goes with him.

Now for further satisfaction, if not of you, yet of others, this may well be
thought on. Man lost by sin Nature, and cannot have Light enough to see the way
to Heaven, but by Grace. This Grace was first merited, after given by Christ:
this Grace is first kindled in Faith; by which, if we agree not to some
Supernatural Principles, which no Reason can demonstrate simply, we can never
see our way. But this Light, when it has made Reason submit it self, cleares
the Eye of Reason, it never puts it out. In which sense, it may be, is that of
L. 3. Rationabilu and ubique diffusa.
Optatut, That the very Catholic Church it self is reasonable, as well as
diffused every where. By which Ut ipsa fide valentiores facti, quod credimus
intelligere mereannur, non jam hominibus, sed Deo intrinsecus mentem nostram
firmante and illuminante. S. Aug. cont. Epist Fundamenti. c. 14.
Reason enlightened (which is stronger then Reason) the Church in all Ages has
been able, either to convert, or convince, or at least Omnia genera Ingeniorum
subdita Scripturae. S. Aug. L. 22. cont. Faust. cap. 96.
stop the mouths of Philosophers, and the great men of Reason, in the very
Point of Faith, where it is at highest. To the present occasion then. The
first, immediate, Fundamental Points of Faith, without which there is no
salvation, as they cannot be proved by Reason; so neither need they be
determined by any Council, nor ever were they attempted, they are so plain
set down in the Scripture. If about the sense, and true meaning of these, or
necessary deduction out of these Prime Articles of Faith, General Councels
determine any thing, as they have done in Nice, and the rest; there is no
inconvenience, that one and the same Canon of the Council should be believed,
as it reflects upon the Articles and Grounds indemonstrable; and Almain. 3. D.
24. q. 1. and Tho. 2. 2a. q. 1. A. 5. C. Id quod est scitum ab uno homine etiam
in statu via. est ab alio Creditum, qui hoc Demonstrare non novit.
yet known to the Learned, by the Means and Proof, by which that Deduction
is vouched, and made good. And again, the Conclusion of a Council, suppose
that in Nice, about the Consubstantiality of Christ with the Father, in it
self considered, is indemonstrable by Reason; There I believe, and assent in
Faith: But the same Conclusion, Concilium Nicanum deduxit Conclusionem ex
Scripturis. Bellar. 2. de Council. c. 12.. Sic etiam.
if you give me the Ground of Scripture, and the Creed (and somewhat must be
supposed in all, whether Faith, or Knowledge) is demonstrable by natural
Reason, against any Arrian in the world. And if it be demonstrable, I may know
it, and have an Habit of it. And what inconvenience in this? For the weaker
sort of Christians, which cannot deduce, when they have the Principle granted,
they are to rest upon the Definition only, and their Assent is mere Faith:
yea, and the Learned too, where there is not a Demonstration evident to them,
assent by Faith only and not by knowledge. And what inconvenience in this?
Nay, the necessity of Nature is such, that these Principles once given, the
understanding of man cannot rest, but it must be thus And the S. Pet. 3. 15.
Apostle would never have required a man to be all to give a Reason, and an
account of the hope that is in him, if he might not be able to know his
account, or have lawful interest to give it, when he knew it, without
prejudicing his Faith by his knowledge. And suppose exact knowledge and mere
Belief cannot stand together in the same Person, in regard of the same thing,
by the same means, yet that does not make void this Truth. For where is that
exact knowledge, or in whom, that must not merely, in points of Faith, believe
the Article, or Ground upon which they rest? But when that is once believed, it
can demonstrate many things from it. And Definitions of Councels are not
Principia Fidei, Principles of Faith, but Deductions from them.

And now because you ask, Wherein are we nearer Consid. 7.
to unity by a Council, if a Council may err? Besides the consider which
Opinion was most agreeable with the Church, which most able to preserve, or
reduce Christian Peace: The Roman, That a Council cannot err; Or the
Protestants, That it can. And this I propose not as a Rule, but leave the
Christian world to consider of it, as I do.

First then I Consider, Whether in those Places of Scripture before mentioned,
or any other, there b^e absolute Infallibility? Or whether such an
Infallibility will not serve the turn, as Relect. Cont. 4. q. 2. Notab. 3
Exacta and Omnimoda Infallibilitate non indiget, sed satis est semel acceptis.
etc.
Stapleton; after much wrigling, is forced to acknowledge? One not every way
exact: because it is enough, if the Church do diligently insist upon that
which was once received: and there is not need of so great certainty to open
and explicate that which lies hid in the seed of Faith sown, and deduce from
it as to seek out, and teach that which was altogether unknown. And if this
be so, then sure the Church of the Apostles required guidance by a greater
degree of Infallibility, then the present Church; which yet, if it follow the
Scripture, is Infallible enough, though it has not the same degree of
Certainty which the Apostles had, and the Scripture has. Nor can I tell, what
to make of Bellarmine, that in a whole Chapter disputes five Prerogatives, in
Certainty of Truth, L. 2 de Con. c. 12.. ult. Cum utraque sint infallibilis
veritatis, aque certa dici possunt.
that the Scripture has above a Council; and at last Concludes, That They may
be said to be equally certain in Infallible Truth.

The next thing I Consider, is: Suppose this not Exact, congruous Infallibility
in the Church; Is it not residing according to Power and Right of Authority in
the whole Church, and in a General Council, only by Power deputed Nam si
Ecclesiae Vniversitati non est data ulla Authoritas; ergo nec Concilio
Generali, quatenus Ecclesiam Vniversalem repraesentat. Bellar. L. 2. de Council.
c. 16.. Quod si Ecclesiae.
; with Mandate to determine? The Places of Scripture, with Expositions of the
Fathers upon them, make me apt to believe this. S. Peter (says S. Augustine
Petrus personam Ecclesiae Catholicae sustinet, and huic datae sunt claves, quum
Petro datae. De Agon. Chr. c. 30.
,) did not receive the Keys of the Church, but as sustaining the Person of the
Church. Now for this Particular, suppose the Key of Doctrine be to let in
Truth, and shut out Error; and suppose the Key rightly used, infallible in
this: yet this Infallibility is primely in the Church; in whose person, (not
strictly, in his own) S. Peter received the Keys. But here Stapleton lays
cross my way again, and would thrust me out of this Consideration. He Rel.
Cont. 6. q. 3. A. 5. Sed propter Primatum quem gerebat Ecclesiae, ideoque etsi
finaliter Ecclesia accepit, tamen formaliter P ^trus accepit.
grants that S. Peter received these Keys indeed, and in the Person of the
Church; but (says he) that was, because he was Primate of the Church; And
therefore the Church received the Keys finally, but S. Peter formally: that is
(if I mistake him not) S. Peter for himself and his Successors received the
Keys in his own Right; but to this end, to benefit the Church, of which he
was made Pastor. But I keep in my Consideration still, and I would have this
considered, whether it be ever read in any Classicke Author, That to receive a
thing in the Person of another, or sustaining the Person of another, is only
meant finally to receive it, that is, to his good, and not in his Right. I
should think, he that receives any thing in the Person of another, receives it
indeed to his good, and to his use, but in his right too: And that the primary
and formal right is not in the receiver, but in him whose person he sustaines,
while he receives it. A man purchases Land, and takes possession of it by an
Attorney. I hope the Non est idem possidere, and alieno Nomine possidere. Nam
possidet, cujus nomine possidetur. Procurator aliena rei praestat Ministerium.
L. Quod meo. 18. in Princ. H. de acquir. Possess. Celsus.
Attorney being the hand to receive it Instrumentally, and no more, shall take
nor Use nor right from the Purchaser. A Man marries a Wife by a Quando
Matrimonium fit per Procuratorem -- Procurator est tantum, Conditio sine qua
non. Sanch. de matrim. L. (...). Dispat. 11. q. 4. Nu. 28. p. 128.
Proxy (This is not unusual among great Persons) But I hope he that has the
Proxy, and receives the woman with the Ceremonies of Marriage in the Others
Name, must also leave her to be the Others Wife, who gave him power to receive
her for him. This stumbling-blocke then is nothing: and in my Consideration it
stands still, That the Church in General by the hands of the Apostles and
their Successors received the Keys, and all Power signified by them, and by
the assistance of Gods Spirit may be able to use them, but still in and by the
same hands, and perhaps to open, and shut in some things infallibly, when the
Pope, and a General Council too (forgetting both her, and her Rule, the
Scripture) are to seek how to turn these Keys in their wards.

The third Particular, I Consider, is: Suppose in the absolute Infallibility in
the Prime Foundations of Faith, absolutely necessary to Salvation; and that
this Power of not erring so, is not Non omnia illa que tradit Ecclesia sub
Desinitione judiciali (i. in Concilio) sunt de Necessitate Salutis credenda,
sed illa duntaxat quae sic tradit concurrente Universali totius Ecclesiae
consensu, implicit, vel explicit, vere, vel interpretative. Gerson. Tract. de
Declaratione veritatum quae credenda sunt etc.. 4. par. 1. p. 414.
communicable to a General Council, which represents it, but that the
Council is subject to error: This supposition does not only preserve that
which you desire in the Church, an Infallibility, but it Possit tamen contingere
quod quamvis Generale Concilium definiret aliquid contra Fidem, Ecclesia Dei
non exponeretur periculo. Quia possit contingere quod congregati in Concilio
Generali essent pauci and viles tam in re, quam in hominum reputatione,
respectu illorum qu^ ad illud Concilium Generale minime convenissent. Et tunc
illorum leviter Error ex^irparetur per multitndinem meliorum and sapientiorum
and famosiorum illis. Quibut etiam multitudo simplicium adhaereret magis. etc.
Och. Dial. P. 3. l. 3. c. 13.
meets with all inconveniences, which usually have done, and daily do perplexe the
Church And here is still a Remedy for all things. For if Private respects, if
Many of these were potent at Ariminum, and Seleucia.
Bandies in a Faction, if power, and favor of some parties, if weakness of
them which have the mannaging, if any unfit mixture of State Councels, if any
departure from the Rule of the Word of God, if any thing else sway and wrench
the Council; the Whole Determinationibus quae a Concilio, vel Pontisice Summo
siunt super iis dubitationibus, quae substantiam sidci concernunt, necessario
^redendum est, dum Vniversalis Ecclesia non reclamet. Fr. Pic. Mirand. Theor. 8.
Church upon evidence found in express Scripture, or demonstration of this
miscariage, has power to represent her self in another Body, or Council, and
to take order for what was amiss, either practiced, or concluded. So here is a
means without any infringing any lawful Authority of the Church, to preserve
or reduce unity, and yet grant, as I did, and as the Artic. 21.
Church of England does. That a General Council may err, And this course the
Church heretofore took; for she did call, and represent her self in a new
Council, and define against the Heretical Conclusions of the former: as in the
case at Ariminum, and the second of Ephesus, is evident, and in other Councels
named by Bell. L. 2. de Council. c, 16.. Tertio, Concililium sine Papa.
Bellarmine. Now the Church is never more cunningly abused, then when men out
of this Truth, that she may err, infer this falsehood, that she is not to be
Obeyed. For it will never follow, She may err, Therefore She may not Govern.
For he that says, Obey them which have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls Heb. 13. 17.
Heb. 13. Commands Obedience, and expressly ascribes Rule to the Church. And
this is not only a Pastoral Power, to teach and direct, but a Praetorian also,
to Control and Censure too, where Errors or Crimes are against Points
Fundamental, or of great Consequence. Else S. Paul would not have given the
Rule for Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. Nor Christ 1 Cor. 5. 5.
himself have put the man that will not hear and Obey the Church into the
place and condition of an Ethnic and a Publican, as he does, S. Mat. 18. And
Salomon's S Mat. 18. 17.
Rule is general, and he has it twice: My Son, forsake not the teaching, or
instruction of thy Mother Now this is either spoken and meant of a natural
Mother; And her Prove. 18. Uid. S. Aug. 2. Conf. e. 3. and (Prove. 6. 20.)
Ecclu^. 3. 3. Prove. 15. 20.
Authority over her Children is confirmed, Ecclus. 3. And the fool will be
upon him, that despises her, Prove. 15: Or'tis extended also to our Mysti^all
and Spiritual Mother, the Church And so the Geneva For sake not thy Mothers
instruction, that is, the Teaching of the Church, where in the faithful are
begotten by the incorruptible seed of Gods Word. Annot. in Prove 1. 8.
Note upon the Place expresses it. And I cannot but incline to this Opinion;
Because the Blessings which accompany this O^edience are so many and great, as
that they are not like to be the fruits of Obedience to a Natural Mother
only, as Solomon expresses them all, Prove. Prove. 6. 21
6. And in all this, here is no Exception of the Mothers erring. For Matter
errans, an erring Mother looses neither the right nor the power of a Mother by
her error. And I marvel what Son should show reverence or Obedience, if no
Mother, that has erred, might exact it. It Is true, the Son is not to follow
his Mothers error, or his Mother into Error. But it is true too, it is a grievous
crime in a Son to cast off all obedience to his Mother, because at some time,
or in some things she has fallen into error. And howsoever, this Consideration
meets with this Inconvenience, as well as the rest, For suppose (as I said) in
the whole Catholic Militant Church, an absolute Infallibility in the prime
Foundations of Faith absolutely necessary to Salvation: And then, though the
Mother Church, Provincial, or National may err; yet if the Grandmother, the
whole Universal Church cannot in these necessary things, all remains safe,
and all Occasions of Disobedience taken from the possibility of the Churches
erring, are quite taken away. Nor is this Mother less to be valued by her
Children, because in some smaller things age had filled her face fuller of
wrinkles. For where it is said, that Christ makes to himself a Church without
spot or wrinkle Ephesians. 5. That is not understood of the Ephesians. 5. 27.
Church Militant, but of the Church Triumphant. In id progrediuntur (Pelagiani)
ut dicant vitam Iustorum in hoe seculo nullum omnino habere peccatum, and ex
his Ecclesiam Christi in hac mortalitate perfici, ut sit omnino sine macula and
ruga. Quasi non sit Christi Ecclesia, quae in toto terrarum orb clamat ad
Deum: Dimitte nobis de^ita nostra, etc. S. Aug. L. de Haeresibus, Haer. 88.
And to maintain the contrary, is a Branch of the spreading Heresy of
Pelagianisme. Nor is the Church on earth any fr^er from wrinkles in Doctrine,
and Discipline, then she is from Spots in Life and Conversation.

The next thing I consider, is: Suppose a General Council infallible in all
things which are of Faith: If it prove not so, but that an Error in the Faith
be concluded; the same erring Opinion that makes it think it self infallible,
makes the Error of it seem irrevocable. And when Truth, which lay hid, shall
be brought to light, the Church (who was lulled asleep by the opinion of
Infallibility) is left open to all manner of Distractions, as it appears at
this day. And that a Council may err (besides al other instances, which are
not few) appears by that Error of the Council of Sess. 13.
Constance. And one Instance is enough to overthrow a General, be it a
Council. S. Matthew. 26.
Christ instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood in both Kind. 1 Cor.
11. 23.
To break Christ's Institution, is a damnable Error, and so confessed by
Return of Untruths upon Mr. Ieweil. Ar. 2. untruth, 49.
Stapleton. The Council is bold, and defines peremptorily, That to communicate
in both kinds, is not necessary, with a Non obstante to the Institution of
Christ. Consider now with me, Is this an Error, or not? 4. De Eucharist. c. 26.
Bellarmine, and Stapleton, and you too, say it is not; because to receive under
both kinds, is not by Divine Right. No? no sure. For it was not Christ's
Bellarm. ibid.. Vicesimo proferunt.
Precept, but his Example. Why, but I had thought, Christ's Institution of a
Sacrament had been more then his Example only, and as binding for the
Necessaries of a Sacrament, the Matter and Form, And now lately in a
Catechism printedat Paris, 1637. without the Authors Name, it is twice affirmed
thus. The Institution of a Sacrament is of it self a Command. Conference, 14.
p. 244. And again, p. 260. Institution is a Precept.
as a Precept: Therefore speak out, and deny it to be Christ's Institution, or
else grant with Stapleton, It is a damnable Error to go against it. If you can
prove, that Christ's Institution is not as binding to us as a Precept (which you
shall never be able) take the Precept with it, S. Matthew. 26. 1 Cor. 11. (...).
in Liturg. S. Chrysostom.
Drink ye All of this, which though you shift as you can, yet you can never
make it other then it is, A binding Precept. But Bellarmine has yet one better
Devise then this, to save the Council. He says, it is a mere Calumny, and
that the Council has no such thing; That the Non obstante has no reference
to Receiving under both kinds, but to the time of receiving it, after Supper;
in which the Council says, the Custom of the Church is to be observed, Non
obstante notwithstanding Christ's Example. How foul Bellarmine is in this, must
appear by the Words of the Council, which are these. Licet Christus post
Coenam instituerit, and suis Discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie
Panis and Uini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, tamen hoc Non obstante, non debet
confici post Coenam, nec recipi nifi a jejunis. (Here Bellarmine stays, and
goes no farther, but the Council goes on.) Et similiter quod licet in
Primitiva Ecclesia Sacramenta reciperentur sub utraque Specie a fidelibus,
tamen haec Consuetudo, ut a Laicis sub Specie Panis tantum suscipiatur, habenda
est pro Lege, quam non licet reprobare, Et asserere hanc esse illicitam, est
Erroneum, Et pertinaciter asserentes sunt arcendi tanquam Haretici. Sess. 13.
Though Christ instituted this venerable Sacrament, and gave it his Disciples
after Supper under both kinds of Bread and Wine, yet, Non obstante,
notwithstanding this, it ought not to be Consecrated after Supper; nor received
but fasting. And likewise, that though in the Primitive Church this Sacrament
was received by the faithful under both kinds; yet this Custom, that it
should be received by Laymen only under the kind of Bread, is to be held for
a Law, which may not be refused. And to say, this is an unlawful Custom of
Receiving under one kind, is erroneous; and they which persist in saying so,
are to be punished, and driven out as Heretics. Now, where is here any slander
of the Council? The words are plain, and the Non obstante must necessarily
(for ought I can yet see) be referred to both Clauses in the words following,
because both Clauses went before it, and has as much force against Receiving
under both kinds, as against receiving after Supper. Yea, and the after-words
of the Council couple both together, in this Reference; for it follows, Et
similiter, And so likewise, that though in the Primitive Church etc. And a man
by the Definition of this Council, may be an Heretic, for standing to Christ's
Institution, in the very matter of the Sacrament: And the Churches Law for One
kind may not be refused, but Christ's Institution under Both kinds may. And
yet this Council did not err; No; take heed of it.

But your opinion is more Unreasonable then this: for Body Collective, be it
more, or less Universal, whenever it assembles it self, did it ever give
more power to the Representing Body of it, then binding power upon all
particulars, and it self? And did it ever give this power otherwise, then with
this Reservation in Nature, That it would call again and reform, yea, and if
need were, abrogate any Law, or Ordinance upon just cause made evident, that
this Representing Body had failed in Trust, or Truth? And this Power no Body
Collective, Ecclesiastical, or Civil can put out of it self, or give away to
a Parliament, or Council, or call it what you will, that represents it. Nay,
in my Consideration it holds strongest in the Church. For a Council has power
to order, settle, and Define differences arisen concerning Faith. This Power
the Council has not by any immediate Institution from Christ, but it was
prudently taken up in the Church, from the Act. 15. In Novo Testamento Exemplum
celebrationis Conciliorum ab Apostolis habem^. etc. Ioh. de Turrecremata Sum.
de Eccl. L, 3. c. 2. Et fir^it as Conciliorum nititur Exemplo primi Concilii,
Staple. Relect. Contr. 6. q. 3. A. 4. Ad 3um.
Apostles Example. So that to hold Counsels to this end; is apparent
Apostolical Tradition written: but the Power, which Counsels so held have, is
from the whole Catholic Church, whose members they are, and the Churches power
from God. And This is more reasonable a great deal then that of Bellarmine, 2.
de Conc. c. 18. Pontificem non posse se subjicere se^tentiae coactivae
Conciliorum.
this Power the Church cannot farther give away to a General Council, then
that the Decrees of it shall bind all Particulars, and it self, but not bind
the whole Church from calling again, and in the After-Calls, upon just cause
to order, yea, and if need be, to abrogate former Acts. I say upon just cause.
For if the Council be lawfully called, and proceed orderly, and conclude
according to the Rule, the Scripture, the whole Church cannot but approve the
Council, and then the Definitions of it, are Binding. And the Power of the
Church has no wrong in this, so long as no Power, but her own may meddle or
offer to infringe any Definition of hers made in her Representative Body, a
Lawful General Council. And certain it is, no Power, but her own may do
it. Nor does this open any gap to private Spirits. For all Decisions in such a
Council, are binding: And because the Whole Church can meet no other way, the
Council shall remain the Supreme, External, Living, Temporary,
Ecclesiastical Judge of all Controversies. Only the whole Church, and she
alone has power, when Scripture or Demonstration is found, and peaceably
tendered to her, to represent her self again in a new Council, and in it to
order what was amiss.

Nay, your Opinion is yet more unreasonable: For Definition of a General
Council, but the Sentence of the Pope infallible, nay more infallible then it.
Bellar. L. 2. de Conciliis, c. 16. and 17.
For any General Council may err with you, if the Pope confirm it not. So
belike this Infallibility rests not in the Representative Body, the Council,
nor in the Whole Body, the Church, but in your Head of the Church, the Pope of
Rome. Now I may ask you, to what end such a trouble for a General Council?
Or wherein are we nearer to Unity, if the Pope confirm it not? You answer
(though not in the Conference, yet elsewhere) That the Pope erres not,
especially giving Sentence in a General Council. And why especially? Does the
Deliberation of a Council help any thing to the Conclusion? Surely not in
your Opinion: For you hold the Conclusion Prophetical, the Means fallible:
and fallible Deliberations cannot advance to a Prophetik Conclusion. And just
as the Council is in Stapletons Judgment, for the Definition and the Proofs;
so is the Pope, in the Judgment of Canus lib. 6. de Lotis, cap. 8.. Et quidem
in. Pontifiees summi in Conclusione errare nequeunt, Rations autem. etc.
Melch. Canus, and them which followed him, Prophetical in the Conclusion. The
Council then is called but only in effect to hear the Pope give his Sentence
in more state. Else what means this of Relect. Con. 6. q. 3. Art. 5. and ibid.
Quia ad compescendo simportunos Haereticos Concilii Generalis Definitio
illustrior est etc. Et vulgo hominum magis satisfacit. etc.
Stapleton: The Pope by a Council joined unto him, acquires no new Power, or
Authority, or Certainty in judging, no more then a Head is the wiser by joining
the Offices of the rest of the members to it, then it is without them? Or this
of 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3. At contra, Nam. Ex quo apparet totam firmitatem
Conciliorum Legitimorum esse a Pontifice, non partim a Pontifice, partim a
Cencilio.
Bellar. That all the firmness and infallibility of a General Council is
only from the Pope, not partly from the Pope, and partly from the Council? So,
belike the Presence is necessary, not the Assistance: Which opinion is the most
groundless, and worthless, that ever offered to take possession of the
Christian Church. And I am persuaded, many Learned Men among your selves scorn
it at the very heart. And I avow it, I have heard some Learned and Judicious
Roman Catholics utterly condemn it. And well they may. For no man can
affirm it, but he shall make himself a scorn to all the Learned Men of
Christendom, whose Judgments are not Captivated by Roman Power. And for my
own part, I am clear of Et mirum est quod Adversarii non asserant cum
Impiccabilem: Et credo assercrent, nisi quotidiana Summorum Pontificu^ Opera ad
credendn^ Oppositum compellerent. Almain. de Author. Eccles. cap. 10. sine.
Jacobus Almain's Opinion: And a great wonder it is to me, That they which
affirm the Pope cannot err, do not affirm likewise, that he cannot sin.
And I verily believe they would be bold enough to affirm it, did not the daily
Works of the Popes compel them to believe the Contrary. For very many of them
have led lives quite Contrary to the Gospel of Christ. Nay, such lives, as no
Epicurean Monster storied out to the world has out-gone them in sensuality, or
other gross Impiety, if their own Historians be true. Take your choice of
Platina and Onuphrius in Vitis eorum.
John the thirteenth, about the year 966. Or of Sylvester the second, about
the year 999. Or John the eighteenth, about the year 1003. Or Benedict the
ninth, about the year 1033. Or Boniface the eighth, about the year 1294, Or
Alexander the sixth, about the year 1492. And yet these, and their like, must
be infallible in their Dictates and Conclusions of Faith. Do your own believe
it? Surely no. For Non enim credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem Papae
Assentatorem, ut ci tribuere hoc velit, ut nec errare, nec in Interpretatione
SS. Literarum ballucinari possit. Alphons. a Castro. I. 1. Advers. Hares. c. 4.
And the Gloss confesses it plainly, in C. 24. q. (...). C. A recta ergo.
Alphonsus a Castro tells us plainly, That he does not believe, that any man can
be so gross and impudent a flatterer of the Pope, as to attribute this unto
him, that he can neither err, nor mistake in expounding the Holy Scripture.
This comes home; And therefore it may well be thought it has taken a shrewd
Purge. For these words are Express in the Edition at Paris 1534. But they are
not to be found in that at Colen 1539. Nor in that at Antwerp, 1556. Nor in
that at Paris, 1571. Parding his Detection of Errors against Jewel. p. 64.
Harding says indeed, Alphonsus left it out, of himself, in the following
Editions. Well: First, Harding says this, but proves it not; so I may choose
whether I will believe him, or no. Secondly, be it so, that he did, that
cannot help their Cause a whit. For say he did dislike the sharpness of the
Phrase, or ought else in this speech, yet he altered not his judgment of the
thing. For in all these later Editions he speaks as home, if not more then in
the first; and says Expressly, Coelestinus crravit non solum ut privata
persona, sed ut Papa, etc. Alph. a Castro. L. 1. adv. Haeres. c. 4. Ibid.
That the Pope may err, not only as a private person, but as Pope. And in
difficult Cases he adds, That the Pope ought to Consult Viros doctos, men of
Learning. And this also was the Opinion of the Ancient Church of Christ
concerning the Pope and his Infallibility. For thus Liberius, and he a Pope
himself, writes to Athanasius. Brother Athanasius, if you think in the
presence of God, and Christ, as I do, I pray subscribe this Confession, which
is thought to be the true Faith of the Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church,
that we may be the more certain, that you think concerning the Faith as We
do. (...). Liberius in Epist. ad Athanas. apud Athanas. To. 1. p. 42. Edit.
Parisuns. 1608. Et Edit. Paris. Latino-Grac. 1627.
Vt ego etiam persuasus sim inhaesitanter, That I also may be persuaded without
all doubting of those things which you shall be pleased to Command me. Now I
would feign know, if the Pope at that time were, or did think himself
Infallible, how he should possibly be more certainly persuaded of any Truth
belonging to the Faith by Athanasius his Concurring in judgment with him. For
nothing can make Infallibility more certain then it is: At least, not the
Concurring Judgment that is Fallible, as S. Athanasius was. Beside the Pope
Complemented exceeding low, that would submit his unerring Judgment to be
Commanded by Athanasius, who, he well knew, could Err. Again in the Case of
Easter (which made too great a noise in the Church of old) Post Aegyptiorum
supputationes and Alexandrinae Ecclesiae definitionem, Episcopi quoque Romanae
Ecclesiae per Literas plerique meam adhuc expectant sententiam, quid existimem
de die Paschae. S. Ambros. L. 10. Epist. 83.
Very many men called for S. Ambrose his Judgment in that Point, even after
the Definition of the Church of Alexandria, and the Bishop of Rome. And this I
presume they would not have done, had they then conceived either the Pope, or
his Church Infallible. And thus it continued down till Lyra's time. For he
says expressly, Ex hoc patot quod Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus ratione
Potestatis vel Dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, vel sacularis, quid multi Principes
and summi Pontifices, and alii inferiores inventi sunt Apostat ass a Fide,
etc. Lyra in S. Matthew. 16. 18.
That many Popes as well as other Inferiors, have not only erred, but even
quite Apostatized from the Faith. And yet now nothing but Infallibility will
serve their turns. And sometimes they have not only taken upon them to be
Infallible in Cathedra, in their Chair of Decision, but also to Prophecy
Infallibly out of the Scripture. But Prophetical Scripture (such as the
Revelation is) was too dangerous for men to meddle with, which would be
careful of their Credit in not Erring. For it fell out in the time of Innocent
the third, and Honorius the third, (as Ram. Pontifices ex S. Historia, and
(...) Qua mendaci^sima esse exitus prob av^. Aventm. Anna^ Boicrum. L. 7. p.
529. Edit. Basil. 1580.
Aventine tells us) That the then Popes assured the world, that Destruction was
at hand to Saracens, Turks, and Mahumetans, which, the Event showed, were
notorious untruths. And it is remarkable which happened Anno 1179. For then in
a Council held at Rome, Pope Baron. An. 1179. N. 13.
Alexander the third Condemned Peter Lombard of Heresy: And he lay under that
Damnation for thirty and six years, till Innocent the third restored him, and
condemned his Accusers. Now Peter Lombard was then Condemned for some thing
which he had written about the humane Nature of our Savior Christ. So here
was a great Mystery of the Faith in hand; something about the Incarnation. And
the Pope was in Cathedra, and that in a Council of three hundred Archbishops
and Bishops. And in this Council he condemned Peter Lombard, and, in him, his
Opinion about the Incarnation: And therefore of necessity either Pope Alexander
erred, and that in Cathedra, as Pope, in Condemning him: Or Pope Innocentius,
in restoring him. The truth is, Pope Alexander had more of Alexander the Great,
then of S. Peter in him. And being accustomed to warlike Employments, he
understood not that which Peter Lombard had written about this Mystery. And so
He, and his Learned Assistants Condemned him unjustly.

And whereas you profess Apud A. C. p. 68.
after, That you hold nothing against your Conscience. I must ever wonder much,
how that can be true, since you hold this of the Pope's Infallibility,
especially as being Prophetical in the Conclusion. If this be true, why do
you not lay all your strength together, all of your whole Society, and make
this one Proposition evident? For all Controversies about matters of Faith are
ended, and without any great trouble to the Christian World, if you can but
make this one Proposition good, That the Pope is an Infallible Judge. Till
then, this shame will follow you infallibly, and eternally, That you should
make the Pope, a mere man, Principium Fidei, a Principle, or Author of Faith;
and make the mouth of him, whom you call Christ's Vicar, sole Judge, both of
Christ's Word, be it never so manifest, and of his Church, be she never so
Learned, and careful of his Truth. And for Conclusion of this Point, I would
feign know (since this had been so plain, so easy a way, either to prevent
all Divisions about the Faith, or to end all Controversies, did they arise) why
this brief, but most necessary Proposition, The Bishop of Rome cannot err in
his Judicial Determinations concerning the Faith, is not to be found either in
Letter, or sense, in any Scripture, in any Council; or in any Father of the
Church, for the full space of a thousand years and more after Christ? For had
this Proposition been true, and then received in the Church, how weak were all
the Primitive Fathers, to prescribe so many Rules and Cautions for avoydance of
Heresy, as Tertullian, and Vincentius Lirinensis, and others do, and to endure
such hard Conflicts, as they did, and with so many various Haereticks; To see
Christendom so rent, and torn by some distempered Councels, as that of
Ariminum, the second of Ephesus, and others; Nay to see the whole world almost
become Arrian, to the amazement of it self; And yet all this time not so much
as call in this Necessary Assistance of the Pope, and let the world know, That
the Bishop of Rome was infallible; that so in his Decision all differences
might cease? For either the Fathers of the Church, Greek, as well as Latin,
knew this Proposition to be true, That the Pope cannot Err Iudicially in
matters belonging to the Faith, or they knew it not. If you say they knew it
not; you charge them with a base, and unworthy Ignorance, no ways like to
over-cloud such, and so many Learned men, in a Matter so Necessary, and of such
infinite use to Christendom. If you say they knew it, and durst not deliver
this Truth, how can you charge them which durst die for Christ, with such
Cowardice toward his Church? And if you say they knew it and withheld it from
the Church, you lay a most unjust Load upon those Charitable Souls, which
loved Christ too well to imprison any Truth, but likely to make or keep peace
in his Church Catholic over the world. But certainly, as no Divine of worth
did then dream of any such Infallibility in Him, so is it a mere dream, or
worse, of those Modern Divines, who affirm it now The wild Extent of the
Popes Infallibility and Jurisdiction is a Mistake. These are the Words of a
Great Roman Catholic uttered to my self. But I will spare his Name, because
he is living; and I will not draw your Envy upon him.
. And as Puto quod ipsi etiam rideant, quum hoc audiunt, and tamen nifi hoc
dicant, quod erabescant si dicant, non habent omnino quod dicant. Sed quid ad
nos? N^ini invidemus. Legant nobis hoc de Scripturis Sanctis, and credimus. S.
August. de Unit. Eccl. c. 17.
S. Augustine sometimes spoke of the Donatists, and their absurd limiting the
whole Christian Church to Africa only; so may I truly say of the Romanists
confining all Christianity to the Roman Doctrine, governed by the Pope's
Infallibility: I verily persuade my self, That even the Jesuits themselves
laugh at this. And yet unless they say this, which they cannot but blush while
they say, they have nothing at all to say. But what is this to us, we envy no
man? If the Pope's Decision be infallible, Legant, Let them read it to us out
of the Holy Scripture, and we will believe it.

In the mean time, take this with you, that Pope has no Infallibility to
attend his Cathedral Judgment in Things belonging to the Faith. For first,
besides the silence of Impartial Antiquity, Diverse Papa non solum Errore
Personali, sed and Errore Iudiciali potest errare in Materia Fidei. Almain. L.
de Author. Eccles. c. 10.
of your Own confess it, yea and prove it too, by sundry Instances.

Secondly, there is a great Question among the Schoolmen and Controversers,
Whether the Pope coming to be an Heretic may be Deposed? And it is
learnedly disputed by L. 2. de Romans Font c. 30.
Bellarmine. The Opinions are different. For the Si sit a Fide de. vius. Did.
40. Can. Si Papa.
Canon Law says expressly, He may be judged and deposed by the Church in Case
of Heresy. Iure Divino Papatu privatus est etc. Io. de Turrecrem. L. 4. Par.
2. c. 20. Et Bellar. L. 2. de Re. Pent. c. 30.
Io. de Turrecremata is of Opinion, That the Pope is to be deposed by the
Church so soon as he becomes an Heretic, though as yet not a manifest one;
Because he is already deprived by Divine Right. And recites another opinion,
That the Pope cannot be deposed, though be fall into secret or manifest
Heresy. Papa factus Hareticus non est ipso fact, vel jure Divino, vel humano
depositus. sed deponendus. Cajet. Tract. de Author. Papa and Concilii. c. 20.
Cajetan thinks that the Pope cannot be deposed, but for a manifest Heresy,
and that then he is not deposed ipso facto, but must be deposed by the Church.
Papa Hareticus manifestus per se desinit esse Papa and Caput etc. Et tum potest
ab Ecclesia Iudicari, and puniri. Bellar. L. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 30.. Est ergo
quinta.
Bellarmines own Opinion is, That if the Pope become a manifest Heretic, he
presently ceases to be Pope and Head of the Church, and may then be Judged and
punished by the Church. Bellarmine has disputed this very learnedly, and at
large, and I will not fill this Discourse with another man's labors. The use I
shall make of it, runs through all these Opinions, and through all alike. And
truly the very Question it self supposes, that A Pope may be an Heretic. For
if he cannot be an Heretic, why do they question, whether he can be Deposed
for being One? And if he can be one, then whether he can be deposed by the
Church, Before he be manifest, or not till after, or neither before nor after,
or which way they will, it comes all to one for my purpose. For I question not
here his Deposition for his Heresy, but his Heresy. And I hope none of these
Learned men, nor any other dare deny, but that if the Pope can be an Heretic,
he can err. For every Heresy is an error, and more. For it is an Error
ofttimes against the Errants knowledge, but ever with the pertinacie of his
Will. Therefore out of all, even your own Grounds; If the Pope can be an
Heretic, he can err grossly, he can err wilfully. And he that can so Err,
cannot be Infallible in his Judgment private or public. For if he can be an
Heretic, he can, and doubtless will Judge for his Heresy, if the Church let
him alone. And you your selves maintain his Deposition lawful, to prevent
this. I verily believe Pighius L. 4. Ecclesiastica Hierarchia. c. 8.
Alb. Pighius foresaw this blow. And therefore he is of Opinion. That the Pope
cannot become an Heretic at all. And though Communis Opinio est in
contrarium. Bellar, L. 2. de To. Pont. c. 30.. 2.
Bellarmine favor him so far, as to say his Opinion is probable: yet he is
so honest as to add, that the common Opinion of Divines is against him. Nay,
though L. 4. de To. Pont. cap. 11.
he Labor hard to excuse Pope Honorius the first from the Heresy of the
Monothelites, and says, that Pope Adrian was deceived, who thought him one,
yet Tamen non possumus negare, quin Adrianus cum Romano Concilio, imo and tota
Synodus octava Generalis senserit, in causa Haresis posse Romans Pontificem
judicari. Add quod esset miserrima Conditio Ecclesia, si Lupum manifest
grassantem pro Pastore agnoscere cogeretur. Bellar, L. 2. de To. Pont. c 30.. 5.
He confesses, That Pope Adrian the second, with the Council then held at
Rome, and the eight General Synod did think that the Pope might be judged in
the Cause of Heresy: And that the condition of the Church were most miserable,
if it should be constrained to acknowledge a Wolf manifestly raging for her
Shepherd. And here again I have a Question to ask, whether you believe the
eight General Council, or not? If you believe it, then you see the Pope can
err, and so He not Infallible. If you believe it not, then in your Judgment
that General Council erres, and so that not Infallible.

Thirdly, It is altogether in vain and to no use, Pope should be Infallible,
and that according to your own Principles. Now God and Nature make nothing in
vain. Therefore either the Pope is not Infallible, or at least God never made
him so. That the Infallibility of the Pope (had he any in him) is altogether
vain, and useless, is manifest. For if it be of any use, it is for the settling
of Truth and Peace in the Church, in all times of her Distraction. But neither
the Church, nor any member of it can make any use of the Popes Infallibility
that way; Therefore it is of no use or benefit at all. And this also is as
manifest, as the rest. For before the Church, or any particular man can make
any use of this Infallibility, to settle him and his Conscience, he must
either Know or Believe that the Pope is Infallible; But a man can neither Know
nor Believe it. And first for Belief; For if the Church, or any Christian man
can believe it, he must believe it either by Divine, or by Humane Faith. Divine
Faith cannot be had of it; For (as is before prooved) it has no Ground in the
written Word of God. Nay (to follow you closer) it was never delivered by any
Tradition of the Catholic Church. And for Humane Faith, no Rational man can
possibly believe (having no Word of God to overruled his Understanding) that he
which is Fallible in the means, as Staple. Relect. cont. 4. q. 2. Notab. 4.
your selves confess the Pope is, can possibly be Infallible in the
Conclusion. And were it so that a Rational man could have Humane Faith of this
Infallibility, yet that neither is, nor ever can be sufficient to make the Pope
Infallible. No more then my strong Belief of another man's Honesty can make him
an Honest man, if he be not so. Now secondly for Knowledge, And that is
altogether impossible too, that either the Church, or any Member of the Church,
should ever know that the Pope is Infallible. And this I shall make evident
also out of your own Principles. For your Omnia Sacramenta tribus persiciuntur
etc. Decret. Eugenii 4 in Council. Fleren.
Council of Florence had told us That three things are necessary to every
Sacrament, the Matter, the Form of the Sacrament, And the Intention of the
Priest, which Administers it, that he intends to do as the Church does. Your
Con. Trid. Ses. 7. Can. 1.
Council of Trent confirms it for the Intention of the Priest. Upon this
Ground (be it Rock or Sand, it is all one, for you make it Rock, and build
upon it) I shall raise this Battery against the Popes Infallibility. First the
Pope if he have any Infallibility at all, he has it as he is Bishop of Rome,
and S. Peter's Successor. Bella^ L 4. de To. Pent. c. 3. (...) P^vilegium est.
This is granted. Secondly, the Pope cannot be Bishop of Rome, but he must be
in holy Orders first. And if any man be chosen that is not so, the Election is
void ipso facto, propter errorem Personae, for the Error of the Person.
Constantinus ex Lai^o Papa circa Ann. 767. ejectus Papatu. Et Steph 3. qui
successit, habito Concilio statuit, ne quis nisi per Gradus Ecclesiasticos
ascendens Pontifi^atu^ occupare auderet sub paena Anathematis. Decret Did. 79.
c. Nullus.
This is also granted. Thirdly, He that is to be made Pope can never be in Holy
Orders, but by receiving them from One that has Power to Ordain. This is
notoriously known, So is it also, that with you Order is a Sacrament properly
so called And if so, then the Pope, when he did receive the Order of Deacon, or
Priesthood at the hands of the Bishop, did also receive a Sacrament. Upon these
Grounds I raise my Argument thus. Neither the Church, nor any Member of the
Church can know that this Pope which now sits, or any other that has been, or
shall be, is Infallible. For he is not Infallible, unless he be Pope, and he
is not Pope, unless he be in Holy Orders, And he cannot be so, unless he have
received those Holy Orders, and that from one that had Power to Ordain, And
those Holy Orders in your Doctrine are a Sacrament, And a Sacrament is not
perfectly given, if he that Administers it have not intentionem faciendi quod
facit Ecclesia, an intention to do that which the Church does by Sacraments.
Now who can possibly tell, that the Bishop which gave the Pope Orders, was
first, a man qualified to give them: and secondly, so devoutly set upon his
Work, that he had, at the Instant of giving them, an Intention and purpose to
do therein as the Church does? Surely none but that Bishop himself And his
testimony of himself, and his own Act, such especially as, if faulty, he
would be loath to Confess, can neither give Knowledge nor Belief sufficient,
that the Pope, according to this Canon, is in Holy Orders. So upon the Whole
matter, let the Romanists take which they will (I give them free choice) either
this Canon of the Council of Trent is false Divinity, and there is no such
Intention necessary to the Essence and Being of a Sacrament: Or if it be true,
it is impossible for any man to know, and for any advised man to Believe, That
the Pope is Infallible in ^is Judicial Sentences in things belonging to the
Faith. And so here again a General Council, at least such an One, as that of
Trent is, can Err, or the Pope is not Infallible.

But this is an Argument ad Hominem, good against your Party only which
maintain this Counc^ll. But the plain Truth is, Both are Errors. For neither
is the Bishop of Rome Infallible in his Iudicialls about the Faith: Nor is this
Intention of either Bishop or Priest of Absolute Necessity to the Essence of a
Sacrament; so, as to make void the gracious Institution of Christ, in case by
any Tentation the Priests Thoughts should wander from his Work, at the Instant
of using the Essentials of a Sacrament, or have in him an Actual Intention to
scorn the Church. And you may remember, if you please, that a Neopolitan
Minorensis Episcopus suit.
Bishop then present at Trent disputed this Case very learnedly, and made it
most evident that this Opinion cannot be defended, but that it must open a way
for any unworthy Priest to make infinite Nullities in Administration of the
Sacraments. And his Arguments were of such strength, L 2. Hist. Trident. p 276.
277. L^idae. An. 1622
ut caeteros Theologos dederint in stuporem, as amazed the other Divines which
were present. And concluded, That no Internal Intention was required in the
Minister of a Sacrament, but that Intention which did appear Opere externo, in
the Work it self performed by him; And that if he had unworthily any
wandering thoughts, nay more, any contrary Intention within him, yet it neither
did, nor could hinder the blessed effect of any Sacrament. And most certain it
is, if this be not true, besides all other Inconveniences, which are many, no
man can secure himself upon any Doubt or trouble in his Conscience, that he
has truly, and really been made partaker of any Sacrament whatsoever, No, not
of Baptism; and so by Consequence be left in Doubt whether he be a Christian
or no, even after he is Baptized. Whereas it is most impossible; That Christ
should so order his Sacraments, and so leave them to his Church, as that poor
Believers in his Name, by any unworthiness of any of his Priests, should not
be able to know whether they have received His Sacraments or not, even while
they have received them. And yet for all this such great lovers of Truth, and
such Careful Pastors over the Flock of Christ were these Trent Fathers, that
they regarded none of this, but went on in the usual track, and made their
Decree for the Internal Intention and purpose of the Priest, and that the
Sarcament was invalid without it.

Nay, one Argument more there is, and from your That the Pope can err, not
Personally only, but Iudicially also; and so teach false Doctrine to the
Church; which Summus Pontif^ quum (...) Ecclesiam ^ct, in his quae al Fidem
pertinent, nullo casu ^rrare potest. Bell. l. 4. De To. P^t. c. 3.. 1.
Bellarmine tells us No Pope has done, or can do. And a Maxim it is with you,
That a General Council can err, if it be not confirmed by the Pope, Concilia
Gen^ralia a Pontifi^ Consirmata (...) non possunt. (...). L. 2. de Con. c. 2..
1.
But if it be confirmed, then it cannot err. Where first, this is very
improper Language. For I hope no Council is Confirmed, till it be finished.
And when it is finished, even before the Popes Confirmation be put to it, either
it has Erred, or not erred. If it have Erred, the Pope ought not to Confirm
it, and if he do, it is a void Act. For no power can make falsehood Truth: If it
have not Erred, then it was True before the Pope Confirmed it. So his
Confirmation adds nothing but his own Assent, Therefore his Confirmation of a
General Council (as you will needs call it) is at the most Signum, non Causa,
A Sign, and that such as may fail, but no Cause of the Councels not Erring.
But then secondly, if a General Council Confirmed (as you would have it) by
the Pope have Erred, and so can Err, then certainly the Pope can Err
Iudicially For he never gives a more solemn Sentence for Truth, then when he
Decrees any thing in a General Council. Therefore if he have Erred, and can
Err there, then certainly he can Err in his Definitive Sentence about the
Faith, and is not Infallible. Now that he has Erred, and therefore can Err in
a General Council Confirmed, in which he takes upon him to teach all
Christendom, is most clear and evident. For the Pope teaches in, and by the
Conc. Lateran. Can. 1.
Council of Lateran Confirmed by Innocent the third; Christ is present in the
Sacrament by way of Transubstantiation. And in, and by the Council. Constan.
Sess. 13.
Council of Constance, the Administration of the Blessed Sacrament to the
Laity in one kind, notwithstanding Christ's Institution of it in both kinds
for all. And in, and by the Council. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de Invotatione.
Council of Trent, Invocation of Saints, and Adoration of Images, to the great
Scandal of Christianity, and as great hazard of the Weak. Now that these
Particulars, among Many, are Errors in Divinity, and about the Faith, is
manifest both by Scripture, and the Judgment of the Primitive Church For
Transubstantiation first; That was never heard of in the Primitive Church, nor
till the Council of Lateran, nor can it be prooved out of Scripture; And
taken properly cannot stand with the Grounds of Christ an Religion. As for
Communion in one kind; Christ's Institution is clear against that. And not
only the Primitive Church, but the Whole Church of Christ kept it so, till
within less then four hundred years. For Provide in quibusdam Eccl^siis
obser^tur, ut Populo Sanguis non detur. T^om. p. 3. q. So. A. 12. c. So it was
(...) in some Churches in his time, Negare non possumus etiam in Ecclesia
Latina suisse usum utriusque speci^i, and usque ad tempora S. Thomae durasse.
Uasqu. in 3. Disput. 216. c. 3. n. 38.
Aquinas confesses it was so in use even to his times; And he was both borne
and dead during the Reign of Henry the third of England. Nay, it stands yet as
a Monument in the very Refecti cibo potuque coelesti, Deus noster, Te supplices
exoramus etc. In Proprio Missarum de Sanctis, Ianua. 15. Orat: post
Communionem. Et Ianua. 21.
Missall, against the present Practice of the Church of Rome, That then it was
usually Given and received in both kinds. And for Invocation of Saints, though
some of the Ancient Fathers have some Rhetorical flourishes about it, for the
stirring up of Devotion (as they thought) yet the Church then admitted not of
the Invocation of them, but only of the Commemoration of the Martyrs, as
appears clearly in Ad quod Sacrificium suo loco and Ordine Homines Dei
nominantur, non tamen a Sacerdote, qui Sacrificat, Invocantur. S. Aug. L. 22.
Civ. Dei. c. 10.
S. Augustine. And when the Church prayed to God for any thing, she desired to
be heard for the Mercies and the Merits of Christ, not for the Merits of any
Saints whatsoever. For I much doubt this were to make the Saints more then
Mediators of Intercession, which is all that Bellarm. L. 1. De San^r. Beatitud.
c. 20.. Ad primum ergo locum etc.
you will acknowledge you allow the Saints. For I pray, is not by the Merits,
more then by the Intercession? Did not Christ redeem us by his Merits? And if
God must hear our Prayers for the Merits of the Saints, how much fall they
short of sharers in the Sunt Redemptores nostri aliquo modo and secundum
aliquid Bellar. L 1. De Indulgen. c. 4. Et Sanctos appellat Numina. L. 2. de
Imagine. Sanctorum. c. 20. 3. Now if this word (Numen) signify any thing else
besides God himself, or the power of God, or the Oracle of God, let Bellarmine
show it; or A. C. for him.
Mediation of Redemption. You may think of this. For such Prayers as these the
Church of Rome makes at this day, and they stand (not without great scandal to
Christ, and Christianity) used, and authorized to be used in the Missall. For
instance. Ut ejus Meritis and Precibus a Gehennae Incendii^ liberemur. In
proprio Missarum de Sanctis, December. 6,
Upon the Feast of S. Nicolas you pray, That God by the Merits and Prayers of
S. Nicolas, would deliver you from the fire of Hell. And upon the Octaves of S.
Peter and S. Paul, Ut Amborum Meritis aternitatis Gl^riam consequamur. I^id.
Julii 6.
you desire God That you may Obtain the Glory of Eternity by their Merits. And
on the Ejus intercedentibus Meritis ab Omnibus nos absolve peccatis. Ibid.
Julii 14
Feast of S. Bonaventure you pray, that God would absolve you from all your
sins by the Interceding Merits of Bonaventure. And for Adoration of Images,
the In Optatus his time the Christians were much troubled upon but a false
report, That an Image was to be placed upon the Altar. What would they have
done, if Adoration had been Commanded? etc. Et recte dictum or at, fi talem
samam similis veritas sequeretur. Optatus L. 3. ad finem.
Ancient Church knew it not. And the Modern Church of Rome is too like to
Paganism in the Practice of it; and driven to scarce Intelligible Subtilties
in her Servants Writings that defend it; And this without any Care had of
Millions of Souls unable to understand her Subtilties, or shun her Practice.
Did I say, the Modern Church of Rome is grown too like Paganism in this
Point? And may this Speech seem too hard? Well, if it do, I Will give a double
Account of it. The One is. It Is no harsher Expression then They of Rome use of
the Protestants, and in Cases in which there is no show or Resemblance. For
Sicut non licet cum Ethnitis Idela colere. Becan. L. de fide Haret fer^anda. c.
8.
Becanus tells us, It Is no more lawful to receive the Sacrament as the
Calvinists receive it, then it is to worship Idols with the Ethnicks: And
Gregory de Valentia inlarges it to more Points then one, but with no more
truth. The Sectaries of our times Contingit aliquando Hareticos circa plura
errare quam Gentiles, ut Manichaos, inquit Thomas. Quod nos possumus ver^
dicere de nostri temporis Sectariis, qui culpabiliter in pluribus videntur
errare. Valentia in 2. 2 ae. Disp. 1. Q. 10. Puncto 3.
(says he) seem to Err culpably in more things then the Gentiles. This is
easily said, but here is no Proof. Nor shall I hold it a sufficient warrant for
me to sower my Language, because these men have dipped their Pens in Gall. The
other Account therefore which I shall give of this speech, shall come vouched
both by Authority and Reason. And first for Authority; I could set Lu^o vicus
Vives against Becanus, if I would, who lays expressly, That the making of
Feasts at the Oratories of the Martyrs (which Quod quidem a Christianis
melioribus non sit. S. Aug. L. 8. de Civ. Dei. c. 27.
S. Augustine tells us, The best Christians practiced not) are a kind of Illae
quasi Parentalia superstitioni Gentilium simillima. Lud Vives Ibid.
Parentalia, Funeral Feasts too much resembling the superstition of the
Gentiles. Nay, Vives need not say, resembling that superstition, since Quod
ergo mortuis litabatur, utique parentationi deput abatur, quae species proinde
Idololatri^ est, quoniam and Idololatria Parentationis est species. Tertull. L.
de Spectaculis. c. 12.
Tertullian tells us plainly, that Idolatry it self is but a kind of
Parentation. And Vives dying in the Communion of the Church of Rome, is a
better testimony against you, then Becanus, or Valentia, being bitter enemies
to our Communion, can be against us. But I Will come nearer home to you, and
prove it by more of your own. For Manifestius est, quam ut multis verbis
explicari debeat, Imaginum and simulachrorum Cultum nimium invaluisse, and
affectioni, seu potius superstitioni populi plus satis indultum esse, it a ut
ad summam ador ationem qua vel a Paganis, suis simulacris exhiberi consuevit,
etc. Cassand. Consult. Art. 21. C. De Imaginibus. Where he names diverse of
your own, as namely, Durantus Mimatensis Episcopus, John Billet, Gerson,
Durand, Holkot, and Biel, rejecting the Opinion of Thomas, and other
superstitions concerning Images. Ibid.
Cassander, who lived and died in your Communion, says it expressly, That in
this present Case of the Adoration of Images, you came full home to the
Superstition of the Heathen. And secondly, for Reason, I have (I think) too
much to give, that the Modern Church of Rome is grown too like to Paganism
in this Point. For the Non quod Credatur inesse aliqua in iis Divinitas, and
veluti olim fiebat a Gentibu^. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de Invocat.
Council of Trent it self confesses, That to believe there is any Divinity in
Images, is to do as the Gentiles did by their Idols. And though in some words
afterthe Fathers of that Council seem very religiously careful, that all Et
rudibus periculosi Erroris Occasionem, etc. Ibid.
Occasion of dangerous Error be prevented; yet the Doctrine it self is so
full of danger, that it works strongly, both upon the Learned and Unlearned,
to the scandal of Religion, and the perverting of Truth. For the Unlearned
first, how it works upon them by whole Countries together, you may see by what
happened in Asturia, Cantabria, Galetia, no small parts of Spain. For there
the People (so Et ade^ Gens affe^a est truncis corrosis and deformibus
Imaginibus, ut me test, quotres Episcopi, decentiores ponere jubent, veteres
suas petant plorantes, etc Hieton. (...) summa. p. 3. c. 3.
He tells me that was an Eye witness, and that since the Council of Trent) are
so addicted to their worm eaten and deformed Images, that when the Bishops
commanded new, and handsommer Images to be set up in their rooms, the poor
people cried for their old, would not look up to their new, as if they did not
represent the same thing. And though he say, this is by little and little
amended, yet I believe there is very little Amendment. And it works upon the
Learned too, more then it should. For it wrought so far upon Lamas himself,
who bemoaned the former Passage, as that he delivers this Doctrine, Imagines
Christi and S: Matris ejus, and Sanctorum non sunt venerandae, acsi in ipsis
Imaginibus esset Divinitas, secundum quod sunt Materia Art essigiata, and non
secundum quod repraesentant Christum, and Sanctos, etc. Sic enim adorare, vel
petere aliquid ab iis, esset Idolola^ tria. Lamas Ibid.
That the Images of Christ, the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, are not to be
worshipped, as if there were any Divinity in the Images, as they are material
things made by Art, but only as they represent Christ and the Saints; For else
it were Idolatry. So then belike, according to the Divinity of this Casuist, a
man may worship Images, and ask of them, and put his trust in them, as they
Represent Christ, and the Saints. For so there is Divinity in them, though not
as Things, yet as Representers. And what I pray did, or could any Pagan Priest
say more then this? For the Proposition resolved is this. The Images of Christ
and the Saints, as they represent their Exemplars, have Deity or Divinity in
them. And now I pray A. C. do you be Judge, whether this Proposition do not
teach Idolatry? And whether the Modern Church of Rome be not grown too like
to Paganism in this Point? For my own part, I heartily wish it were not. And
that men of Learning would not strain their wits to spoil the Truth, and rent
the Peace of the Church of Christ by such dangerous, such superstitious
vanities. For better they are not; but they may be worse. Nay these and their
like have given so great a Scandal among us, to some ignorant, though, I
presume, well meaning men, that they are afraid to testify their Duty to God,
even in Quis ferat populum in Templum irruentem, c^u in hara^ Sues? Certe non
obsunt populo Ceremoniae, sed prosunt, si modus in c^ servetur, and Cavca^ ne
(...) loco habeantur, hoc est, ne praecipuam pictatem in illis collocemus.
Rhen. annot. in Tertul. de Cor. Mil.
his own House, by any Outward Gesture at all. In so much that those very
Ceremonies, which, by the Judgment of Godly and Learned men, have now long
continued in the practice of this Church, suffer hard measure for the Romish
Superstitions sake. But I will conclude this Point with the saying of B.
Rhenanus: Who could endure the people (says he) rushing into the Church like
Swine into a Stye? Doubtless, Ceremonies do not hurt the people, but profit
them, so there be a mean kept, and the By be not put for the Maine, that is,
so we place not the principal part of our Piety in them.

The Conference grows to an end, and I must meet it again ere we part. For
you say,


F. After this (we all rising) the Lady asked the B. whether she might be saved
in the Roman Faith? He answered, She might.


B. What? Not one Cave ne dum vis alium not are Culpae, ipse noteris Calumniae.
S. H^er. L. 3. advers. Pelagianos.
Answer perfectly related? Foundation, and conformed themselves to a Religious
life. But why do you not speak out what I added in this Particular? That it
must needs go harder with the Lady, even in Point of Salvation, because she had
been brought to understand very much, for one of her Condition, in these
Controverted Causes of Religion. And a Person that comes to know much, had need
carefully bethink himself, that he oppose not known Truth against the Church
that made him a Christian. For Salvation may be in the Church of Rome, and yet
they not find it, that make surest of it: Here A. C. is as confident as A. C.
p. 64.
the Jesuit himself, That I said expressly, That the Lady might be saved in
the Roman Faith. Truly, it is too long since now for me to speak any more then
I have already, upon my memory: But this I am sure of, That whatsoever I said
of her, were it never so particular, yet was it under the Conditions before
expressed.


F. I bad her mark that.


B. This Answer (I am sure) troubles not so carefully mark that. Well, you bad
her Mark that. For what? For some great matter? or for some new? Not for some
New sure. For the Protestants have ever been ready for Truth and in Charity to
grant as much as might be. And therefore from the beginning many Nos fatemur
sub Papaetu plurimum esse boni. imo omne bonum Christianum, at que etiam illinc
ad nos devenisse, etc. Luther. contra Anabaptist. citante Bellarmine. L. 4. de
Notis Eccles. c. 16.. penult. Et Field. appendice. par. 3. c. 2. Et Ios. Hall
Bishop of Exeter. L. Of the Old Religion c. t. Many holding Christ the
Foundation aright, and groaning under the burden of Popish trash, etc. by a
general repentance, and assured Faith in their Savior, did find favor with
the Lord. D. Geo. Abbot late Archbishop of Cant. Answer to Hill. ad Ration. 1..
30.

For my part I dare not deny the possibility of their Salvation, who have been
the chiefest Instruments of ours, etc. Hooker in his Discourse of Iustificat..
17. In former times a man might hold the general Doctrine of those Churches,
wherein our Fathers lived, and be saved. And yet since the Council of Trent
some are found in it in such degree of Orthodoxy, as we may well hope of their
Salvation. Field. L. 3. Eccl. c. 47.

The Latin, or Western Church subject to the Romish Tyranny, was a true
Church, in which a saving profession of the Truth of Christ was found. Ios.
Hall B. of Exeter. L. Of the old Religion, fine. in his Advertisement to the
Reader, p. 202.

Non panci retinuerunt Christum Fundamentum, etc. Mornaeus Tract. de Ecclesia
c. 9. fine.

Inter sordes istas, ista quae sum cum periculo expectetur salus, non ipsorum
Additamentis, sed iis quae nobiscum habent communia Fundamentis est
attribuenda. Io. Prideaux Lectione 9. fine.

Papa aliquam adhuc Religionis formam relinquit, spem vitae aternae non tollit,
etc. Calv. Instruct. advers. Libertinos. c. 4.


Learned men granted this. So that you needed not have put such a serious Mark
that upon my speech, as if none before had, or none but I would speak it. And
if your Mark that were not for some New matter, was it for some Great? Yes
sure, it was. For what greater then Salvation? But then I pray, mark this too,
That might be saved, grants but a Here A. C. gets another snatch, and tells us,
That to grant a Possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church, is the free
Confession of an Adversary, and therefore is of force against us, and extorted
by Truth: But to say that salvation is more securely, and easily to be had in
the Protestant Faith, that is but their partial Opinion in their own behalf,
and of no force, especially with Roman Catholics. I easily believe this
latter part, That this, as A. C. and the rest use the matter with their
Proselytes, shall be of little, or no force with Roman Catholics. But it will
behoove them, that it be of force. For let any indifferent man weigh the
Necessary Requisites to Salvation, and he shall find this no partial Opinion,
but very plain and real Verity, That the Protestant living according to his
belief, is upon the safer way to Heaven. And as for my Confession, let them
enforce it as far as they can against me, so they observe my Limitations,
which if they do, A. C. and his fellows will (of all the rest) have but little
comfort in such a limited Possibility.
Possibility, no sure, or safe way to Salvation. The Possibility I think cannot
be denied, the Ignorants especially, because they hold the Foundation, and
cannot survey the Building. And the Foundation can deceive no man that rests
upon it. But a secure way they cannot go, that hold with such corruptions,
when they know them. Now whether it be wisdom, in such a Point as Salvation
is, to forsake a Church, in the which the Ground of Salvation is firm, to
follow a Church, in which it is but possible one may be saved, but very
probable he may do worse, if he look not well to the Foundation, judge ye. I am
sure L. 1. De Bapt. cont. Don. c. 3. Graviter peccarent in rebus ad salutem
animae pertinentibus, etc. ^o solo quod certis incerta praeponerent.
S. Augustine thought it was not, and judged it a great sin, in Point of
Salvation, for a man to prefer incerta certis, uncertainties and naked
possibilities before an evident and certain Course. And Propter incertitudinem
propriae Iustitiae, and periculuminanis glori^, tutissimu^ est fiduciam totam
in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere Bellar. L. 5. ae Iustif. c.
7.. Sit tertia Propositio.
Bellarmine is of Opinion, and that in the Point of Justification: That in
regard of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and of the danger of vain
glory, tutissimum est, it is safest to repose our whole trust in the Mercy and
Goodness of God. And surely, if there be One safer way then another, as he
Confesses there is, he is no wise man, that in a matter of so great moment will
not betake himself to the safest way. And therefore even you your selves in
the Point of Condignity of Merit, though you write it, and preach it
boysterously to the People; yet you are content to dye, renouncing the
condignity of all your own Merits, and trust to Christ's. Now surely, if you
will not venture to dye as you live, live and believe in time, as you mean to
die.

And one thing more, because you bid Mark this, (That we acknowledge an honest
ignorant Papist may be saved) you and your like work upon the advantage of our
Charity, and your own want of it, to abuse the weak. For thus I am told you
work upon them. You see the Protestants (at least many of them) confess there
may be salvation in our Church; We absolutely deny there is salvation in
theirs: Therefore it is safer to come to Ours, then to stay in theirs; to be
where, almost all grant Salvation, then where the greater part of the world
deny it. This Argument is very prevailing with men, that cannot weigh it, and
with women especially, that are put in fear by And this piece of Cunning to
affright the weak was in use in Justin Martyrs time. Quosdam scimus etc. ad
Iracundiam suam Evangelium p^ntes etc. quibus si potestas ea obtigisset ut ^los
Gehenna traderent, Orbem quoque Vniversum consumpsissent: Just. Martyr. Epist.
ad Zenam and Serinam. (And here it is) ad Iracundiam suam Ecclesiam pertrahentes
etc.
violent (though causeless) denying Heaven unto them. And some of your party
since this, have set out a Book, called Charity mistaken. But beside the
Answer fully given to it, this alone is sufficient to Confute it. First, that
in this our Charity (what ever yours be) is not mistaken, unless the Charity
of the Church her self were mistaken in the Case of the Donatists, as shall.,
35. Nu. 3.
after appear. Secondly, even Mistaken Charity (if such it were) is far
better then none at all. And if the Mistaken be ours, the None is yours. Yea,
but A. C. tells us, That this denial of Salvation A. C. p. 65.
is grounded upon Charity, as were the like threats of Christ, and the Holy
Fathers. For there is but one true Faith, and one true Church, and out of that
there is no Salvation. And he that will not hear the Church, S. Matthew. 18. let
him be as a Heathen, and a Publicane, Therefore he says, it is more Charity to
fore-warne us of the danger, by S. Matthew. 18. 17.
these threats, then to let us run into it, thorough a false security. It Is
true, that there is but one true Faith, and but one true Church. But that one,
both Faith, and Church, is the And this is prooved by the Creed. ^n which we
profess our Belief of the Catholic, not of the Roman Church.
Catholic Christian, not the Particular Roman. And this Catholic Christian
Church, he that will not both hear, and obey, yea and the Particular Church,
in which he lives too, so far as it in necessaries agrees with the
Universal, is in as bad condition as a Heathen and a Publicane, and perhaps in
some respects worse. And were we in this Case, we should thank A. C. for
giving us warning of our danger. But it is not so. For he thunders out all these
threats, and denial of salvation, because we join not with the Roman Church,
in all things; as if her Corruptions were part of the Catholic Faith of
Christ. So the whole passage is a mere begging of the Question, and then
threatening upon it, without all ground of Reason or Charity. In the mean time
let A. C. look to himself, that in his false security, he run not into the
danger, and loss of his own salvation, while he would seem to take such
care of ours. But though this Argument prevails with the weak, yet it is much
stronger in the cunning, then the true force of it. For all Arguments are very
mooving that lay their ground upon This is a free Confession of the Adversaries
Argument against themselves, and therefore is of force. A. C. p. 64. But every
Confession of Adversaries, or others is to be taken with its Qualities, and
Conditions: If you leave out, or change these, you wrong the Confession, and
then it is of no force. And ^so does A. C. here. And though Bell. rm. makes the
Confession of the Adversa^y a note of the true Church. L. 4. de Not^s Ec^l c.
16. yet in the very beginning, wh^ lays his Ground, (...). 1. he lays it
(...) plain fallacy a secunaum quid ad simpliciter.
the Adversaries Confession; especially if it be confessed, and avouched to be
true. But if you would speak truly, and say, Many Protestants indeed confess,
there is salvation possible to be attained in the Roman Church, but that yet
they say withal, that the Errors of that Church are so many For they are no
mean Differences that are between us, by Bellarmines own Confession. Agendum
est non de rebus levibus, sed de gravissimis Quastionibut quae ad ipsa Fidei
fundament a pertinent. etc. Bellarm. in praefat. Operibus praefixa.. 3. And
therefore the Errors in them, and the Corruptions of them cannot be of small
Consequence, by your own Confession. Ye^, by your own indeed. For you A. C.
say full as much, if not more then Bellarmine. Thus We Catholics hold all
points, in which Protestants differ from us in Doctrine of Faith, to be
Fundamental, and necessary to be Believed, or at least not denied. A. C.
Relation of the first Conference. p. 28.
(and some so great, by the Confession of your own, as weaken the Foundation)
that it is very hard to go that way to Heaven, especially to them that have
had the Truth manifested; the heart of this Argument were utterly broken.
Besides the force of this Argument lies upon two things, one directly
Expressed, the other but as upon the By.

That which is expressed, is, We and our Adversaries Roman Church. What? would
you have us as malicious, (at least as rash) as your selves are to us, and deny
you so much, as possibility of Salvation? If we should, we might make you in
some things strain for a Proof? But we have not so learned Christ, as either
to return evil for evil in this headie course, or to deny salvation to some
ignorant silly souls; whose humble peaceable obedience makes them safe among
any part of men, that profess the Foundation, Christ; And therefore seek not
^o help our Cause by denying this comfort to silly Christians, as you most
fiercely do, where you can come to work upon them. And this was an old trick
of the Donatists. For in the Point of Baptism (Whether that Sacrament was true
in the Catholic Church, or in the Part of Donatus) they exhorted all to be
baptized among them. Why? Because both Parts granted, that Baptism was true
among the D^atists: which that peevish Sect most unjustly denied the sound
part, as S. Esse vero apud D^natistas Baptismum, and illi asserunt, and nos
concedimus etc. L. 1. de Bap. cont. Donat. c. 3.
Augustine delivers it. I would ask now, Had not the Orthodox true Baptism
among them, because the Donatists denied it injuriously? Or should the Orthodox
against Truth, have denied Baptism, among the Donatists, either to cry
quittance with them, or that their Argument might not be the stronger, because
both parts granted? But Mark this, how far you run from all common
Principles of Christian Peace, as well as Christian Truth, while you deny
salvation most unjustly to us, from which you are farther off your selves.
Besides, if this were, or could be made a concluding Argument, I pray, why do
not you believe with us in the Point of the Eucharist? For all sides agree in
the Faith of the Church of England, That in the most Blessed Sacrament, the
Worthy receiver is by his Corpus Christi manducatur in Coena etc. tantum
caelesti and spiritual ratione: Medium autem quo Corpus Christi accipitur and
manducatur in Coena, Fides est. Eccl. Angl. Art. 28.

After a spiritual manner by Faith on our behalf, and by the working of the
Holy Ghost on the behalf of Christ. Fulk. in 1 Cor. 11. p. 528.

Christus se cum omnibus bonis suit in Coena offert, and nos eum recipimus fide
etc. Calv. 4. Inst. c. 17.. 5. Et Hooker. L. 5.. 67. p. 176.

And say not you the same with us? Spiritualis manducatio, quae per Animam fit,
ad Christi Carnem in Sacramento pertingit. Cajet. Tom. 2. Opusc. de Euchar.
Tract. 2. Cap. 5.

Sed spiritualiter, idest, invisibiliter, and per virtutem Spiritus Sancti.
Thom. p. 3. q. 75. A. 1. ad 1um.

Spiritualiter manducandus est per Fidem and Charitatem. Tena. in Heb. 13.
Difficultate 8.


Faith made spiritually partaker of the true and real Body and Blood of Christ
I would have no man troubled at the words Truly and Really. For that Blessed
Sacrament received as it ought to be, does Truly and Really exhibit and apply
the Body and the Blood of Christ to the Receiver. So Bishop White in his
Defense against T. W. P. Edit. London. 1617. p. 138. And Calvin. in 1 Cor. 10.
3. Vere datur. etc. And again in 1 Cor. 11. 24. Neque enim Mortis tantum and
Resurrectionis suae beneficium nobis offert Christus, sed Corpus ipsum in quo
passus est, and resurrexit. Concludo Realiter (ut vulgo loquuntur) hoc est,
Vere nobis in Coena datur Christi Corpus, ut sit Animis nostris in cibum
Salutarem. etc.
truly, and really, and of all the Benefits of his Passion. Your Roman
Catholics add a manner of this his Presence, Transubstantiation, which many
deny; and the Lutherans a manner of this Presence, Consubstantiation, which
more deny. If this argument be good, then even for this Consent, it is safer
Communicating with the Church of England, then with the Roman, or Lutheran;
Because all agree in this Truth, not in any other Opinion. Nay Hoe totum pendet
ex Principiis Metaphysicis and philosophicis, and ad Fidei Doctrinam non est
necessarium. Suarez. i^ 3. Thom. Disput. 50.. 2.
Suarez himself, and he a very Learned Adversary (what say you to this A. C?
does Truth force this from him?) Confesses plainly, That to Believe
Transubstantiation is not simply necessary A. C. p. 64. 65.
to Salvation. And yet he knew well the Church had Determined it. And Bellar.
L. 3. de Eucha. c. 18.. Ex his colligimus.
Bellarmine, after an intricate, tedious, and almost inexplicable Discourse
about an Adductive Conversion (A thing which neither Divinity, nor Philosophy
ever heard of till then) is at last forced to come to this: Sed quidquid fit de
Modis loquendi, illud tenendum est, Conversionem Panis and Uini in Corpus and
Sanguinem Christi esse substantialem, sed arcanam and ineffabilem, and nullis
naturalibus Conversionibus per omnia similem. etc. Bellar. in Recognit. hujus
loci. Et Vid.. 38. Nu. 3
Whatsoever is concerning the manner and forms of speech, illud tenendum est,
this is to be held, that the Conversion of the Bread and Wine into the Body and
the Blood of Christ, is substantial, but after a secret and ineffable manner,
and not like in all things to any natural Conversion whatsoever. Now if he had
left out Conversion, and affirmed only Christ's real Presence there, after a
mysterious, and indeed an ineffable manner, no man could have spoke better. And
therefore, if you will force the Argument always to make that the safest way
of Salvation, which differing Parties agree on; why do you not yield to the
force of the same Argument, in the Belief of the Sacrament, one of the most
immediate means of Salvation, where not only the most, but all agree; And
your own greatest Clerks cannot tell what to say to the Contrary?

I speak here for the force of the Argument, A. C. made of great account; For
he says, It Is a A. C. p. 64.
Confession of Adversaries extorted by Truth. Just as Sed quia it a magnum
firmamentum vanitatis vestrae in hac sententia esse abitramini, ut ad hoc ti^
terminandam putares Epistolam quo quasi recentius in Animus Lege^tium
remaneret, breviter respondeo. etc. S. Aug. L. 2. cont. Lit. Petil. c. 108.
Andhere A. C. ad hoc sibi putavit terminanda^ Collationem: sed frustra ut
ap^bit. Number. 6.
Petilian the Donatist bragged in the case of Baptism. But in truth, it is
nothing. For the Syllogism, which it frames, is this. The Papists and the
Protestants, which are the Parties differing, agree in this, That there is
Salvation possible to be found in the Roman Church. But in Point of Faith and
Salvation it is safest for a man to take that way, which the differing Parties
agree on. Therefore it is safest for a man to be, and continue in the Roman
Church. To the Major Proposition then; I observe first, that though many
Learned Protestants grant this, all do not. And then that Proposition is not
Universal, nor able to sustain the Conclusion. For they do not in this all
agree; nay I doubt not, but there are some Protestants, which can, and do as
stiffly, and as churlishly deny them Salvation, as they do us. And A. C. should
do well to consider, whether they do it not upon as good reason at least.
Next for the Minor Proposition; Namely, That in point of Faith and Salvation,
it is safest for a man to take that way, which the Adversary confesses, or the
Differing Parties agree on. I fay, that is no Metaphysicall Principle, but a
bare Contingent Proposition, and may be true, or false, as the matter is to
which it is applied, and so of no necessary truth in it self, nor able to
lead in the Conclusion. Now that this Proposition (In point of Faith and
Salvation, it is safest for a man, to take that way, which the differing Parties
agree on, or which the Adversary Confesses) has no strength in it self, but
is sometimes true, and sometimes false, as the Matter is, about which it is
conversant, is most evident. First, by Reason: Because Consent of disagreeing
Parties, is neither Rule, nor Proof of Truth. For Herod and Pilate,
disagreeing Parties enough, yet agreed against Truth it self. But Truth rather
is, or should be the Rule to frame, if not to force Agreement. And secondly, by
the two Instances. 35. N. 3
before given. For in the Instance between the Orthodox Church then, and the
Donatists, this Proposition is most false; For it was a Point of Faith, and so
of Salvation, that they were upon, Namely, the right use, and administration of
the Sacrament of Baptism. And yet had it been safest to take up that way,
which the differing Parts agreed on, or which the adverse Part Confessed, men
must needs have gone with the Donatists against the Church. And this must fall
out as often as any, Heretic will cunningly take that way against the Church,
which the Donatists did, if this Principle shall go for current. But in the
second Instance, concerning the Eucharist, a matter of Faith, and so of
Salvation too, the same Proposition is most true. And the Reason is, because
here the matter is true; Namely, The true, and real participation of the Body
and Blood of Christ in that Blessed Sacrament. But in the former the matter was
false, Namely, That Rebaptization was necessary after Baptism formally given
by the Church. So this Proposition (In Point of Faith and Salvation it is
safest for a man to take that way, which the differing Parties agree in; or
which the Adversary Confesses) is, you see, both true and false, as men have
cunning to apply it, and as the matter is, about which it is Conversant. And is
therefore no Proposition able, or fit to settle a Conclusion in any sober man's
mind, till the Matter contained under it, be well scanned, and examined. And
yet as much use as you would make of this Proposition to amaze the weak, your
selves dare not stand to it, no not where the matter is undenyably true, as
shall appear in diverse Particulars beside this of the Eucharist.

But before I add any other particular Instances, I must tell you what A. C.
says to the two A. C. p. 65.
former. For he tells us, These two are nothing like the present case. Nothing?
That is strange indeed. Why in the first of those Cases concerning the
Donatists, your Proposition is false; And so far from being safest, that it
was no way safe for a man to take that way of Belief, and so of Salvation,
which both parts agreed on. And is this nothing? Nay, is not this full, and
home to the present case? For the present case is this, and no more. That it is
safest taking that way of Belief, which the differing Parties agree on: or
which the Adversary Confesses. And in the second of those Cases concerning the
Eucharist, your Proposition indeed is true, not by the Truth which it has in
it self, Metaphysically, and in Abstract, but only in regard of the matter, to
which it is applied; yet there you desert your own Proposition, where it is
true. And is this nothing? Nay, is not this also full, and home to the present
case, since it appears your Proposition is such as your selves dare not bide
by, either when it is true, or when it is false? For in the Case of Baptism
administered by the Donatist, the Proposition is false, and you dare not bide by
it, for Truths sake. And in the case of the Eucharist, the Proposition is true,
and yet you dare not bide by it, for the Church of Romes sake. So that Church
(with you) cannot err, and yet will not suffer you to maintain Truth, which
not to do is some degree of Error, and that no small one.

Well, A. C. goes on, and gives his Reasons why A. C. p. 65.
For in these Cases (says he) there are annexed other Reasons of certainly
known peril of damnable. Schism and Heresy, which we should incur by
consenting to the Donatists denial of true Baptism among Catholics: and to
the Protestants denial, or doubting of the true substantial Presence of
Christ in the Eucharist. But in this Case of Resolving to live and dye in the
Catholic Roman Church, there is confessedly no such peril of any damnable
Heresy, or Schism, or any other sin. Here I have many Particulars to
observe upon A. C. and you shall have them, as briefly as I can set them down.

And first, I take A. C. at his word, that in Punct. 1.
the case of the Donatist, should it be followed, there would be known
peril of damnable Schism, and Heresy, by denying true Baptism to be in the
Orthodoxe Church. For by this you may see, what a sound proposition this is
(That where two Parties are dissenting, it is safest believing that in which
both Parties agree, or which the Adversary confesses) for here you may see by
the case of the Donatist, is confessed, it may lead a man, that will
universally lean to it, into known and damnable Schism and Heresy. An
excellent Guide, I promise you, this, is it not?

Nor secondly, are these, though A. C. calls them Punct. 2. A. C. p. 65.
so, annexed Reasons; For he calls them so, but to blaunch the matter, as if
they fell upon the proposition ab extra, accidentally, and from without,
Whereas they are not annexed, or pinned on, but flow naturally out of the
Proposition it self. For the Proposition would seem to be Metaphysicall, and
is applyable indifferently to any Common Belief of dissenting Parties, be the
point in difference what it will. Therefore if there be any thing Heretical,
Schismatic, or any way evil in the Point, this proposition being neither
Universally, nor necessarily true, must needs cast him, that relyes upon it,
upon all these Rocks of Heresy, Schism, or what ever else follows the matter
of the Proposition.

Thirdly, A. C. does extremely ill to join these Cases of the Donatists for
Baptism, and the Protestant for Punct. 3. A. C. p. 66.
the Eucharist together, as he does. For this Proposition in the first
concerning the Donatists, leads a man (as is confessed by himself) into
known and damnable Schism and Heresy: but by A. Cs. good leave the later
concerning the Protestants, and the Eucharist, nothing so. For I hope A. C.
dare not say, That to believe the true Caterum his absurditatibus sublatis,
quicquid ad Exprimendam veram substantialemque Corporis ac sanguinis Domini
Communicationem, qua sub sacris Coenae symbolis, fidelibus exhibetur, facere
potest, libeuter recipio. Calvin L 4. Inst. c. 17.. 19.

In Coenae mysterio, per symbola Panis and Vini Christus vere nobis exhibetur
etc. Et nos participes substantiae ejus facti sumus, Ibid.. 11.


substantial Presence of Christ, is either known, or damnable Schism, or
Heresy. Now as many, and as Learned. 35. N 3.
Protestants believe and maintain this, as do believe possibility of
Salvation (as before is limited) in the Roman Church: Therefore they in that
not guilty of either known, or damnable Schism, or Heresy, though the
Donatists were of both.

Fourthly, whereas he imposes upon the Protestants, The denial or doubting of
the true and Real Presence of Punct. 4. A. C. p. 66.
Christ in the Eucharist; he is a great deal more bold, then true, in that
also: For understand them right, and they certainly, neither deny, nor doubt
it. For as for the Lutheran (as they are commonly called) their very Opinion of
Consubstantiation makes it known to the world, that they neither deny, nor
doubt of his true, and Real Presence there. And they are Protestants. And for
the Calvinists, if they might be rightly understood, they also maintain a
most true and Real Presence, though they cannot permit their judgment to be
Transubstantiated. And they are Protestants too. And this is so known a Truth,
that Bellarm. L. 1 de Euchar. c 2.. Quinto dicit. Sacrame^ saepe (...) (...) de
Corpus Christian Coen^ adesse, sea (...) adesse nunquam (...), quod legerim,
nifi forte loquuntur de Coena quae fit in Calo, etc.

And that he means to brand Protestants under the name of Sacramentarii, is
plain. For he says the Council of Trent opposed this word realiter, Figmento
Calvinistico, to the Calvinistic^ll figment. Ibid.


Bellarmine confesses it. For he says, Protestants do often grant, that the
true and real Body of Christ is in the Eucharist: But he adds, That they never
say (so far as he has read) That it is there ^ruly and Really, unless they
speak of the Supper, which shall be in Heaven. Well, first if they grant that
the true, and Real Body of Christ, is in that Blessed Sacrament (as Bellarmine
confesses they do, and it is most true) then A. C. is false, who charges all
the Protestants with denial, or doubtfulnesse in this Point. And A. C. p 65.
secondly, Bellarmine himself also shows here his Ignorance, or his Malice;
Ignorance, if he knew it not: Malice, if he would not know it. For the
Calvinists, at least they which follow Calvine himself, do not only believe
that the true and real Body of Christ is received in the Eucharist, but that
it is there, and that we partake of it vere and realiter, which are Calv. in 1.
Cor. 10. 3. vere, etc. and in 1. Cor. 11. 24. realiter. Vids supra. Number. 3.
Calvine's own words; and yet Bellarmine boldly affirms, that to his reading,
no one Protestant did ever affirm it. And I, for my part, cannot believe but
Bellarmine had read Calvine, and very carefully, he does so frequently and so
mainly Oppose him. Nor can that Place by any Art be shifted, or by any Violence
wrested from Calvine's true meaning of the Presence of Christ in and at the
blessed Sacrament of the Fucharist, to any Supper in Heaven whatsoever. But
most manifest it is, that Quod legerim, for ought I have read, will not serve
Bellarmine to Excuse him. For he himself, but in the very Bellar. L. 1. de
Eucharistia. c. 1.. Secundo, docet.
Chapter going before, quotes four Places out of Calvine, in which he says
expressly, That we receive in the Sacrament the Body and the Blood of Christ
Vere, truly. So Calvine says it four times, and Bellarmine quotes the places;
and yet he says in the very next Chapter, That never any Protestant said so,
to his Reading. And for the Church of England, nothing is more plain, then
that it believes and teaches the true and real Presence of Christ in the The
Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper (of the Lord) only
after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner. And the means whereby the Body of
Christ is received and eaten, is Faith. Eccl. Ang. Art. 28. So here is the
Manner of Transubstantiation denied, but the Body of Christ twice affirmed. And
in the prayer before Consecration, thus, Grant us Gracious Lord so to eat the
Flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his Blood, etc. And
again, in the second Prayer or Thanksgiving after Consecration, thus. We give
thee Thanks, for that thou do vouchsafe to feed us which have duly received
these holy Mysteries with the spiritual food of the most precious Body and
Blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ, etc.
Eucharist, unless A. C. can make a Body, no Body, and Blood, no Blood (as
perhaps he can by Transubstantiation) as well as Bread, no Bread, and Wine, no
Wine. And the Church of England is Protestant too. So Protestants of all sorts
maintain a true and real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, and then,
where is any known, or damnable Heresy here? As for the Learned of those
zealous men that died in this Cause in Q. Mary's days, they denied not the
Real Presence simply taken, but as their Opposites forced Transubstantiation
upon them, as if that, and the Real Presence had been all one. Whereas all
the Ancient Christians ever believed the one, and none but modern and
superstitious Christians believe the other; If they do believe it, for I, for
my part, doubt they do not. And as for the Unlearned in those times, and all
times, their zeal (they holding the Foundation) may eat out their Ignorances,
and leave them safe. Now that the Learned Protestants in Q. Mary's days, did
not deny, nay did maintain the Real Presence, will manifestly appear. For
when the Commissioners obtruded to Io. Frith the Presence of Christ's natural
Body in the Sacrament; and that without all figure, or similitude: Io. Frith
acknowledges, Io. Fox Mar^rolog. To. 2. London. 1597. page 943.
That the inward man does as verily receive Christ's Body, as the outward man
receives the Sacrament with his Mouth: And he adds, Fox ibid.
That neither side ought to make it a necessary Article of Faith, but leave it
indifferent. Nay, Archbishop Cranmer comes more plainly, and more home to it
then Frith: For if you understand (says Cranmer apud Fox. ibid. p. 1301.
he) by this word Really, Reipsa, that is, in very deed and effectually; so
Christ by the Grace and efficacy of his Passion, is indeed, and truly present,
etc. But if by this word Really, you understand I say Corporaliter, Corporally;
for so Bellarmine has it expressly: Quod autem Corporaliter and proprie sumatur
Sanguis and Caro, etc. probari potest omnibus Argumentis, etc. Bellar. L. 1. de
Eucharist. c. 12.. Sed tota. And I must be bold to tell you more then, That
this is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. For I must tell you too, that
Bellarmine here contradicts himself. For he that tells us here, that it can be
proved by many Arguments, that we receive the Flesh and the Blood of Christ in
the Eucharist Corporaliter, said as expressly before (had he remembered it) that
though Christ be in this Blessed Sacrament vere and realiter, yet (says he)
non dicemus Corporaliter, i. e. co modo quo sua natura existunt Corpora, etc.
Bellar. L. 1. de Euchar. c. 2.. Tertia Regula. So Bellarm. here is in a
notorious Contradiction. Or else it will follow plainly out of him, That Christ
in the Sacrament is existent one way, and received another, which is a gross
absurdity. And that Corporaliter was the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and
meant by Transubstantiation, is farther plain in the Book called, The
Institution of a Christian man, set forth by the Bishops in Convocation in Hen.
8. time. An 1534 Cap. Of the Sacrament of the Altar. The words (...) Una^r the
form and figure of Bread and Wine, the very Body and Blood of Christ is
Corporally, really, etc. exhibited and received, etc. And Aquinas expresses it
thus. Quia tamen substantia Corporis Christi realiter non d^iditur a sua
quantitate dimensiva, and ab aliis (...) ^bus, inde est, quod ex virealis
Concomitantiae est in hoc Sacramento tota quantitas dimensiva Corporis Christi,
and omnia Accidentia ejus. Tho. p. 3. q. 76. Ar. 4. c.
Corporaliter, Corporally, in his natural and Organicall Body, under the
Forms of Bread and Wine, it is contrary to the Holy Word of God. And so
likewise Bishop Ridley. Nay, Bishop Ridley adds yet farther, and speaks so
fully to this Point, as I think no man can add to his Expression: And it is
well if some Protestants except not against it. Both you and I (says Apud Fox
ibid p. 1598.
he) agree in this: That in the Sacrament is the very true and natural Body
and Blood of Christ, even that which was borne of the Virgin Marv; which
ascended into Heaven which sits on the right hand of God the Father, which
shall come from thence to judge the quick and the dead. Only we differ in
modo, in the way and manner of Being. We confess all one thing to be in the
Sacrament, and dissent in the Manner of Being there. I confess Christ's
Natural Body to be in the Sacrament by Spirit and Grace, etc. You make a
grosser kind of Being, enclosing a natural Body under the shape and form of
Bread and Wine. So far, and more, Bishop Ridley. And Apud Fox ibid. p. 1703.
Archbishop Cranmer confesses, that he was indeed of another Opinion, and
inclining to that of Zuinglius, till Bishop Ridley convinced his Judgment, and
settled him in this Point. And for Tantum de modo quastio est. etc. Et facessat
calumnia auferri Christum a Coena sua etc. Calv. L. 4. Inst. c. 17.. 31.
Veritatem Dei in qua acquiescere tuto licet, sine controversia amplectar.
Pronun^i it Ille Carnem suam esse Anima mea cibum, Sanguinem esse potum.
Talibus alimentis animam Illi meam pascendum offero. In S. Coena jubet me sub
Symbolis Panis and Vini Corpus and Sanguinem suum sumere, manducare and bibere.
Nihil dubito, quin and Ipse Vere porrigat, and ego recipiam, Calv: ibid.. 32.
Calvine, he comes no whit short of these, against the Calumny of the
Romanists on that behalf. Now after all this, with what face can A. C. say (as
he does) That Protestants deny, or doubt of the true, and real Presence of
Christ in the Sacrament. I cannot well tell, or am unwilling to utter.

Fifthly, whereas it is added by A. C. That in this present case, there is no
peril of any damnable Heresy, Pun. 5. A. C. p. 66.
Schism, or any other Sin, in resolving to live and die in the Roman
Church. That Is not so neither. For he that lives in the Roman Church, with
such a Resolution, is presumed to believe as that Church believes. And he that
does so, I will not say is as guilty, but guilty he is, more, or less, of the
Schism which that Church first caused by her Corruptions, and now continues by
them, and her power together; And of all her Damnable Opinions too, in point of
Misbeliefe, though perhaps A. C. will not have them called Heresies, unless
they have been condemned in some General Council; And of all other sins
also, which the Doctrine and Misbeliefe of that Church leads him into. And
mark it I pray. For it is one thing to live in a Schismatic Church, and not
Communicate with it in the Schism, or in any false Worship that attends it.
For so Elias lived among the Ten Tribes, and was not Schismatic, 3. Reg. 17.
And after him Elizaus, 4. Reg. 3. Reg. 17 4. Reg. 3.
3. But then neither of them either countenanced the Schism, or worshipped the
Calves in Dan, or in Bethel. And so also beside these Prophets, did those
Thousands live in a Schismatic Church, yet never bowed their knee to Baal,
3. Reg. 19. But it is 3. Reg. 19. 18.
quite another thing to live in a Schismatic Church, and Communicate with it
in the Schism, and in all the Superstitions and Corruptions, which that Church
teaches, nay to live and die in them. For certainly here no man can so live in
a Schismatic Church, but if he be of capacity enough, and understand it, he
must needs be a Formal Schismatic, or an Involved One, if he understand it
not. And in this case the Church of Rome is either far worse, or more cruel
then the Church of Israel, even under Ahab and Jezabel, was. The Synagogue
indeed was corrupted a long time, and in a great degree. But I do not find,
that this Doctrine, You must sacrifice in the high places: Or this, You may not
go and worship at the one Altar in Jerusalem, was either taught by the Priests,
or maintained by the Prophets, or enjoined the people by the Sanedrim: Nay, can
you show me when any Jew living there devontly according to the Law, was ever
punished for omitting the One of these, or doing the Other? But the Church of
Rome has solemnly decreed her Errors: And erring, has yet decreed withal,
That she cannot err. And imposed upon Learned men, disputed and improbable
Opinions, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and Forbearance of the Cup in the
blessed Eucharist, even against the express Command of our Savior, and that
for Articles of Faith. And to keep off Disobedience, what ever the Corruption
be, she has bound up her Decrees upon pain of Excommunication, and all that
follows upon it. Nay, this is not enough, unless the faggot be kindled to
light them the way. This then may be enough for us to leave Rome, though the
old Prophet forsook not Israel, 3. Reg. 13. And therefore in this present case
there is peril, great peril of 3. Reg. 13. 11.
damnable both Schism and Herefie, and other sin; by living and dying in the
Roman Faith, tainted with so many superstitions, as at this day it is, and
their Tyranny to boot. So that here I may answer A. C. just as Petilianus
dixit, Venite ad Ecclesiam populi, and ausugite Traditores (ita Orth^doxos tum
appellavit) si cum iisdem perire non vulus. Nam ut facile cognoscatis quod ipsi
sunt rci, de fide nostra optime judicant. Ego illorum infectos baptizo. Illi
meos (quod absit) recipient baptizatos quae omnino non facerent, si in Baptismo
nostro culpas aliquas agnoviss^nt. Videte ergo quod damus, quam sanctum sit,
quod destiuere metuit Sacrilegus Inimicus. S. August. respondet. Sic approbam^s
in Ha^reticis Baptismum, non Haercticorum, sed Christi, sicut in
Fornicatoribus, Idololatr^, Veneficis, etc. approbamus Baptismum non little, sed
Christi. Omnes enim isti. inter quos and Haerctici sunt, sicut dicit Apostolus:
Regnum Dei non possidebunt, etc. S. August. L. 2. cont. Lit. Petiliani. c. 108.
S. Augustine answered Petilian the Donatist, in the forenamed case of
Baptism. For when Petilian pleaded the Concession of his Adversaries, That
Baptism, as the Donatists administered it, was good and lawful, and thence
inferred (just as the Jesuit does against me) that it was better for men to
join with his Congregation, then with the Church. S. Augustine answers; We do
indeed approve among H^reticks Baptism, but so, not as it is the Baptism of
Heretics, but as it is the Baptism of Christ. Just as we approve the Baptism
of Adulterers, Idolaters, Witches, and yet not as'tis theirs; but as it is
Christ's Baptism. For none of these, for all their Baptism, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. And the Apostle reckons Heretics among them. Gal. 5. 19. 20.
21.
Galat. 5. And again afterward: It is not therefore yours (says Non ergo
vestrum est quod d^struere metuimus, sed Christi; quod and in (...) per se
(...) est. S. Aug. Ibid.
Saint Augustine) which we fear to destroy, but Christ's, which, even among
the Sacrilegious, is of, and in it self, holy. Now you shall see how full this
comes, home to our Petilianist A. C. (for he is one of the Contracters of the
Church of Christ to Rome, as the Donatists confined it to Afric.) And he
cries out, That a Possibility of Salvation, A. C. p. 6^.
is a free Confession of the Adversaries, and is of force against them, and to
be thought extorted from them by force of Truth it self. I Answer. I do
indeed for my part (leaving other men free to their own judgment) acknowledge
a Possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church. But so, as that which I grant
to Romanists, is not as they are Romanists, but as they are Christians, that
is, as they believe the Creed, and hold the Foundation Christ himself, not as
they associate themselves wittingly and knowingly to the gross Superstitions
of the Romish Church. Nor do I fear to destroy quod ipsorum est, that which
is theirs, but yet I dare not proceed so roughly, as with theirs, or for theirs
to deny, or weaken the Foundation, which is Christ's, even among them; and which
is, and remains holy even in the midst of their Superstitions; And I am
willing to hope there are many among them, which keep within that Church, and
yet wish the Superstitions abolished which they know, and which pray to God to
forgive their errors in what they know not, and which hold the Foundation
firm, and live accordingly, and which would have all things amended that are
amiss, were it in their power. And to such I dare not deny a Possibility of
Salvation, for that which is Christ's in them, though they hazard themselves
extremely by keeping so close to that, which is Superstition, and in the Case
of Images, comes too near Idolatry. Nor can A. C. shift this A. C. p. 66.
off by adding, living and dying in the Roman Church. For this living and
dying in the Roman Church, (as is before expressed) cannot take away the
Possibility of Salvation from them which believe, and repent of whatsoever is
error, or sin in them, be it sin known to them, or be it not. But then
perhaps A. C. will reply, that if this be so, I must then maintain, that a
Donatist also, living and dying in Schism, might be saved. To which I answer
two ways. First, that a plain honest Donatist, having (as is confessed) true
Baptism, and holding the Foundation (as, for ought I know, the For though
Prateolus will make Donatus, and from him the Donatists, to be guilty of an
impious Heresy (I doubt he means Arrianisme, though he name it not) in making
the Son of God less then the Father, and the Holy Ghost less then the
Son. L. 4. de Haeres. Har. 14. yet these things are most manifest out of S.
Aug. concerning them, who lived with them both in time and place, and
understood them, and their Tenets far better then Prateolus could.

And first, S. Aug. tells us concerning them: Arriani, Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, diversas substantias esse dicunt. Donatista autem unam
Trinitatis substantiam confitentur. So they are no Arrians.

Secondly, Si aliqui little minorem Filium esse dixerunt quam Pater est, ejusdem
tamen substantiae non negarunt. But this is but si aliqui, if any so 'twas
doubtful, this too, though Prateolus delivers it positively.

Thirdly, Plurimi vero in iis hoc se dicunt, omnino credere de Patre, and
Filio, and Spiritu Sancto, quod Cathilica credit Ecclesia. Necipsa cum illis
vertitur Question, sed de sola Communione infoeliciter litigant, etc. De sola.
Only about the Union with the Church. Therefore they erred not in Fundamental
Points of Faith. And

Lastly, All that can farther be said against them, is, That some of them, to
win the Goths to them, when they were powerful, said, Hoc se Credere quod and
illi Credunt. Now the Goths (for the most) were Arrians. But then, says S.
Aug. they were but nonnulli, some of them. And of this some it was no more
Certain, then sicut audivimus, as we have heard, S. Aug. knew it not. And then
if it were true of some, yet Majorum suorum Authoritate convincuntur; Quia nec
Donatus ipse sic credidisse asseritur, de cujus part se esse gloriantur. S
Aug. Epist. 50. Where Prateolus is again deceived; for he says expressly, that
Donatus affirmed the Son to be less then the Father. Impius ille asserebat,
etc. But then indeed, (and which perchance deceived Prateolus) beside Donatus
the founder of this Heresy, there was another Donatus, who succeeded Majorinus
at Carthage, and he was guilty of the Heresy, which Prateolus mentions, Et
extant scripta ejus ubi apparet, as S. Aug. confesses, L. 1. de Haere^. Har.
69. But then S. Aug. adds there also, nec facile in iis quisquam, that scarce
any of the Donatists did so much as know, that this Donatus held that Opinion,
much less did they believe it themselves. S. Aug. Ibid.


Donatists did) and repenting of what ever was sin in him, and would have
repented of the Schism, had it been known to him, might be saved. Secondly,
that in this Particular, the Romanist and the Donatist differ much; And that
therefore it is not of necessary consequence, that if a Romanist now (upon the
Conditions before expressed) may be saved; Therefore a Donatist heretofore
might. For in regard of the Schism the Donatist was in one respect worse, and
in greater danger of damnation then the Romanist now is: And in an other
respect better, and in less danger. The Donatist was in greater danger of
damnation, if you consider the Schism it self then; for they brake from the
Orthodox Church without any cause given them. And here it does not follow, if
the Romanist have a Possibility of Salvation, therefore a Donatist has. But if
you consider the Cause of the Schism now, then the Donatist was in less
danger of Damnation then the Romanist is; Because the Church of Rome gave the
first and the greatest cause of the Schism (as is prooved. 21. N. etc.
before.) And therefore here it does not follow, That if a Donatist have
possibility of Salvation, Therefore a Romanist has; For a lesser Offender may
have that possibility of safety, which a greater has not.

And last of all, whereas A. C. adds, that confessedly Punct. 6. A. C. p. 66.
there is no such Peril. That Is a most loud untruth, and an Ingenuous man
would never have said it. For in the same. 35. N. 12.
place, where I grant a possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church, I
presently add, that it is no secure way, in regard of Roman Corruptions. And
A. C. cannot plead for himself that he either knew not this, or that he
overlooked it; for himself disputes against it as strongly as he can. What
modesty, or Truth call you this? For he that confesses a possibility of
Salvation, does not thereby confess no peril of Damnation in the same way Yea
but if some Protestants should say there is peril of Damnation to live and dye
in the Roman Faith, their saying is nothing in comparison of the number or
worth of those that say, there is none. So A. C. again, And beside, A. C. p.
66.
they which say it, are contradicted by their own more Learned Brethren. Here
A. C. speaks very confusedly. But whether he speak of Protestants, or
Romanists, or mixes both, the matter is not great. For as for the Number and
Worth of men, they are no necessary Concluders for Truth Not Number; for who
would be judged by the Many? The time was when the Ingemuit totus Orbis, and
Arrianum se esse miratus est. S. Hier. advers. Luciferian. post medium. T^. 2.
Arrianorum Uenenum non jam portiun culam quandam, sed pene Orbem totum
contaminaverat, adeo ut prope cunctis Latini Sermonis Episcopis. partim vi,
partim fraud deceptis, caligo quaedam mentibus offunderetur. etc. Vin. Lir.
cont. Haeres. c. 6. Ecclesia non Parietibus consistit, sed in Dogmatum
veritate. Ecclesia ibi est, ubi fides vera est. Caterum ante annos quindecim,
aut viginti, Parietes omnes hic Ecclesiarum Haeretici (de Atrianis and aliis
Haereticis loquitur) possidebant etc. Ecclesia autem illic erat, ubi sides vera
erat. S. Hier. in Psalm. 133. Constantius. Tantane Orbis terrae pars, Liberi, in
te residet ut tu solus homini Impio (de Athanasio loquitur) subsidio venire,
and pacem Orbis ac Mundi totius dirimere audeas. Liberius. Esto quod ego solus
sim, non tamen propterea Causa fidei fit inferior, nam olim tres solum erant
reperti, qui Rggis mandato resisterent etc. Theod. L. 2. Hist. Eccles. c. 16.
Dialogo inter Constant. Imp. and Liberium Papam. So that Pope did not think
Multitude any great note of the true Church. Vbi sunt. etc. qui Ecclesiam
multitudine definiunt, and parvum gregem aspernantur. etc. Greg. Naz. Orat 25.
prin. Nay the Arrians were grown to that boldness that they Objected to the
Catholics of that time Paucitatem, the thinness of their number, Greg. Naz.
Carm. de vita sua. p. 24. Edit. Paris. 1611. Quum ejecti tamen essent de
Civitatibus, jactabant in desertis suis Synagogis illud: Multi vocati, pauci
electi, Socr. L. 1. Hist. Eccl. c. 10.
Arrians were too many for the Orthodox. Not Worth simply, for that once Error
Origenis and Tertulliani magna fuit in Ecclesia Dei Populi tentatio, Vin Lir.
cont. Har. c. 23 and 24.
misled, is of all other the greatest misleader. And yet God forbid, that to
Worth weaker men should not yield in difficult and Perplexed Questions, yet so,
as that when Matters Fundamental in the Faith come in Question they finally
rest upon an higher, and clearer certainty then can be found in either Number
or Weight of men. Besides, if you mean your own Party, you have not yet
prooved your Party more worthy for Life or Learning then the Protestants.
Prove that first, and then it will be time to tell you, how worthy many of
your Popes have been for either Life or Learning. As for the rest, you may
blush to say it. For all Protestants unanimously agree in this, That there is
great peril of Damnation for any man to live and dye in the Roman persuasion.
And you are not able to produce any one Protestant, that ever said the
contrary. And therefore that is a most notorious slander, where you say, that
they which affirm this peril of Damnation, are contradicted by their own
more A. C. p. 66.
Learned Brethren.

And thus having cleared the way against the Exceptions A. C. to the two former
Instances, I will now proceed (as I. 35. N. 4.
promised) to make this farther appear, that A. C. and his fellows dare not
stand to that ground, which is here laid down. Namely, That in Point of Faith
and Salvation, it is safest for a man to take that way which the Adversary
Confesses to be true, or whereon the differing Parties agree. And that if they
do stand to it, they must be forced to maintain the Church of England in many
things against the Church of Rome.

And first, I Instance in the Article of our Savior Christ's Descent into Hell.
I hope the Church of Rome believes Punct. 1.
this Article, and withal that Hell is the place of the Damned, so does the
Church of England. In this then these distenting Churches agree: Therefore
according to the former Rule (yea and here in Truth too) it is safest for a man
to believe this Article of the Creed, as both agree: That is, that Christ
descended in Soul into the Place of the Damned. But this the Romanists will
not endure at any hand. For the Sequuntur enim Thom p. 3. q. 52 Ar. 2. c. Verba
ejus sunt. Anima Christi per suam essentiam descendit solu^ ad locum Inferni,
in quo justi detinebantur. etc.
School agree in it, That the Soul of Christ in the time of his death went
really no farther then in Limbum Patrum, which is not the place of the Damned,
but a Region or Quarter in the upper part of Hell, (as they call it) built up
there by the Romanist, without License of either Scripture, or the Primitive
Church. And a man would wonder how those Builders with untempered mortar found
light enough in that dark Place to build as they have done. Ezec. 13. 10.


Secondly, I Will instance in the Institution of the Sacrament in both kinds.
That Christ Instituted it so, is confessed Punct. 2.
by both Churches; that the Ancient Churches received it so, is agreed by both
Churches. Therefore according to the former Rule (and here in Truth too) it is
safest for a man to receive this Sacrament in both kinds. And yet here this
Ground of A. C. must not stand for good, no not at Rome, but to receive in one
kind is enough for the Laity. And the poor Basiliense Concilium concessit
Bohemis utriusque speci^i usum: modo faterentur id sibi concedi ab Ecclesia,
non autem ad hoc teneri Divino jure. Bell. L. 1. de Sacrament. in genere. c. 2..
2.
Bohemians must have a Dispensation, that it may be lawful for them to receive
the Sacrament as Christ commanded them. And this must not be granted to them
neither, unless they will acknowledge (most opposite to Truth) that they are
not bound by Divine Law to receive it in both kinds. And here their Building
with untempered Mortar appears most manifestly. For they have no show to
maintain this, but the fiction of Thomas of Aquin, That he which receives the
Body of Christ, receives also his Blood per concomitantiam, by concomitancy;
because the Blood goes always with the Body, of which Term Tho. p. 3. q. 76.
A. 2. c. and alibi passim.
Thomas was the first Author I can yet find. First then, if this be true, I
hope Christ knew it: And then why did he so unusefully institute it in both
kinds? Next, if this be true, Concomitancy accompanies the Priest, as well as
the People; and then why may not he receive it in one kind also? Thirdly, this
is apparently not true; For the Eucharist is a Sacrament Sanguinis effusi, of
Blood shed, and poured out; And Blood poured out, and so severed from the Body,
goes not along with the Body per concomitantiam. And yet Christ must rather
err, or proceed I know not how in the Institution of the Sacrament in both
kinds, rather then the Holy unerring Church of Rome may do amiss in the
Determination for it, and the Administration of it in one kind. Nor will the
Distinction, That Christ instituted this as a Sacrifice, to which both kinds
were necessary, serve the turn; For suppose that true, yet he instituted it,
as a Sacrament also, or else that Sacrament had no Institution from Christ,
which I presume A. C. dares not affirm. And that Institution which this
Sacrament had from Christ, was in both kinds.

And since here is mention happened of Sacrifice, my Punct. 3.
Third Instance shall be in the Sacrifice which is offered up to God in that
Great and High Mystery of our Redemption by the death of Christ: For as Christ
offered up Christ by his own Blood entered once into the Holy Place, and
obtained eternal Redemption for us. Heb. 9. 12. And this was done by way of
Sacrifice. By the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once made. Heb. 10. 10.
Christ gave himself for us, to be an Offering, and a Sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor unto God. Ephesians. 5. 2. Out of which place the School infers,
Passion Christi verum Sacrificium suisse. Tho. p. 3. q. 48. Art. 3. c Christ
did suffer Death upon the Cross for our Redemption, and made there, by his one
Oblation of himself once offered a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice,
O^lation and Satisfaction for the sins of the whole World. Eccles. Ang. in
Canone Consecrationis. Euchar.
himself once for all, a full and allsufficient Sacrifice for the sin of the
whole world. So did He Institute, and Command a And Christ did Institute, and
in his Holy Gospel Command us to continue a Perpetual Memory of that his
precious Death, until his Coming again. Eccles. Ang. ibid.
Memory of this Sacrifice in a Sacrament, even till his coming again. For at,
and in the Eucharist, we offer up to God three Sacrifices. One by the Priest
only, that is the Sacramentum hoc est Commemorativum Dominicae Passionis quae
fuit verum Sacrificium; and sic Nominatur Sacrifi^ Tho. p. 3. q. 73. A. 4. C.
Christ being Offered up once for all in his own proper Person, is yet said to
be Offered up etc. in the Celebration of the Sacrament; Because his O^lation
one for ever made, is thereby Represented. Lambert in Fox (...) Martyrolog.
Uol. 2. Edit. Land. 1597. p. 1033 Et postea It Is a Memorial, or Representation
thereof. Ibid. The (...) of the Sentences judged truly in this Point, saying:
That wh^ is offered and Consecrated of the Priest, is called a Sacrifice a^
Oblation, because it is a Memory, and Representation of t^ true Sacrifice, and
Holy Oblation made on the Altar of t^ Cross. Archbishop Cranmer in his Answer
to Bishop (...) concerning the most Holy Sacrament. L. 5. p. 377. A^ again
this shortly is the mind of Lombardus, That the the which is done at Gods
Board is a Sacrifice, and so is that (...) which was made upon the Cross, but
not after one mann^ (...) understanding, I or this was the Thing indeed, and
that is (...) Commemoration of the Thing. Ibid. So likewise Bishop (...)
acknowledges incruentum and rationabile Sacrificium, (...) of by Eusebius. De
Demonstrat. Evang. L. (...). Ie^ls (...) against Harding. Art. 7. Divis. 9.
Again, The (...) of the Holy Communion is sometimes of the Anc^ent (...)
called an Unbloody Sacrifice, not in respect of any Corpo^ fleshly presence,
that is imagined to be there without (...) shedding, but for that it
represents, and reports to (...) minds that one, and everlasting Sacrifice
that Christ made (...) Body upon the Cross. This Bishop Jewel disliketh not in
his Answer to Harding: Art. 17. Divis. 14. Patres Coenam Dominicam duplici de
causa vocarunt Sacrificium incruentum. Tum quod sit Imago and solennis
repraesentatio illius Sacrificii (...) quod Christus cum sanguinis effusione
obtulit in Cruce: Tum quod sit etiam Eucharisticum Sacrificium, id est,
Sacrificium Laudis and gratiarum actionis, cum pro beneficiis omnibus, tum pro
redemptione imprimis per Christi mortem peracta. Zanch. in 2. Praecep. Decal.
T. 4. p. 459 And D. Fulke also acknowledges a Sacrifice in the Eucharist. In S.
Mat. 26. 26. Non dissimulaverint Christiani in Coena Domini, five ut ipsi
loquebantur, in Sacrificio Altaris peculiari quodam modo praesentem se venerari
Deum Christianorum, sed quae esset forma ejus sacrificii quod per Symbola Panis
and vini peragitur, hoc Veteres praese non ferebant. Isa. Casaub. Exercit. 16.
ad Annal. Baron.. 43. p. 560.
Commemorative Sacrifice of Christ's Death represented in Bread broken, and Wine
poured out. Another by the In the Liturgy of the Church of England we pray to
God immediately after the reception of the Sacrament, That He would be pleased
to accept this our Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving etc. And Heb. 13. 15.
The Sacrifice Propitiatory was made by Christ himself only, but the Sacrifice
Commemorative and Gratulatory is made by the Priest and the People. Archbishop
Cranmer in his Answer to Bishop Gardner. L. 5 p. 377.
Priest and the People, jointly, and that is the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving, for all the Benefits and graces we receive by the precious Death
of Christ. The Third, I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of God, that you
give up your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God. Romans 12.
1. We offer, and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our souls, and bodies,
to be a reasonable, holy and living Sacrifice unto thee. So the Church of
England in the Prayer after the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
by every particular man for himself only, and that is the Sacrifice of every
man's Body, and Soul, to serve him in both, all the rest of his life, for this
blessing thus bestowed on him. Now thus far these dissenting Churches agree,
that in the Eucharist, there is a Sacrifice of Duty, and a Sacrifice of Praise,
and a Sacrifice of Commemoration of Christ. Therefore according to the former
Rule (and here in truth too) it is fafest for a man to believe the
Commemorative, the Praising, and the Performing Sacrifice, and to offer them
duly to God, and leave the Church of Rome in this Particular to her
Superstitions, that I may say no more. And would the Church of Rome stand to A.
Cs. Rule, and believe dissenting Parties where they agree, were it but in this,
and that before, of the Real Presence, it would work far toward the Peace of
Christendom. But the Truth is; They pretend the Peace of Christendom, but
care no more for it, then as it may uphold at least, if not increase their own
Greatness.

My fourth Instance shall be in the Sacrament of Baptism, and the things
required as necessary to make it Punct. 4.
effectual to the Receiver. They in the common received Doctrine of the Church
of Rome are three. The Matter, the Form, and the Intention of the Priest, to
do that which the Church does, and intends he should do. Now all other
Divines, as well ancient as modern, and both the dissenting Churches also,
agree in the two former; but many deny that the Intention of the Priest is
necessary. Will A. C. hold his Rule, That it is safest to believe in a
controverted Point of Faith that which the dissenting Parties agree on, or
which the Adverse Part Confesses? If he will not, then why should he press
that, as a Rule to direct others, which he will not be guided by himself? And
if he will; then he must go professedly against the Con. Trid. Sess. 7. Can.
11.
Council of Trent, which has determined it as defide, as a Point of Faith,
that the Intention of the Priest is necessary to make the Baptism true and
valid. Though in the Histor. Con. Trid. L. 2. p. 277. Edit. Lat. Ley^ dae. 1622.
History of that Council, it is most apparent the Bishops and other Divines
there could not tell what to answer to the Bishop of Minors, a Neapolitane, who
declared his Judgment openly against it, in the face of that Council.

My fifth Instance is. We say, and can easily Punct. 5.
prove there are diverse Errors, and some gross ones in the Roman Missall. But
I my self have heard some Jesuits confess, that in the Liturgy of the
Church of England, there is noe positive error. And being pressed, why then
they refused to come to our Churches, and serve God with us? They answered,
they could not do it; Because though our Liturgy had in it nothing ill, yet
it wanted a great deal of that which was good, and was in their Service. Now
here let A. C. consider again, Here is a plain Concession of the adverse
Part: And Both agree, there is nothing in our Service, but that which is holy
and good. What will the Jesuit, or A. C. say to this? If he forsake his
ground, then it is not safest in point of Divine Worship to join in Faith as
the dissenting Parties agree, or to stand to the Adversaries own Confession.
If he be so hardy as to maintain it, then the English Liturgy is better, and
safer to worship Cod by, then the Roman Mass. Which yet, I presume, A. C.
will not confess.

In all these Instances (the Matter so falling out of it self, for the
Argument enforces it not) the thing is true, but not therefore true, because
the dissenting Parties agree in it, or because the adverse Part Confesses it.
Yet least the Jesuit, or A. C. for him, farther to deceive the weak, should
infer that this Rule in so many Instances is true, and false in none, but
that one concerning Baptism among the Donatists, and therefore the Argument is
true ut plerumque, as for the most, and that therefore it is the safest way to
believe that which dissenting Parties agree on; I will lay down some other
Particulars of as great Consequence, as any can be in, or about Christian
Religion. And if in them A. C. or any Jesuit dare say, that it is safest to
believe as the dissenting Parties agree, or as the adverse Party confesses, I
dare say he shall be an Heretic in the highest degree, if not an Infidel.

And First, where the Question was betwixt the Ortbodox, and the Arrian,
whether the Son of God were Punct. 1.
consubstantiall with the Father. The Orthodox said he was (...) of the same
substance. The Arrian came within a Letter of the Truth, and said he was (...)
of like substance. Now he that says, he is of the same substance, confesses
he is of like substance, and more, that is, Identity of Substance; for
Identity contains in it all Degrees of likeness, and more. But he that
acknowledges, and believes, that He is of like nature, and no more, denies the
Identity: Therefore if this Rule be true, That it is safest to believe that, in
which the dissenting Parties agree, or which the Adverse Part Confesses, (which
A. C. makes such great vaunt of) then it is safest A. C. p. 64. 65.
for a Christian to believe that Christ is of like nature with God the Father,
and be free from Belief, that He is Consubstantiall with him, which yet is
Concluded by the Con. Nicen. Fides vel Symbolum in fine Council.
Council of Nice as necessary to Salvation, and the Contrary Condemned for
Damnable Heresy.

Secondly, in the Question about the Resurrection, Punct. 2.
between the Orthodoxe, and diverse Gross Saturninus, Basilides, Carpocrates,
Cerinthus, Valentinus, Cerdon, Apelles, etc. Tertull. de praescript. advers.
Haret. c. 46. 48. 49. 51. etc.
Heretics of old, and the Anabaptists and Libertines of late. For all, or
most of these dissenting Parties agree, that there ought to be a Resurrection
from sin to a state of Grace, and that this Resurrection only is meant in
diverse Passages of holy Scripture, together with the Life of the Soul, which
they are content to say is Immortal. But Libertini rident spe^ omnem quam de
Resurrectione habemus, idque jam nobis evenisse dicunt, quod adhuc expectamus,
etc. ut Homo sciat Animam suam Spiritum immortalem esse perpe^ viventem in
Coelis, etc. Calv. instructione advers. Libertinos c. 22. princ. Sunt etiam
hodie Libertini qui eam irrident, and Resurrectionem quae tractatur in
Scripturis, tantum ad Animas re^runt. Pet. Matt. Loc. Com. Class. 3. Ca. 15. Nu
4.
they utterly deny any Resurrection of the Body after Death: So with them that
Article of the Creed is gone. Now then if any man will guide his Faith by this
Rule of A. C. The Consent of dissenting Parties, or the Confession of the
Adverse Part, he must deny the Resurrection of the Body from the Grave to
Glory, and believe none but that of the Soul, from sin to Grace, which the
Adversaries Confess, and in which the Dissenting Parties agree. Punct. 3.


Thirdly, in the great Dispute of all others, about the Unity of the Godhead.
All dissenting parties, Jew, Turk, and Christian: Among Christians Orthodoxe,
and Anti-Trinitarian of old: And in these later times, Orthodoxe and Socinian
(that Horrid and mighty monster of all Heresies) agree in this, That there is
but one God. And I hope it is as necessary to believe one God our Father, as
one Church our Mother. Now will A. C. say here, it is safest believing as the
dissenting Parties agree, or as the Adverse Parties Confess, namely, That
there is but one God, and so deny the Trinity, and therewith the Son of God
the Savior of the world?

Fourthly, in a Point as Fundamental in the Faith, as Punct. 4.
this, Namely, whether Christ be true and very God. For which very Point, most
of the Hebr. 11. 37. Cyrillus Alexandrinut male audivit, quod Ammonium Martyrem
appellavit, quem constitit temeritatis poenas dedisse, and non Necessitate
negandi Christi in tormentis esse mortuum. Socr. Hist. Eccl. L. 7. c. 14.
Martyrs in the Primitive Church laid down their lives. The dissenting Parties
here were the Orthodoxe Believers, who affirm He is both God and Man; for so
our Creed teaches us: And all those Heretics, which affirm Christ to be Man,
but deny him to be God, as the Optatus L. 4. Cont. Parmen.
Arrians, and Tertul. L. de Prascrip. c. 48.
Carpocratians, and Tertul. Ibid.
Cerinthus, and Tertul. L. de Carne Christi. c. 14.
Hebion, with others: and at this day the Si ad Jesus Christi respicias
Essentiam at que Naturam, non nisi Hominem eum fuisse constanter affirma^us.
Volkelius Lib. 3. de Religione Christiana. cap. 1.
Socinians. These dissenting Parties agree fully and clearly, That Christ is
Man. Well then. Dare A. C. stick to his Rule here, and say it is safest for a
Christian in this great Point of Faith to govern his Belief by the Consent of
these dissenting Parties, or the Confession and acknowledgement of the Adverse
Party, and so settle his Belief, that Christ is a mere Man, and not God? I
hope he dares not. So then, this Rule, To Resolve a man's Faith into that, in
which the Dissenting Parties agree, or which the Adverse Part confesses, is as
often false, as true. And false in as Great, if not Greater Matters, then
those, in which it is true. And where it is true, A. C. and his fellows dare
not govern themselves by it, the Church of Rome condemning those things which
that Rule proves. And yet while they talk of Certainty, nay of Infallibility,
(less will not serve their turns) they are driven to make use of such poor
shifts as these, which have no certainty at all of Truth in them, but infer
falsehood and Truth alike. And yet for this also men will be so weak, or so
wilful, as to be seduced by them.

I told you. 35. Nu. 2. fine.
before, That the force of the preceding Argument lies upon two things. The one
expressed, and that is past; the other upon the Bye, which comes now to be
handled: And that is your continual poor Outcry against us, That we cannot
be saved, because we are out of the Church. Sure if I thought I were out, I
would get in as fast as I could. For we confess as well as you, That Extra
Ecclesiam veminem Vivificat Spiritus Sanctus. S. Aug. Epist. 5 0. ad finem.
Field. L. 1. de Eccles. c. 13. Vna est Fidelium Vniversalis Ecclesia, extra
quam nullus salvatur. Conc Lateran. Can. 1. And yet even there, there is no
mention of the Roman Church.
Out of the Catholic Church of Christ there is no Salvation. But what do you
mean by Out of the Church? Sure out of the And so does A. C. too: Out of the
Catholi^ Roman Church there is no Possibility of Salva^on. A C. p. 65.
Roman Church. Why but the Roman Church and the Church of England are but two
distinct members of that Catholic Church which is spread over the face of the
earth. Therefore Rome is not the House where the Church dwells, but Rome it
self, as well as other Particular Churches, dwells in this great Universal
House, unless you will shut up the Church in Rome, as the Donatists did in
Afric. I come a little lower. Rome and other National Churches are in this
Universal Catholic House as so many And Daughter Sion was God's own phrase
of old of the Church, Isa. 1. 8. (...). Hyppol. Orat. de Consum. mundi. Et
omnis Ecclesia Virgo appellata est. S. Aug. Tr. 13. in S. Ioh.
Daughters, to whom (under Christ) the care of the Household is committed by God
the Father, and the Catholic Church the Mother of all Christians. Rome, as an
Elder Sister, For Christ was to be preached to all Nations, but that Preaching
was to begin at Jerusalem, S. Luc. 24. 47. according to the Prophecy, Mic. 4.
2. And the Disciples were first called Christians at Antioch, Act. 11. 26. And
therefore there was a Church there, before ever S. Peter came thence to settle
One at Rome. Nor is it an Opinion destitute either of Authority, or
Probability, That the Faith of Christ was preached, and the Sacraments
administered here in England, before any settlement of a Church in Rome. For S.
Gildas the Ancientest monument we have, and whom the Romanists themselves
reverence, says expressly, That the Religion of Christ was received in
Britannie, Tempore (ut scimus) summo Tiberii Caesaris, etc. In the later time
of Tiberius Caesar, Gildas deexcid. Brit. whereas S. Peter kept in Iewrie long
after Tiberius his death. Therefore the first Conversion of this Island to the
Faith, was not by S. Peter. Nor from Rome, which was not then a Church. Against
this Rich. Broughton in his Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain, Centur.
1. C. 8.. 4. says expressly: That the Protestants do freely acknowledge, that
this Clause of the time of Tiberius (tempore summo Tiberii Caesaris) is wanting
in other Copies of that holy Writer, and namely in that which was set forth by
Pol. Virgil, and others. Whereas first these words are express in a most
fair, and ancient Manuscript of Gildas to be seen in St. Rob. Cotton's Study,
if any doubt it. Secondly, these words are as express in the printed Edition
of Gildas by Polyd. Virg. which Edition was printed at London, An. 1525. and
was never reprinted since. Thirdly, these words are as express in the Edition
of Gildas, by Io. Ioselin. printed at London also, An. 1568. And this falsehood
of Broughton is so much the more foul, because he boasts (Proetat. to his
Reader, fine.) That he has seen, and dilig^ntly perused the most, and best
Monuments and Antiquities extant, etc. For if he did not see and peruse these,
he is vainly false to say it: if he did see them, he is most maliciously false
to belie them. And lastly, whereas he says: The Protestants themselves
confess so much, I must believe he is as false in this as in the former, till
he name the Protestants to me, which do confess it. And when he does, he shall
gain but this from me, That those Protestants which confessed it, were
mistaken. For the thing is mistaken.
but not the Eldest neither, had a great Care committed unto her, in, and from
the prime times of the Church, and to her Bishop in Her: but at this time (to
let pass many brawles that have formerly been in the House) England, and some
other Sisters of hers are fallen out in the Family. What then? Will the Father,
and the Mother, God, and the Church, cast one Child out, because another is
angry with it? Or when did Christ give that power to an Elder Sister, that She,
and her Steward, the Bishop there, should thrust out what Child she pleased?
Especially when sh^e her self is justly accused to have given the Offense that
is taken in the House? Or will not both Father, and Mother be sharper to Her
for this unjust and unnatural usage of her younger Sisters, but their dear
Children? Nay, is it not the next way to make them turn her out of doors,
that is so unnatural to the rest? It is well for all Christian men and
Churches, that the Father and Mother of them are not so cursed as some would
have them. And Salvation need not be feared of any dutiful Child, nor Outing
from the Church, because this Elder Sisters faults are discovered in the House,
and she grown froward for it against them that complained. But as Children
cry when they are waked out of sleep, so do you, and wrangle with all that
come near you. And Return of Untruths upon M. Jewel. Art. 4. Untruth 105.
Stapleton confesses, That ye were in a dead sleep, and overmuch rest, when
the Protestants stole upon you. Now if you can prove that Rome is properly The
For I am sure there is a Roman Church, that is but a Particular. Bellarm. L.
4. de Romans Pont. c. 4. And then you must either show me another Roman Church,
which is The Catholic: Or you must show how One and the same Roman Church is
in different Respects or Relations A Particular, and yet The Catholic. Which
is not yet done. And I do not say, A Particular, and yet A Cathol^ke; B^t A
Particular, and yet The Catholic Church: For so you speak. For that which
Card. Peron has, That the Roman Church is the Catholic Causally, because it
infuses Universality into all the whole Body of the Catholic Church, can, I
think, satisfy no man that reads it. That a Particular should infuse
Universality into an Universal. Peron L. 4. of his Reply. c. 9.
Catholic Church it self (as you commonly call it) speak out and prove it. In
the mean time, you may Mark this too, if you will, and it seems you do; for
here you forget not what the Bishop said to you.


F. The Lady which doubted (said the Bishop to me) may be better saved in it,
then you.


B. I said so indeed. Mark that too. Where yet by the way, these words (Then
you) do not suppose Person Romans 14. 4.
no man, that has another Master to stand or fall to. But they suppose Calling
and Sufficiency in the Person. Then you, that is, Then any man of your Calling
and knowledge, of whom more is required. And then no question of the truth of
this speech, That that Person may better be saved (that is easier) then you,
then any man that knows so much of truth, and opposes against it, as you, and
others of your Calling do. How far you know Truth other men may judge by your
Proofs, and Causes of knowledge; but how far you oppose Truth known to you,
that is within, and no man can know, but God and yourselves. Howsoever, where
the Foundation is but held, there for Caeteram turbam non intelligendi
vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam facit. S. Aug. cont. Fund. c. 4.

(...). Naz. Orat. 21. Omission of Inquiry many times saves the People.


ordinary men, it is not the vivacity of understanding, but the simplicity of
Beleiving, that makes them safe. For S. Augustine speaks there, of men in the
Church; and no Haeretickes in respect of the Profession of sundry Divine
Verities which they still retain in common with right Believers, etc. do
still pertain to the Church Field. L. 1. de Eccles. c. 14. Potest aliquis
Ecclesiae membrum esse secundum quid, qui tamen simpliciter non est. Haereticus
recedens a Fide, non dimittitur ut Paganus, sed propter Baptismi Characterem,
punitur ut transfuga, and excommunicationis gladio Spiritualiter occiditur.
Stapl. Contro. 1. q. 2. A. 3. Notabili. 3.

The Apostle pronounces some gone out. S. Ioh, 2. 19. from the fellowship of
sound Beleivers, when as yet the Christian Religion they had not utterly cast
off. In like sense and meaning, throughout all Ages, Haeretikes have justly
been hated as Branches cut off from the true Vine, yet only so far forth cut
off, as the Haeresies have extended. For both Haeresie, and many other Crimes
which wholly sever from God, do sever from the Church of God, but in part
only. Hooker. L. 5. Eccles. Pol.. 68.


man can be said simply to be Out of the Visible Church, that is Baptized, and
holds the Foundation. And as it is the simplicity of beleiving, that makes them
safe, yea safest, so is it sometimes, A quickness of Understanding, that
loving it self, and some byrespects too well, makes men take up an unsafe way
about the Faith. So that there is no question, but many were saved in corrupted
times of the Church, when their Ipsis Magi^ pereuntibus: (...) forte ante ^tem
resipuer^ Luth. de Sov. Arbit.

Haeresiarchae pl^s peccant, quam alii qui Haeresin aliquam sunt secuti.
Supplem. Tho q. 99. A. 4. c


Leaders, unless they repented before death, were lost. And Si mihi videretur
unus and idem Haereticus, and Haereticis credens homo, etc. S. Aug. L. 1. de
Util. Cred. c. 1.
S. Augustine's Rule will be true, That in all Corruptions of the Church,
there will ever be a difference between an Heretic, and a plain well
meaning man that is misted, and believes an Heretic. Yet here let me add
this for fuller Expression: This must be understood of such Leaders and
Heretics as S. Mat. 18. 17. Qui oppugnant Regulam Veritatis. S. Aug. L. de
Haeresibus: versus finem.
refuse to hear the Churches Instruction, or to use all the means they can,
to come to the knowledge of the Truth. For else, if they do this, Err they
may, but Heretics they are not, as is most manifest in Cyprianus Beatus, and
Martyr. S. Aug. L. 1. de Bapt. cont. Donatist. c. 18.
S. Cyprian's Case of Rebaptization. For here, though he were a maine Leader in
that Error, yet all the whole Church grant him safe; and his Donatista vero
(qui de Cypriani Authoritate fibi carnaliter blandiuntur. S. Aug. L. 1. de
Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 18.) nimi^ ^iseri, and, nisi se corrigant; a semetipsis
omnino da^ati, qui hoc in tanto viro eligunt imitari. Ibid. c. 19.
Followers in danger of damnation. But if any man be a Leader, and a Teaching
Heretic, and will add Rei falsitatis (circa accusatum Coecilianum) deprehensi
Donatistae, pertina^ dissentione firmata, schisma in Haeres^ verterunt. S. Aug.
L. de Haeres. Haer. 69. Et Tales sub Vocabulo Christiano doctrinae resistunt
Christianae. S. Aug. L. 18. (...) Civ. Dei. c. 51. prin.
Schism to Heresy, and be obstinate in both, he without repentance must
needs be lost, while many that succeed him in the Error only, without the
Obstinacy, may be saved. For, they which are missed, and swayed with the
Current of the time, hold the same Errors with their misleaders, yet not
supinely, but with all sober diligence to find out the Truth: Not
pertinaciously, but with all readiness to submit to Truth, so soon as it
shall be found: Not uncharitably, but retaining an internal Communion with
the Whole Visible Church of Christ in the Fundamental Points of Faith, and
performance of Acts of Charity, not factiously, but with an earnest desire, and
a sincere endeavor (as their Place, and Calling gives them means) for a
perfect Union, and Communion of all Christians in Truth as well as Peace. I say
these, however misled, are neither Heretics, nor Schismatics in the sight of
God, and are therefore in a state of Salvation. And were not this true
Divinity, it would go very hard with many poor Christian souls, that have
been, and are misled on all sides in these and other Distracted times of the
Church of Christ; Whereas thus habituated in themselves, they are, by God's
mercy, safe in the midst of those waves, in which their Misleaders perish. I
pray you Mark this, and so, by God's Grace will I. For our Qui et fi ipsi
postmodum ad Ecclesiam r^eunt restituere tamen eos, and seoum re^are non
possunt, qui ab iis seducti sunt, and foris morte praeventi extra Ecclesiam
sine Communicatione and pace perierunt, quorum Animae in die Iudicii de ipsorum
manibus expetentur, qui perditionis Authors, and duces extiterunt. S. Cypr. L.
2. Epist. 1.
reckoning will be heavier, if we thus mislead on either side, then theirs
that follow us. But I see, I must look to my self; for you are secure: For,


F. D. White (said I) has secured me, that none of our Errors be damnable,
so long as we hold them not against our Conscience. And I hold none against my
Conscience.


B. It seems then you have two Securities: White's Assertion, and your
Conscience. What White gave you, I cannot tell of my self; nor, as things
stand, may I rest upon your Relation. It may be you use him no better then you
do me. And sure it is so. For I have since spoken with D. White the late
Reverend B. of Ely, and he avovvs this, and no other Answer. He was asked in
the Conserence between you, Whether Popish Errors were Fundamental? To this
he gave an Answer, by Distinction of the Persons which held and professed the
Errors: Namely, that the Errors were Fundamental reductive, by a Reducement,
if they which embraced them, did pertinaciously adhere to them, having
sufficient means to be better informed: Nay farther, that they were materially
and in the very kind and Nature of them, Leaven, Dross, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
Hay, and Stubble. Yet he thought withal, that such as were misled by
education, or long custom, or over valuing the Sovereignty of the Roman
Church, and did in simplicity of heart embrace them, might by their general
Repentance, and Faith in the Merit of Christ, attended with Charity, and other
Uertues, find mercy at Gods hands. But that he should say signanter, and
expressly, That none either of yours, or your Fellows Errors were damnable, so
long as you hold them not against Conscience, that he utterly disavowes. You
delivered nothing to extort such a Confession from him. And for your self, he
could observe but small love of Truth, few signs of Grace in you (as be told
me:) Yet he will not presume to judge you, or your salvation; It is the S John
12. 48.
Word of Christ that must judge you at the later day. For your Conscience, you
are the happier in your Error, that you hold nothing against it, especially if
you speak not against it, while you say so. But this no man can know, but your
self, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
For no man knows the thoughts of a man, but the Spirit of a man that is
within him, to which I leave you.

To this A. C. replies. And first he grants, that did not signanter and
expressly say these precise A. C. p 67.
words. So then here is his plain Confession. Not these precise words. Secondly
he says, that neither did D. White signanter and expressly make the Answer
above mentioned. But to this I can make no Answer, since I was not present at
the first or second Conference. Thirdly, he says that the Reason which moved
the Jesuit, to say D. White had secured him, was because the said Doctor had
granted in his first Conference with the Jesuit these things following. First,
That there must be one or other Church continually visible. Though D. White,
late Bishop of Ely, was more able to Answer for himself, yet since he is now
dead, and is thus drawn into this Discourse, I shall, as well as I can, do
him the right, which his Learning, and Pains for the Church deserved. And to
this first, I grant as well as he, That there must be some one Church or other
continually visible: Or that the Militant Church of Christ must always be
visible in some Particulars, or Particular at least (express it as you
please.) For if this be not so, then there may be a time in which there shall
not any where be a visible Profession of the Name of Christ; which is contrary
to the whole scope and promise of the Gospel.

Well. What then? Why then A. C. adds, That D. White confessed that this
Visible Church had in all ages A. C. p. 67.
taught that unchanged Faith of Christ in all Points Fundamental. D. White had
reason to say that the Visible Church taught so; but that this or that
Particular Visible Church did so teach, sure D. White affirmed not; unless in
case the whole Visible Church of Christ were reduced to one Particular only.

But suppose this. What then? Why then A. C. tells D. White being urged to
assign such a Church, expressly A. C. p. 67.
granted he could assign none different from the Roman, which held in all
ages all Points Fundamental. Now here I would feign know what A. C. means by
a Church different from the Roman. For if he mean different in Place; It Is
easy to affirm the Greek Church (which as has. 9.
before been prooved) has ever held, and taught the Foundation in the midst
of all her Pressures. And if he mean differenti^ Doctrinall Things, and those
about the Faith, he cannot assign the Church of Rome for olding them in all
ages. But if he mean different in the Foundation it self, the Creed; then his
urging to assign a Church, is void, be it Rome, or any other For if any other
Church shall thus differ from Rome, or Rome from it self, as to deny this
Foundation, it does not, it cannot remain a Differing Church, sed transit in
Non Ecclesiam, but passes away into No-Church, upon the Denial of the Creed.

Now what A. C. means, he expresses not, nor Premises, he would infer. For
hence he tells us, he gathered that D. Whito's Opinion A. C. p. 67.
was, That the Roman Church held and taught in all ages unchanged Faith in all
Fundamental Points, and did not in any age err in any Point Fundamental.
This is very well. For A. Cs. confesses, he did but gather, that this was
Doctor White's Opinion. And what if he gathered that, which grew not there, nor
thence? For suppose all the Premises true, yet no Cartrope can draw this
Conclusion out of them. And then all A. C's. labor's lost. For grant some one
Church or other must still be Visible. And grant that this Visible Church held
all Fundamentals of the Faith in all ages. And grant again that D. White could
not assign any Church differing from the Roman, that did this; Yet this will
not follow, that therefore the Roman did it. And that because there is more in
the Conclusion, then in the Premises. For A. Cs. A. C. p. 67.
Conclusion is, That in D. White's Opinion the Roman Church held and taught in
all ages unchanged Faith in all Fundamental Points, And so far perhaps the
Conclusion may stand, taking Fundamental Points in their literal sense, as
they are expressed in Creedes, and approved Councels. But then he adds, And
did not in any age err in any Point Fundamental. Now this can never follow
out of the Premises before laid down. For say some one Church or other may
still be Visible; And that Visible Church hold all Fundamental Points in all
Ages; And no man be able to name another Church different from the Church of
Rome, that has done this; yet it follows not therefore, That the Church of
Rome did not err in any age in any Point Fundamental. For a Church may hold
the Fundamental Point Literally, and as long as it stays there, be without
controlle, and yet err grossly, dangerously, nay damnably in the Exposition of
it. And this is the Church of Romes case. For most true it is, it has in all
ages maintained the Faith unchanged in the Expression of the Articles
themselves; but it has in the exposition both of Creeds, and Councels, quite
changed, and lost the sense, and the meaning of some of them. So the Faith is
in many things changed both for life and belief, and yet seems the same. Now
that which deceives the world is, That because the Bark is the same, men
think this old decayed Tree, is as sound as it was at first, and not
weather-beaten in any age. But when they can make me believe that Painting is
true Beauty, I Will believe too, that Rome is not only sound, but beautiful.

But A. C. goes on and tells us, That hereupon the Jesuit asked, whether Errors
in Points not Fundamental were damnable? And that D. White answered, they were
not, unless they A. C. p. 67.
were held against conscience. It Is true, that Error in Points not Fundamental
is the more damnable, the more it is held against conscience: But it is true
too, that Error in Points not Fundamental may be damnable to some men, though
they hold it not against their conscience. As namely, when they hold an Error
in some Dangerous Points, which grate upon the Foundation, and yet will neither
seek the means to know the Truth, nor accept and believe Truth when it is
known, especially being men able to Judge; which I fear, is the case of too
many at this day in the Roman Church. Out of all which A. C. tells us, The
Jesuit collected, that D. White's Opinion was, That the Roman Church held all
A. C. p. 68.
Points Fundamental, and only erred in Points not Fundamental, which he
accounted not damnable, so long as he did not hold them against his Conscience;
And that thereupon he said D. White had secured him, since he held no Faith
different from the Roman, nor contrary to his Conscience. Here again, we
have but A Cs and the Jesuits Collection: But if the Jesuit, or A. C. will
collect amiss, who can help it?

I have spoken before in this very Paragraph to all A. C. as supposing them
true: and set down what is to be answered to them, in case they prove so. But
now it is most apparent by D. White's Answer, set down before. 37. N. 1.
at large, that he never said, that the Church of Rome erred only in Points
not Fundamental, as A. C. would have it. But that he said the contrary,
Namely, that some errors of that Church were Fundamental reductive, by a
Reducement, if they which embraced them, did pertinaciously adhere to them,
having sufficient means of information. And again expressly, That he did not
say, that none were damnable, so long as they were not held against Conscience.
Now where is A. C's. Collection? For if a Jesuit, or any other may collect
Propositions, which are not granted him, nay contrary to those which are
granted him, he may infer what he please. And he is much too blame, that
will not infer a strong Conclusion for himself, that may frame his own
Premises, say his Adversary what he will. And just so does A. C. bring in his
Conclusion, to secure himself of Ialvation, because he holds no Faith but the
Roman, nor that Contrary to his Conscience: Presupposing it granted, that the
Church of Rome erres only in not Fundamentals, and such Errors not Damnable,
which is absolutely and clearly denied by D. White. To this A. C. says
nothing, but that D. White did not give this Answer A. C. p. 67.
at the Conference. I was not present at the Conference between them, so, to
that I can say nothing as a witness. But I think all that knew D. White, will
believe his affirmation as soon as the Jesuits; To say no more. And whereas
A. C. referres to the Relation of the Conference between D. White and M.
Fisher, A. C. p. 67.
most true it is, there A. C. in his relation of that Conference. p. 26.
D. White is charged to have made that Answer twice. But all this rests upon
the credit of A. C. only (For For so it is said in the Titlepage, by A. C.
he is said to have made that Relation too, as well as this.) And against his
Credit I must engage D. Whites, who has avowed another Answer, as. 37. Nu. 1.
NUMBER. 8.
before is set down.

And since A. C. relates to that Conference, which it seems he makes some
good account of, I shall here once for all take occasion to assure the Reader,
That most of the Points of Moment in that Conference with D. White, are
repeated again and again, and urged in this Conference, or the Relation of A.
C. and are here answered by me. For instance: In the Relation of the first
Conference, the Jesuit takes on him to prove (1)
the Unwritten Word of God out of 2. These. 2. page 15. And so he does in the
Relation of this Conference with me. page 50. In the first he stands upon it,
That the Protestants (2)
upon their Principles cannot hold, that all Fundamental points of Faith are
contained in the Creed. page 19. And so he does in this. page 46. In the first,
he would feign through (3)
M. Roger's sides wound the Church of England, as if she were unsettled in the
Article of Christ's Descent into Hell. page 21 And he endeavors the same in
this. page 46. In the first he is very earnest to prove, That the Schism was
made by the Protestants. page 23. And he is as earnest for (4)
it in this. page 55. In the first he lays it for a Ground, That Corruption of
Manners is no just Cause of separation (5)
from Faith, or Church. page 24. And the same Ground he lays in this. page 55.
In the first he will have it, That the (6)
Holy Ghost gives continual, and Infallible Assistance to the Church. page 24.
And just so will he have it in this. p 53. In the first he makes much ado
about the Errig of the (7)
Greek Church. page 28. And as much makes he in this. page 44. In the first,
he makes a great noise about the (8)
place in S. Augustine, Ferendus est disputator errans etc. page 18. and 24.
And so does he here also, page 45. In the first he would make his Proselytes
believe, That (9)
he and his Cause have mighty advantage by that Sentence of S. Bernard, It Is
intolerable Pride: And that of S. Augustine, It Is insolent madness to oppose
the Doctrine, or Practice of the Catholic Church. page 25. And twice he is at
the same Art in this. page 56. and. 73. In the first, he (10)
tells us, That Postquam discessionem a toto mundo facere coacti sumus. Calv.
Epist. 141.
Calvin confesses, That in the Reformation, there was a Departure from the
whole world. page 25. And though I conceive Calvine spoke this but of the Roman
world, and of no Uoluntary, but a forced Departure, and wrote this to
Melancthon, to work Unity among the Reformers, not any way to blast the
Reformation: Yet we must hear of it again in this. page 56. But over and
above the rest, one Place with his own gloss upon (11)
it pleases him extremely, It Is out of S. Athanasius his Creed. That whosoever
does not hold it entire, that is, (says he) in all Points: and Inviolate, that
is, (says he) in the true, unchanged, and uncorrupted sense proposed unto us
by the Pastors of his Catholic Church, without doubt he shall perish
everlastingly. This he has almost verbatim in the first, page 20. And in the
Epistle of the Publisher of that Relation to the Reader, under the Name of VV.
I. and then again the very same in this, if not with some more disadvantage to
himself page 70. And perhaps (had I leisure to search after them) more Points
then these. Now the Reasons which moved me to set down these Particulars
thus distinctly, are two. The One, that whereas the In the beginning of the
Conference set out by A. C.
Jesuit affirms, that in a second Conference all the speech was about
Particular matters, and little or nothing about the maine, and great general
Point of a Continual, Infallible, Uisible Church, in which that Lady required
satisfaction, and that therefore this third Conference was held; It may hereby
appear that the most material, both Points, and Proofs are upon the matter
the very same in all the three Conferences, though little be related of the
second Conference by A. C. as appears in the Preface of the Publisher VV. I.
to the Reader. So this tends to nothing but Ostentation, and show. The Other
is, that Whereas these men boast so much of their Cause and their Ability to
defend it; It cannot but appear by this, and their handling of other Points in
Divinity, that they labor indeed, but no otherwise, then like an Horse in a
Mill; round about in the same Circle; no farther at night then at noone; The
same thing over and over again; from Tu es Petrus, to Pasce oves, from thou
art Peter, to Do thou feed my Sheep; And back again the same way.


F. The Lady asked, Whether she might be saved in the Protestant Faith? Upon my
soul (said the Bishop) you may. Upon my soul (said I) there is but one saving
Faith, and that is the Roman.


B. So (it seems) I was confident for the Faith professed have taken the
salvation of another upon my soul. And sure I had reason of this my
Confidence. For to believe the Scripture, and the Creeds; to believe these in
the sense of the Ancient Primitive Church; To receive the four great General
Councels, so much magnified by Antiquity; To believe all Points of Doctrine,
generally received as Fundamental in the Church of Christ, is a Faith, in
which to live and die, cannot but give salvation. And therefore I went upon a
sure ground in the adventure of my soul upon that Faith. Besides, in all the
Points of Doctrine that are contioverted between us, I would feign see any one
Point maintained by the Church of England, that can be proved to depart from
the Foundation. You have many dangerous Errors about the very Foundation, in
that which you call the Roman Faith: But there I leave you to look to your
own soul, and theirs whom you seduce. Yet this is true too, That there is but
one saving Faith. But then every thing which you call De Fide, of the Faith,
because some Council or other has defined it, is not such a Breach from that
One saving Faith, as that he which expressly believes it not, nay, as that he
which believes the Contrary, is excluded from Salvation, so his S. 22. Nu. 5.
Disobedience there while offer no violence to the Peace of the Church, nor the
Charity, which ought to be among Christians. And Multa sunt de side, quae non
sunt absolute necessaria as Salutem. Bellar. L. 3. de Eccles. Milit. c. 14..
Quinto, si esset.
Bellarmine is forced to grant this, There are many Things de Fide, which are
not absolutely necessary to salvation. Wald. Doct. Fid. l. 2. Ar. 2. 23.
Therefore there is a Latitude in the Faith, especially in reference to
different men's salvation. To set. 38. Nu. 8.
Bounds to this, and strictly to define it for particular men, Just thus far
you must believe in every Particular, or incur Damnation, is no work for my
Pen. These two things I am sure of. One, That your peremptory establishing of
so many things, that are remote Deductions from the Foundation, to be believed
as Matters of Faith necessary to Salvation, has, with other Errors, lost the
Peace and Unity of the Church, for which you will one day Answer. And the
other, That you of Rome are gone farther from the Foundation of this One saving
Faith, then can ever be proved, we of the Church of England have done.

But here A. C. bestirres himself, finding that he A. C. p. 68.
And first he answers, That it is Pope Pelagius the second thought it was
sufficient. For when the Bishops of Istria deserted his Communion in Causa
trium Capitulorum. He first gives them an Account of his Faith, that he
embraced that Faith, which the Apostles had delivered, and the four Synods
explicated. And then he adds: Ubi ergo de Fidei firmitate nulla vobis poterit
quastio, vel suspicis generari, etc. Council. To. 4. p. 473. Edit. Paris. So
then, that Pope thought there could be no question made, or suspicion had of
any man's faith, that professed that Faith, which the Apostles delivered, as
it is explicated by those Great Councels. And yet now with A. C. it is not
sufficient. Or else he holds the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in such r^spect
of persons (contrary to the Apostles Rule, S. James 2. 12.) as that profession
of it, which was sufficient for Pope Pelagius, shall not be sufficient for the
poor Protestants.
not sufficient to beget a Confidence in this Case, to say we believe the
Scriptures and the Creeds, in the same sense which the Ancient Primitive Church
believed them, etc. Most true, if we only say, and do not believe. And let
them which believe not, while they say they do, look to it on all sides, for
on all sides I doubt not, but such there are. But if we do say it, you are
bound in Charity to believe us, (unless you can prove the Contrary) For I know
no other proof to men of any Point of Faith, but Confession of it, and
Subscription to it. And for these particulars, we have made the one, and done
the other. So it is no bare saying, but you have all the proof that can be had,
or that ever any Church required: For how far that Belief, or any other
sinkes into a man's heart, is for none to judge but God.

Next, A. C Answers, That if to say this be a sufficient Cause of Confidence,
he marvels why I make such A. C. p. 68.
difficulty to be Confident of the Salvation of Roman Catholics, who believe
all this in a fair better manner then Protestants do. Truly, to say this, is
not a sufficient cause, but to say and believe it, is. And to take off A. Cs.
wonder why I make difficulty, great difficulty of the salvation of Roman
Catholics, who, he says, believe all this, and in a far better manner then
Protestants do. I must be bold to tell him, That Romanists are so far from
believing this in a better manner then we do, that, under favor, they believe
not part of this at all. And this is most manifest: For the Romanists dare not
believe, but as the Roman Church believes: And the Roman Church at this day
does not believe the Scripture and the Creeds in the sense, in the which the
Ancient Primitive Church received them. For the Primitive Church never
interpreted Christ's descent into Hell to be no lower then Limbus Patrum. Nor
did it acknowledge a Purgatory in a sidepart of Hell. Nor did it ever interpret
away half the Sacrament from Christ's own Institutior, which to break,
Stapl. Return of Untruths upon B. Jewel. Art. 2. Untruth 49 fol. 44.
Stapleton confesses expressly, is a damnable Error; Nor make the Intention of
the Priest of the Essence of Baptism; Nor believe worship due to Images; Nor
dream of a Transubstantiation, which the Learned of the Roman Party dare not
understand properly, for a change of one substance into another, for then they
must grant that Christ's real and true Body is made of the Bread, and the
Bread changed into it, which is properly Transubstantiation Nor yet can they
express it in a credible way, as appears by Est totalis Conversio substantiae
Panis and Vini in Corpus and Sanguin^m Domini. Bellar. L. 3. de Euchar. c. 18..
1. Substantia^ (...) (...) Transubstantiatio, sicut Ecclesia appellat. Greg. de
Valen. To. 4 (...) q. 3. punct. 3. Now you shall see what stuff Bellarmine
makes (...) (...) Conversio Panis in Corpus Domini, nec est Productiva, n^
Conservat^ sed Adductiva. Nam Corpus Domini praeexistit ante Conversionem,
(...) non sub spe^iebus Panis. Conversio igitur non facit ut Corpus Christ
simpliciter esse incipiat, sed ut incipiat esse sub speciebus Panis (...)
Bellar. L. 3. de Euchar. c. 18.. Ex his colligimus. So upon the whole matter,
there shall be a total Conversion of the Bread into the Body of Christ: And
yet there shall be no Conversion at all, but a Bringing of the Body of Christ
before praeexistent, to be now under the Species of Bread, where before it was
not. Now this is merely Translocation, it is not Transubstantiation. And I would
have Bellarm. or any Jesuit for him, show where Conversio Adductiva is read in
any good Author. But when Bellar. comes to the Recognition of his works, upon
this place he tells us, That some excepted against him, as if this were
Translocation, rather then Transubstantiation So in this charge upon him I am
not alone. And feign would be shift off this, but it will not be. But while he
is at it, he runs into two pretty Errors, beside the maine one. The first is,
That the body of Christ in the Sacrament begins to be, non ut in loco, sed ut
substantia sub Accidentibut. Now let Bellarm. or A. C. for him give me any one
Instance, That a Bodily Substance under Accidents, is, or can be any where, and
not ut in loco, as in some place, and he says somewhat. The second is, That
some Fathers and others seem (he says, but I see it not) to approve of his
manner of speech of Conversion by Adduction. And he tells us for this, that
Bonaventure says expressly, In Transubstantiatione fit, ut quod erat alicubi,
sine sui mutations sit alibi. Now first here is nothing that can be drawn with
Cart-ropes to prove conversion by Adduction. For if there be Conversion, there
must be Change: And this is fine mutatione sui. And secondly, I would feign
know, how a Body that is alicubi, shall be alibi, without change of it self,
and yet that this shall be rather Transubstantiation then Translocation.
Besides, it is a Phrase of very sour Consequence (should a man squ^eze it)
which Bellar. uses there even in his Recognition. Panis transit in Corpus
Christi.
Bellarmines struggle about it, which yet in the end cannot be, or be called
Transubstantiation, and is that, which at this day is a A Scandal, and a
grievous one. For this gross Opinion was but confirmed in the Council of
Lateran: It had got some footing in the Church, the two blind ages before. For
Berengarius was made recant in such Terms, as the Romanists are put to their
shifts to excuse. Bellar. L. 3. de Euchar. c. 24.. Quartum Argumentum. For he
says expressly: Corpus Christi posse in Sacramento sensualiter manibus
Sacerdotum tractari, and frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri. Decr. par. 3. de
Consecratione. Did. 2. C. Ego Berengarius. Now this Recantation was made about
the year 1050. And the Council of Lateran was in the year 1215. Bet^ene this
gross Recantation of Berengarius, and that Council, the great Learned
Physician and Philosopher Averroes lived, and took scandal at the whole Body
of Christian Religion for this. And thus he says: Mundum peragravi, etc. and
non vidi Sectam deteriorem, aut magis fatuam Christiana, quia Deum, quem
colunt, dentibus devorans. Espeneaeus L. 4. de Euchar. adoratione. c. 3.
scandal to both Jew and Gentile, and the Church of God.

NUMBER. 4. A. C. p. 69.
For all this A. C. goes on, and tells us, That they (of Rome) cannot be proved
to depart from the Foundation so much as Protestants do. So then, We have at
last a Confession here, that they may be prooved to depart from the Foundation,
though not so much, or so far as the Protestants do. I do not mean to
answer this, and prove that the Romanists do depart as far, or farther from
the Foundation, then the Protestants. for then A. C. would take me at the same
lift, and say I granted a departure too. Briefly therefore, I have named here
more Instances then one; In some of which they have erred in the Foundation, or
very near it. But for the Church of England, let A. C. instance, if he can, in
any one point, in which She has departed from the Foundation. Well, that A. C.
will do; For he says, The Protestants err against the Foundation, by denying
Infallible A. C. p. 69.
Authority to a General Council, for that is in effect to deny Infallibility
to the whole Catholic Church.. 33. Consid. 4. Nu 1.
No, there is a great deal of difference between a General Council and the
whole Body of the Church. And when a General Council erres, as the second of
Ephesus did, out of that great Catholic Body another may be gathered, as was
then that of Chalcedon, to do the Truth of Christ that right, which belongs
unto it. Now if it were all one in effect to say, a General Council can err,
and that the Whole Church can err; there were no Remedy left against a
General Council erring;. 33. Consid. 7. Nu. 4.
which is your Case now at Rome, and which has thrust the Church of Christ
into more straits then any one thing besides. But I know where you would be. A
General Council is Infallible, if it be confirmed by the Pope; and the Pope
he is Infallible, else he could not make the Council so. And they which deny
the Councels Infallibility, deny the Pope's which confirms it. And then indeed
the Protestants depart a mighty way from this great Foundation of Faith, the
Popes Infallibility But God be thanked, this is only from the Foundation of the
present Roman Faith, (as A. C. and the Jesuit call it) not from any
Foundation of the Christian A. C. p. 68.
Faith, to which this Infallibility was ever a stranger.

From Answering, A. C. falls to asking Questions. A multis Interrogationibus
simul, by asking many things at once, to see if any one may make me slip into a
Confession inconvenient. And first, he asks, How Protestants, admitting no
Infallible Rule of Faith, but A. C. p. 69
Scripture only, can be infallibly sure that they believe the same entire
Scripture, and Creed, and the Four first General Councels, and in the same
incorrupted sense in which the Primitive Church believed? It Is just as I said.
Here are many Questions in one, and I might easily be caught, would I answer in
gross to them all together; but I shall go more distinctly to work. Well
then; I admit no ordinary Rule left now in the Church, of Divine and Infallible
Verity, and so of Faith, but the Scripture. And I believe the entire Scripture,
first by the Tradition of the Church; Then by all other credible Motives, as is
before expressed: And last of all, by the light which shines in the Scripture
it self, kindled in Believers by the Spirit of God. Then I believe the entire
Scripture Infallibly, and by a Divine Infallibility am sure of my Object: Then
am I as sure of my Believing, which is the Act of my Faith, conversant about
this Object: For no man believes, but he must needs know in himself whether he
believes or no, and wherein, and how far he doubts. Then I am infallibly
assured of my Creed, the Tradition of the Church inducing, and the Scripture
confirming it. And I believe both Scripture and Creed in the same uncorrupted
sense which the Primitive Church believed them, and am sure that I do so
Believe them, because I cross not in my Belief any thing delivered by the
Primitive Church: And this again I am sure of, because I take the Belief of
the Primitive Church, as it is expressed, and delivered by the Councels, and
Ancient Fathers of those times. As for the Four Councels, if A. C. ask how I
have them, that is, their true and entire Copies? I answer, I have them from
the Church-Tradition only: And that is Assurance enough for this. And so I am
fully as sure as A. C. is, or can make me. But if he ask how I know
infallibly I believe them in their true and uncorrupted sense? Then I answer,
There Is no man of knowledge, but he can understand the plain and simple
Decision expressed in the Canon of the Council, where it is necessary to
Salvation. And for all other debates in the Councels, or Decisions of it in
things of less moment, it is not necessary that I, or any man else, have
Infallible Assurance of them; though I think it is possible to attain, even in
these things, as much Infallible Assurance of the uncorrupted sense of them, as
A. C. or any other Jesuits have.

A C. asks again, What Text of Scripture tells, That Protestants now living do
believe all this, or that all A. C. p. 69.
this is expressed in those particular Bibles, or in the Writings of the
Fathers and Councels, which now are in the Protestants hands? Good God! Whither
will not a strong Bias carry even a learned Judgment! Why, what Consequence
is there in this? The Scripture now is the only Ordinary Infallible Rule of
Divine Faith, Therefore the Protestants cannot believe all this before
mentioned, unless a particular Text of Scripture can be showed for it. Is it
not made plain before, how we believe Scripture to be Scripture, and by Divine
and Infallible Faith too, and yet we can show no particular Text for it?
Beside, were a Text of Scripture necessary, yet that is for the Object and the
thing which we are to believe, not for the Act of our believing, which is
merely from God, and in our selves, and for which we cannot have any Warrant
from, or by Scripture, more then that we ought to believe; but not that we in
our particular do believe. The rest of the Question is far more inconsequent,
Whether all this be expressed in the Bibles which are in Protestants hands?
For first, we have the same Bibles in our hands, which the Romanists have in
theirs; Therefore either we are Infallibly sure of ours, or they are not
Infallibly sure of theirs; For we have the same Book, and delivered unto us by
the same hands; and all is expressed in ours, that is in theirs. Nor is it of
moment in this Argument, that we account more Apocryphal then they do; For I
will acknowledge every Fundamental point of Faith as proveable out of the
Canon, as we account it, as if the Apocryphal were added unto it. Secondly, A.
C. is here extremely out of himself, and his way; For his Question is, Whether
all this be expressed in the Bibles which we have? All this? All what? why,
before there is mention of the four General Councels; and in this Question
here is mention of the Writings of the Fathers and the Councels. And what, will
A. C. look that we must show a Text of Scripture for all this, and an express
one too? I thought, and do so still, it is enough to ground Belief upon N^n
potest aliquid certum esse certitudire Fidei, nisi aut immediate contineatur in
verbo Dei: aut ex verbo Dei per evidentem Consequentiam deducatur. Bellar. L.
3. de Iustif. c. 8. 2.
Necessary Consequence out of Scripture, as well as upon express Text. And
this I am sure of, that neither I, nor any man else is bound to believe any
thing as Necessary to Salvation, be it found in Councels, or Fathers, or where
you will, Nec ego Nicaenum nec tu debes Ariminense tanquam praejudicaturus
proferre Concilium. Nec ego hujus Authoritate, nec tu illius detineris.
Scripturarum Au thoritatibus, etc. Res cum re, Causa cum causa, Ratio cum
ratione concertet. S. Aug. L. 3. cont. Maximinum. c. 14. Testimonia Divina in
fundamento ponenda sunt. S. Aug. L. 20. de Civ. Dei. c. 1. Quia principia hujus
Doctrinae per Revelationens habentur, etc. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad 2. Solis
Scriptur arum Libris Canonicis did^ hunc honorem defer, ut nullum Authorem
little in scribendo errasse aliquid firmissime credam. Alios autem ita lego, ut
quant alibet sanctitate, doctrinaque praepolleant, non ideo verum putem, quod
ipsi it a senserunt, vel scripserunt. S. Aug. Epist. 19.
if it be Contrary to express Scripture, or necessary Consequence from it. And
for the Copies of the Councels and Fathers which are in our hands, they are the
same that are in the hands of the Romanists, and delivered to Posterity by
Tradition of the Church, which is abundantly sufficient to warrant that. So we
are as Infallibly sure of this as it is possible for any of you to be. Nay, are
we not more sure? For we have used no Index Expurgatorius upon the Writings
of the Fathers Sixtus Senens. in Epist. ad Pium quintum.
, as you have done: So that Posterity hereafter must thank us for true Copies
both of Councels and Fathers, and not you.

But A. C goes on, and asks still, Whether Protestants be Infallibly sure
that they rightly understand the A. C. p. 69.
sense of all which is expressed in their Books, according to that which was
understood by the Primitive Church, and the Fathers which were present at the
four first General Councels? A. C. may ask everlastingly, if he will ask
the same over and over again. For I pray wherein does this differ from his.
38. N. 5.
first Question, save only that here Scripture is not named? For there the
Question was of our Assurance of the Incorrupted sense: And therefore thither I
refer you for Answer, with this, That it is not required either of us, or of
them, that there should be had an Infallible assurance that we rightly
understand the sense of all that is expressed in our Books. And I think I may
believe without sin, that there are many things expressed in these Books
(for they are theirs as well as ours) which A. C. and his Fellows have not
Infallible assurance that they rightly understand in the sense of the Primitive
Church, or the Fathers present in those Councels. And if they say, yes, they
can, because when a difficulty crosses them, they believe them in the Churches
sense: Yet that dry shift will not serve. For belief of them in the Churches
sense is an Implicit Faith; but it works nothing distinctly upon the
understanding. For by an Implicit Faith no man can be infallibly assured that
he does rightly understand the sense (which is A. Cs. Question) whatever
perhaps he may rightly believe. And an Implicit Faith, and an Infallible
understanding of the same thing under the same Considerations cannot possibly
stand together in the same man at the same time.

A. C. has not done asking yet: But he would farther know, Whether Protestants
can be Infallibly sure that all and only those points which Protestants
account A. C. p. 69.
Fundamental and necessary to be expressly known by all, were so accounted
by the Primitive Church? Truly, Unity in the Faith is very Considerable in the
Church. And in this the Protestants agree, and as Vnisormely as you, and have
as Infallible Assurance as you can have, of all points which they account
Fundamental; yea, and of all, which were so accounted by the Primitive Church.
And these are but the Creed, and some few, and those Immediate deductions from
it. And Tert. praescript. adversus Haeres. c. 13. etc
Tertullian and Ruffin. in Symb.
Ruffinus upon the very Clause of the Catholic Church to decypher it, make a
recital only of the Fundamental Points of Faith. And for the first of these,
the Creed, you see what the sense of the Primitive Church was by that famous
and known place of Et neque qui valde potens est in dicendo ex Ecclesiae
Praefectis alia ab his dicet etc. Neque debilis in dicendo hanc Traditionem
imminuet. Quum euim una and cadem fides sit, ueque is, qui multum de ea dicere
potest, plusquam oportet, dicit, neque qui parum, ipsam imminuit. Irenae. L. 1.
Adv. Haer. c. 2. and 3. Et S. Basil. Sermon. de Fide To. 2. p. 195. Edit Bafil.
1505. Vna and Immobilis Regula. etc. Tert. de veland. Virg. c. 1.
Irenaeus: where after he had recited the Creed, as the Epitome or Brief of
the Faith, he adds, That none of the Governors of the Church, be they never so
potent to Express themselves, can say alia ab his, other things from these:
Nor none so weak in Expression as to diminish this Tradition. For since the
Faith is One, and the same, He that can say much of it, says no more then he
ought, Nor does he diminish it, that can say but little. And in this the
Protestants all agree. And for the second the immediate Deductions, they are
not formally Fundamental for all men, but for such Quantum ad prima
Credibilia, quae sunt Articuli Fidei, tenetur homo Explicit credere, sicut and
tenetur habere fidem. Quantum autem ad alia Credibilia etc. non tenetur
Explicit credere, nisi quando hoc ci constiterit in Doctrina Fidei contineri.
Tho. 2. 2 q. 2. A. 5. c.

Potest quis Errare Credendo oppositum Alicui Articulo subtle, ad cujas sidem
explicitam non ^mnis teuentur. Holkot. in 1. sent q. 1. ad quartum.


as are able to make or understand them. And for others, it is enough if they do
not obstinat^ly or Schismatically refuse them, after they are once revealed
Indeed you account many things Fundamental, which were never so accounted in
any sense by the Primitive Church; such as are all the Decrees of General
Councels, which may be all true, but can never be all Fundamental in the
Faith. For it is not in the power of Resolutio Ocbam est, Quod nec tota
Ecclesiae, nec Concilium Generale, n^ suminus Pontifex potest facere Arti^ulum
quod non suit Articulus. Articulus cuim est ex co solo, qui a Deo Revelatu^
est. Almain. in 3. sent. D. 15. q. unica. Co^clus. 4. Dub 3.
the whole Church, much less of a General Council, to make any thing
Fundamental in the Faith, that is not contained in the Letter or sense, of
that common Faith, which was once given (and but once for all) to the Saints,
S. Lude 3. But if it be A. C's. meaning to call S. Jude verse. 3.
for an Infallible Assurance of all such Points of Faith as are Decreed by
General Councels: Then I must be bold to tell him: All those Decrees are not
necessary to all men's salvation. Neither do the Romanists themselves agree in
all such determined Points of Faith; Be they determined by Councels, or by
Popes. For Instance. After those Books (which we account Apochryphall were
Council. Trid, Sess 4.
defined to be Canonical, and an Anathema pronounced in the Case, Six.
Senens. Biblioth Sanct. L. 1.
Sixtus Senensis makes scruple of some of them. And after Non est necessario
credendum Det^minatis per Sum Pontificem etc. Aimain. in 3. sent. D. 24. q.
unica Conclus. 6. Dubio. 6. fine.
Pope Leo the tenth had defined the Pope to be above a General Council, yet
many Roman Catholics defend the Contrary; And so do all the Sorbonists at
this very day. Therefore if these be Fundamental in the Faith, the Romanists
differ one from another in the Faith, nay, in the Fundamentals of the Faith;
And therefore cannot have Infallible Assurance of them. Nor is there that Unity
in the Faith amongst them, which they so much, and so often boast of. For what
Scripture is Canonical is a great point of Faith. And I believe they will not
now Confess, That the Popes power over a General Council is a small one. And
so let A. C. look to his own Infallible Assurance of Fundamentals in the
Faith: for ours, God be thanked, is well. And since he is pleased to call for a
particular Text of Scripture to prove all and every thing of this nature,
which is ridiculous in it self, and unreasonable to demand (as has been. 38.
N. 6.
showed) yet when he shall be pleased to bring forth but a particular known
Tradition, to prove all and every thing of this on their side, it will then be
perhaps time for him to call for, and for us to give farther Answer about
particular Texts of Scripture.

After all this Questioning A. C. inferres. That I had need seek out some
other Infallible Rule, and means, by A. C. p. 69.
which I may know these things infalli^ly, or else that I have no reason to be
so confident, as to adventure my soul, that one may be saved living and dying
in the Protestant faith. How weak this Inference is, will easily appear, by
that which I have already said to the premises; And yet I have somewhat left to
say to this Inference also. And first, I have lived, and shall (God willing)
dye in the Faith of Christ, as it was professed in the Ancient Primitive
Church, and as it is professed in the present Church of England. And for the
Rule which governes me herein, if I cannot be confident for my soul upon the
Scripture, and the Primitive Church expounding and declaring it, I will be
confident upon no other. And secondly, I have all the reason in the world to be
confident upon this Rule, for this can never deceive me; Another (that very
other which A. C. proposes) A. C. p. 72.
namely, the Faith of the Roman Church) may. Therefore with A. C's. leave, I
will venture my salvation upon the Rule aforesaid, and not trouble my self to
seek another of man's making, to the forsaking or weakening of this which God
has given me. For I know they Committed two Evils, which forsook the
Fountain of Living Waters, to hew out to themselves Cisternes, broken
Cisternes, that can hold no Water. Ier. 2. For Ier. 2. 13.
here is the Evil of Desertion of that which was right: and the Evil of a bad
Choice, of that which is hewed out with much pains and care, and is after
Vselesse and Unprofitable. But then Thirdly, I find that a Romanist may make
use of an Implicit Faith (at his pleasure,) but a Protestant must know all
these things Infallibly; that is A. Cs. word, Know these things; Why, but is it
not enough to believe them? Now God forbid. What shall become of Millions of
poor Christians in the world, which cannot know all these things, much less
know them Infallibly? Well, I would not have A. C. weaken the Belief of poor
Christians in this fashion. But for things that may be known as well as
believed, nor I, nor any other shall need forsake the Scripture, to seek
another Rule to direct either our Conscience, or our Confidence.

In the next place A. C. observes, That the Jesuit was as confident for his
part, with this difference, that he had sufficient A. C. p. 69.
reason of his Confidence, but I had not for mine. This is said with the
Confidence of a Jesuit, but as yet, but said. Therefore he goes on and tells
us, That the Jesuit A. C. p. 70.
had reason of h^s Confidence, out of express Scriptures, and Fathers, and the
Infallible Authority of the Church. Now truly, Express Scriptures, with A. Cs.
patience, he has not named one that is express, nor can he. And the few
Scriptures which he has alleged, I have. 25. N. 5.. 33. Confid. 3. N. 1.
Answered, and so have others. As for Fathers, he has named very few, and
with what success, I leave to the Readers judgment. And for the Authority of
the Catholic Church, I hold it. 21. N. 5.
as Infallible as he, and, upon better Grounds, but not so of a General
Council, which he here means, as appears A. C. p. 71.
after. And for my part I must yet think (and I doubt A. C. will not be able
to disprove it) that express Scripture, and Fathers, and the Authority of the
Church will rather be found proofs to warrant my Confidence, then his. Yea,
but A. C. says, That I did not then tax the Jesuit with any A. C. p. 70.
rashness. It may be so. Nor did he me. So there we parted even. Yea but he
says again, that Iacknowledge there is but one saving Faith, and that the Lady
might be saved in the Roman faith, which was all the Jesuit took upon his
soul. Why, but if this be all, I will confess it again. The first, That there
is but one faith, I confess with S. Paul, Esphes. 4. And the other, that the
Lady might be Ephesians. 4. 5.
saved in the Roman Faith or Church. 35. N. 1.
, I confess with that charity which S. Paul teaches me, Namely, to leave all
men, especially the weaker both sex and sort, which hold the Foundation, to
stand or fall to their own Master, Romans 4. And this is no mistaken charity. As
for Romans 14. 4.
the Inference which you would draw out of it, that is answered at large. 35. N.
2. A. C. p. 70.
already. But then A. C. adds, that I say, but without any proof, that the
Romanists have many dangerous errors, but that I neither tell them which they
be, nor why I think them dangerous, but that I leave them to look to their
own souls; which (he says) they do, and have no cause to doubt. How much
the Jesuit and A. C. have said in this Conference, without any solid proof, I
again submit to judgment, as also what proofs I have made. If in this very
place I have added none, it is because I had made proof enough of the self
samething. 33. N. 12:. 35. N. 7.
before. Where lest he should want and call for proof again, I have plainly
laid together, some of the many Dangerous errors which are charged upon them.
So I tell you which, at least, some of which they be: and their very naming,
will show their danger. And if I did remit you to look to your own souls, I
hope there was no offense in that, if you do it, and do it so that you have no
cause to doubt. And the reason why you doubt not, A. C. tells us, is, Because A.
C. p. 70.
you h^d no new devise of your own, or any other men's, nor any thing contrary
to Scripture, but all most conformable to Scriptures interpreted by Union,
Consent of Fathers, and Definitions of Councels. Indeed, if this were true, you
had little cause to doubt in point of your Belief. But the Truth is, you do
hold new devises of your own, which the Primitive Church was never acquainted
with. And some of those so far from being conformable, as that they are
little less then contradictory to Scripture. In which particulars, and diverse
others, the Scriptures are not interpreted by Union, or Consent of Fathers, or
Definitions of Councels, unless perhaps by some late Councels, packed of
purpose to do that ill service. I have given instances enough. 33. N 12. 35 N.
7.
before, yet some you shall have here, lest you should say again, that I
affirm without proof or Instance. Conc. Lateran. can 1.
I pray then whose devise was Conc. Constan. Sess. 13.
transubstantiation? And whose Communion under one kind? Propter Haeresin Rex
non solum Regno privatur, sed and filii ejus a Regni successione pelluntur.
Simanca Cathol. Instit. tit 9.. 259. Absoluti sunt Subditi a Debito
fid^litatis: Et custodes arcium etc. Ibid. tit. 46.. 73. It was stiffly avowed
not long since by -- That no man could thew any one Roman Catholic of note
and learning, that affirmed it lawful to kill Kings upon any pretext
whatsoever. Now surely he that says (as Romanists do) that it is lawful to
Depose a King, says upon the matter it is lawful to kill him. For Kings do
not use to be long-lived after their Deposition: And they sel^ome stay till
grief break their hearts. They have Assassinates ready to make thorter work.
But since he is so confident; Ple give him an Author of note, and very Learned,
that speaks it out. Rex debet occidi, si solicitet populum colere Idola, vel
deserere Legem Dei. Tostat, in 2 Samuel c. 11. q. 17. And he makes bold with
Scripture to prove it. Deuteronomy. 13. And Emmanuel Sa in his Aphorisms. Verbo
Tyrannus, yet he is so moderate, that he would not have this done, till he be
Sentenced: but then Quisquis potest fieri Executor. Mariana is far worse, For
he says it is lawful to kill him, postquam a paucis Seditiosts, sed doctis
caeperit Tyrannus appellari. L. 1. de Rege. and Reg. Iustitutione c. 6. Yea but
Mariana was disclaimed for this by the Jesuits. Yea but for all that, there
was an Apology printed in Italy: An. 1610. permissu Superiorum. And there it is
said, They were all Enemies of the Holy name of Jesus, (...) condemned Mariana
for any such Doctrine. As for Testatus no Sentence has touched upon him at all
for it.
And whose Deposition and Vnthron ing, nay killing of Princes, and the like, if
they were not yours. For I dare say, and am able to prove, there is none of
these but are rather contrary then conformable to Scripture. Neither is A. C.
or any Jesuit able to show any Corpus Christi veraciter esse in Eucharistia ex
Evangelio habemus: Conversionem vero Panis in Corpus Christi Evangelium non
explicavit, sed express ab Ecclesia accepimus. Cajetan in Them. 3. q. 75. Art.
1.
Scripture interpreted by Union or De Transubstantiatione Panis in Corpus
Christi rara est in antiquis Scriptoribus mentio. Alph. a Castro L. 8. advers.
Haer. Uerbo Indulgentia.
Consent of Fathers of the Primitive Church, to prove any one of these: Nor
any Definition of Ancient Councels, but only Conc. Lateran. Can. 1.
Lateran for Transubstantiation, and that of Conc. Constan. Sess. 13.
Constance for the Eucharist in one kind; which two are modern at least,
far downward from the Primitive Church, and have done more mischief to the
Church, by those their Determinations, then will be cured I fear in many
Generations. So whatever A. C. thinks, yet I had reason enough to leave the
Jesuit to look to his own soul.

But A. C. having as it seems little new matter, is at the same again, and
over and over it must go, That there is but one saving faith: That this one
Faith was A. C. p. 70.
once the Roman. And that I granted, one might be saved in the Roman Faith.
To all which I have abundantly answered. 35. N. 1. and. 38. N 10.
before: Marry then he inferres, That he sees not how we can have our souls
saved, without we entirely hold this faith, being the Catholic faith, which S.
Athanasius says, unless a man hold entirely he cannot be saved. Now here
again is more in the Conclusion then in the premises, and so the Inference
fails. For say there was a time in which the Catholic and the Roman Faith
were one, and such a time there was, when the Roman faith was Catholic and
famous through the world. Romans 1. Yet it does not follow, since the Council.
Triden. Bulla Pii 4 super forma Iuramenti professionis Fidei ad finem Council.
Trident.
Council Romans 1. 8.
of Trent has added a new Creed, that this Roman faith is now the Catholic.
For it has added extranea, things without the Foundation, disputable, if not
false Conclusions to the faith. So that now a man may Believe the whole and
entire Catholic Faith, even as S. Athanasius requires, and yet justly refuse
for dross a great part of that which is now And this is so much the more
Remark^ble, if it be true which Thomas has. S. (...) non composuisse hanc
^nifestationem Fide^, per m^dum Symboli, sed per modum Doctrinae, etc. Et
deinde Authoritate summi Pontificis receptam esse, ut quasi Regula fidei
habeatur. The. 2. 2ae. q. 1. A. 10. ad 3. Symbolo Apost^rum addita sunt duo
alia, scilicet Symbolum Nicaenum, and S. Athanasii, admajorem Fidei
Explanationem. Biel. in 3. Sent. D. 25. q. unica. A. 1. D.
the Roman Faith. And Athanasius himself, as if he meant to arm the
Catholic Faith against all corrupting additions, has in the beginning of his
S. Athanas. in Symb.
Creed, these words, This is the Catholic Faith, This and no other: This and
no Other, then here follows. And again at the end of his Creed, And yet the
Council of Trent having added twelve new Articles, says thus o^ them also.
Haec est vera Catholica Fide^, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, etc. Bulla
(...) 4. super forma Iuramenti professionis Fidei. In sine Council. Triaent.
This is the Catholic Faith, Integram Fid^i Veritatem, ejus Doctrina breviter
continet. Tho. 2. (...). q. 1. A. 10. ad 3.
This and no more then is here delivered (always presupposing the Apostles
Creed, as Athanasius did) and this is the largest of all Creeds. So that if A.
C. would wipe his eyes from the mist which rises about Tyber, he might see how
our souls may be saved, believing the Catholic Faith, and that entire,
without the Addition of Roman Leaven. But if he cannot, or, I doubt, will not
see it, it is enough that by God's Grace we see it. And therefore once more I
leave him and his, to look to their own souls.

After this A. C. is busy in unfolding the meaning great Father of the Church,
S. Athanasius. And A. C. p. 70.
he tells us, That he says in his Creed, that without doubt every man shall
perish, that holds not the Catholic Faith entire (that is, says A. C. in
every point of it) and inviolate (that is, in the right sense, and for the true
formal reason of divine Revelation, sufficiently applied to our understanding
by the Infallible Authority of the Catholic Church proposing to us by her
Pastors this Revelation. Well, we shall not differ much from A. C. in
expounding the meaning of S. Athanasius; yet some few things I shall here
observe. And first, I agree that he which hopes for salvation, must believe the
Catholic Faith whole and entire in every point. Next, I agree, that he must
likewise hold it inviolate, if to believe it in the right sense, be to hold it
inviolate. But by A. Cs. leave, the Believing of the Creed in the right sense,
is comprehended in the first branch: The keeping of it whole and entire. For no
man can properly be said to believe the Whole Creed, that believes not the
Whole Sense, as well as the Letter of it; and as entirely. But thirdly, for the
word inviolate, it is indeed used by him that translated Athanasius. But the
Father's own words are: That he that will be saved must keep the Faith (...).
Now (...), is the sound and entire Faith. And it cannot be a sound Faith,
unless the Sense be as whole and entire as the Letter of the Creed. And (...)
is compounded of the privative particle ((...)) and (...), which is, reproach
or infamy. So that (...) signifies the holding of the entire Faith in such
holiness of life and conversation, as is without all infamy and reproach. That
is, as our English renders that Creed exceeding well: Which Faith unless a man
do keep whole and Sic Ecclesia dicitur (...), Ephesians. 5. 27. and in veteri
Glossario, Immaculatus, (...).
undefiled, even with such a life as Momus himself shall not be able to carpe
at. So Athanasius (who certainly was passing able to express himself in his
own language) in the beginning of that his Creed requires, That we keep it
entire, without diminution: and undefiled, without blame: And at the end, that
we believe it faithfully, without wavering. But [Inviolate] is the mistaken
word of the old Interpreter, and with no great knowledge made use of by A. C.
And then fourthly, though this be true Divinity, that he which hopes for
salvation, must believe the whole Creed, and in the right sense too (if he be
able to comprehend it) yet I take the true and first meaning of Inviolate
[could Athanasius his word (...) have signified so] not to be the holding of
the true sense, but not to offer violence, or a forced sense or meaning upon
the Creed, which every man does not, that yet believes it not in a true sense.
For not to believe the true sense of the Creed, is one thing. But it is quite
another, to force a wrong sense upon it. Fifthly, a reason would be given also,
why A. C. is so earnest for the whole faith, and bawkes the word which goes
with it, which is holy or undefiled. For Athanasius does alike exclude from
salvation those which keep not the Catholic Faith holy, as well as these
which keep it not whole. I doubt this was to spare many of his. 33. Nu. 6.
holy Fathers, the Popes, who were as far as any (the very lewdest among men
without exception) from keeping the Catholic Faith holy. Sixthly, I agree to
the next part of his Exposition, That a man that will be saved must believe the
whole Creed for the true formal reason of divine Revelation. For upon the
Truth of God thus revealed by himself, lies the Infallible certainty of the
Christian Faith. But I do not grant, that this is within the Compass of S.
Athanasius his word (...), nor of the word Inviolate. But in that respect it is
a mere strain of A. C. And then last^y, though the whole Catholic Church be
sufficient in applying this to us and our Belief, not our Understanding, which
A. C. is at A. C. p. 70.
again, yet Infallible She is not, in the proposal of this Revelation to us
by every of her Pastors. Some whereof amongst you, as well as others, neglect,
or forget at least to feed Christ's sheep, as Christ and his Church has fed
them.

But now that A. C. has taught us (as you see) the Athanasius, in the next
place he tells us, A. C. p. 70.
That if we did believe any one Article, we finding the same formal Reason in
all, and applied sufficiently by the same means to all) would easily believe
all. Why surely we do not believe any one Article only, but all the Articles
of the Christian Faith; And we believe them for the same formal Reason in all,
namely, Because they are revealed from and by God, and sufficiently applied in
his Word, and by his Churches Ministration. But so long as they do not believe
all in this sort (says A. C.) Look you; He A. C. p. 70.
tells us we do not believe all, when we profess we do. Is this man become as
God, that he can better tell what we believe, them we our selves? Surely we do
believe all, and in that sort too: Though, I believe, were S. Athanasius
himself alive again, and a plain man should come to him, and tell him he
believed his Creed in all and every particular; he would admit him for a good
Catholic Christian, though he were not able to express to him the formal
reason of that his belief. Yea but (says A. C.) while they will, as all
Heretics do, make choice of what they will, and what they A. C. p. 70.
will not believe, without relying upon the Infallible Authority of the
Catholic Church, they cannot have that one saving Faith in any one Article.
Why, but whatsoever Heretics do, we are not such, nor do we so. For they
which believe all the Articles (as once again I tell you, we do) make no
choice; And we do rely upon the Infallible Authority of the Word of God, and
the whole Catholic Church; And therefore we both can have, and have that one
saving Faith which believes all the Articles entirely, though we cannot believe
that any particular Church is infallible.

And yet again A. C. will not thus be satisfied, but on he goes, and adds,
That although we believe the same A. C. p. 71.
truth which other good Catholics do in some Articles, yet not believing them
for the same formal reason of Divine Revelation sufficiently applied by
Infallible Church Authority, etc. we cannot be said to have one and the same
Infallible and Divine Faith which other good Catholic Christians have, who
believe the Articles for this formal Reason, sufficiently made known to them,
not by their own fancy, nor the fallible Authority of humane deductions, but
by the Infallible Authority of the Church of God. If A. C. will still say the
samething, I must still give the same answer. First, he confesses we believe
the same Truth in some Articles (I pray mark his phrase) the same Truth in
some Articles with other good Catholic Christians: so far his pen has told
Truth against his will: for he does not (I wot well) intend to call us
Catholics, and yet his pen being truer then himself, has let it fall. For
the word (other) cannot be so used as here it is, but that we, as well as they,
must be good Catholics: For he that shall say, the old Romans were valiant, as
well as other men, supposes the Romans to be valiant men; And he that shall
say, The Protestants believe some Articles; as well as other good Catholics,
must in propriety of speech suppose them to be good Catholics. Secondly, as we
do believe those some Articles, so do we believe them, and all other Articles
of Faith, for the same formal reason, and so applied, as but just. 38. Nu. 13.
before I have expressed. Nor do we believe any one Article of Faith by our own
fancy, or by fallible Authority of humane deductions; but next to the
Infallible Authority of God's Word, we are guided by his Church. But then A. C.
steps into a Conclusion, whither we cannot A. C. p. 71.
follow him: For he says, that the Articles to be believed must be
sufficiently made known unto us by the Infallible Authority of the Church of
God, that is, of men Infallibly assisted by the Spirit of God, as all lawfully
called, continued, and confirmed General Councels are assisted. That the whole
Church. 21. Nu. 5.
of God is infallibly assisted by the Spirit of God, so that it cannot by any
error fall away totally from Christ the Foundation, I make no doubt. For if it
could, the gates of hell had prevailed against it, which, our Savior assures
me, S. Matthew. 16. they shall never be able to do. Matthew. 16. 18.
But that all General Councels, be they never so lawfully called, continued,
and confirmed, have Infallible Assistance, I utterly deny. It Is true, that a
General Council de post facto, after it is ended, and admitted by the whole
Church, is then Infallible, for it cannot err in that which it has already
clearly and truly determined without Error. But that a General Council a
part ante, when it first sits down and continues to deliberate, may truly be
said to be Infallible in all its afterdeterminations, whatsoever they shall be,
I utterly deny. And it may be it was not without cunning that A. C. shuffled
these words together, Called, Continued, and Confirmed; for be it never so
lawfully called, and continued, it may err. But after it is confirmed, that is,
admitted by the whole Church, then being found true, it is also Infallible,
that is, it deceives no man. For so all Truth is, and is to us, when it is once
known to be Truth. But then many times that Truth, which being known is
necessary and Infallible, was before both contingent and fallible in the way of
proving it, and to us. And so here, a General Council is a most probable, but
yet a fallible way of inducing Truth, though the Truth once induced may be
(after it is found) necessary and Infallible. And so likewise the very Council
it self for that particular in which it has concluded Truth. But A. C. must
both speak and mean of a Council set down to deliberate, or else he says
nothing.

Now hence A. C. gathers, That though everything defined to be a Divine Truth
in General Councels is not absolutely A. C. p. 71.
necessary to be expressly known and actually believed (as some other Truths
are) by all sorts: yet no man may (after knowledge that they are thus defined)
doubt deliberately, much less obstinately deny the Truth of any thing so
defined. Well, in this Collection of A. C. First we have this granted, That
every thing defined in General Councels is not absolutely necessary to be
expressly known, and actually believed by all sorts of men. And this no
Protestant, that I know, denies. Secondly, it is affirmed, that after
knowledge, that these Truths are thus defined, no man may doubt deliberately,
much less obstinately deny any of them. Truly, Obstinately (as the word is now
in common use) carries a fault along with it: And it ought to be far from the
temper of a Christian, to be obstinate against the Definitions of a General
Council. But that he may not upon very probable grounds, in an humble and
peaceable manner deliberately doubt, yea and upon Demonstrative grounds
constantly deny even such Definitions, yet submitting himself and his grounds
to the Church in that or another Council, is that which was never till now
imposed upon Believers. For it is one thing for a man deliberately to doubt, and
modestly to propose his Doubt for satisfaction, which was ever lawful, and is
many times necessary. And quite an other thing for a man upon the pride of his
own Judgment, S. 32. N. 5.
to refuse external Obedience to the Council, which to do, was never
Lawful, nor can ever stand with any Government. For there is all the reason in
the world, the Council should be heard for it self, as well as any such
Recusant whatsoever, and that before a Judge as good as it self at least. And
to what end did S. Aug. L. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 3. Ipsaque plenaria,
sape priora a posterioribus emendari.
S. Augustine say, That one General Council might be amended by another, the
former by the Later, if men might neither deny, nor so much as deliberately
doubt of any of these Truths defined in a General Council? And A. C. should
have done well to have named but one ancient Father of the Primitive Church,
that ever affirmed this. S. 21. N. 5.
For the Assistance which God gives to the whole Church in general, is but in
things simply necessary to eternal Salvation; therefore more then this cannot
be given to a General Council, no nor so much. But then if a General
Council shall forget it self, and take upon it to define things not
absolutely necessary to be expressly known, or actually believed (which are
the things which A. C. here speaks of) In these as neither General Council,
nor the whole Church have infallible Assistance: so have Christians liberty
modestly and peaceably, and upon just grounds, both deliberarely to doubt, and
constantly to deny such the Councels Definitions. For instance, the Council of
Florence first defined Purgatory to be believed as a Divine Truth, and matter
of Faith ( I know the Greeks subscribed that Council, Sed in illo Concilio
Graeca Ecclesiae diu restitit. Pet. Mart. Loc. com. class tertia. c. 9. nu.
13. Et in ultima Sessione istius Concilii Graeci dixerunt se sine Authoritate
totius Ecclesiae Orientalis Quaestionem aliam tractare non posse praeter illam
de processione Sp. Sancti. Postea vero; consentiente Imperatore, tractarunt de
aliis, etc. Florent. Council. Sess. ult. apud Nicolinum. To. 4. p. 894. etc.
This savours of some art to bring in the Greeks. Howsoever this shows enough
against Bellarmine, That all the Greeks did not constantly teach Purgatory, as
he assirms. L. 1. de Purgat. c. 11.. De tertio modo.
if that Council had Consent enough so to define it.) This was afterward
deliberately doubted of by the Protestants; after this as constantly denied,
then confirmed by the Con. Trid. Sess. 25. and in Bulla Pii 4. super forma
Iuramenti professionis Fidei.
Council of Trent, and an Anathema set upon the head of every man that denies
it. And yet scarce any Father within the first three hundred years ever
thought of it.

I know Omnes veteres Graeci and Latini ab ipso tempore Apostoleru^ constanter
docuerunt Purgatorium esse. Bell. L. 1. de Purg. c 11. De tertio modo.
B^llarmine affirms it boldly, That all the Fathers; both Greek and Latin,
did constantly teach Purgatory from the very Apostles times. And where he
brings his Proofs out of the Fathers for this Point, he divides them into two
Rancks. Bell. Lib 1 de Purg c 6. 1.
In the first, he reckons them which affirm Prayer for the dead, as if that
must necessarily infer Purgatory. Whereas most certain it is, that the
Ancients had, and gave other Reasons of Pray^r for the dead, then freeing them
out of any Purgatory. And this is very Learnedly, and at large set down, by
the now Learned la^ (...) (...). In (...) answer to t^ suites Ch^ c. 7 p. 19^.
Primate of (...). But then in the second, he says, there are Sun^ aper^ma
L^ca (...) (...) tribus ubi ^runt Purg^um. Bell. L 1 (...) Purg. c. 6 De inde
sunt.
most manifest places in the Fathers, in which they affirm Purgatory. And he
names there no fewer then two and twenty of the Fathers. A great Jury
certainly, did they give their Ver dict with him. But first, within the three
hundred years after Christ, he names none but, Tertullian, Cyprian, and
Origin. And Tert. L. de Any. c. 17. Internum.
Tertullian speaks expressly of Hell, not of Purgatory. S. Cypr. L 4. (...). 2.
Emendari ^ne.
Cyprian of a Purging to Amendment, which cannot be after this Life. As for
Orig. Lib. 1. (...) cap 6 S. Hieron. in ^nae 3 Bellar. L. de Purg. c. 2.. Por^o
non. S. Aug. L 21. civ. Dei. c. 17
Origin, he, I think indeed was the first Founder of Purgatory; But of such an
One, as I believe Bellarmine dares not affirm. For he thought there was no
Punishment after this life, but Purgatory; and that not only the most impious
men, but even the Divils themselves should be saved, after they had suffered
and been Purged enough. Which is directly contrary to the Word of God
expounded by his S Aug L 21. civ. Dei. c. 17
Church. In the fourth and fifth (the great and Learned Ages of the Church) he
names more, as S. Amb. in Psa. 36. 14.
S. Ambrose. But S. Ambrose says. That some shall be saved, quasi per ignem,
as it were by fire, leaving it as doubtful, what was meant by that Fire, as
the Place it self does, whence it is taken. 1 Cor. 3. 15. S. Hieron in 66.
Isai. sine.
1 Cor. 3. S. Hierome indeed names a Purging by Fire; But it is not very plain,
that he means it after this life. And howsoever, this is most plain, That S.
Hierome is at Credimus, we believe eternal Punishment; but he goes no farther
then Arbitramur, we think there is a Purging. So with him it was Arbitrary;
And therefore sure no Matter of Faith then. And again S. Hieron. L 4 cont.
Pelag. ultra medium.
he says, That some Christians may be saved, post poenas, after some
punishments endured, but he neither tells us Where, nor When. S. S. Basil. in
Isai. 9.
Basil names indeed Purgatory fire; but he relates as uncertainly, to that in 1
Cor. 3. as S. Ambrose does. As for Paulin. Ep^.
Paulinus, he speaks for Prayer for the dead, but not a word of Purgatory. And
the Place in S., Greg. Naz Orat. 39. fine.
Gregory Nazianzen is far from a manifest Place For he speaks there of
Baptism by fire; which is no usual phrase to signify Purgatory. But yet say
that here he does, there is a (...) a fortassis, a peradventure in the words,
which Bellarmine cunningly leaves out. And if it be a Peradventure ye shall
then be Baptized with fire: why then it is at a Peradventure too, that ye shall
not. Now such Casual stuff as this; peradventure you shall, and peradventure
you shall not, is no Expression for things, which are valued to be de fide; and
to be believed as Matters of Faith. Bellarmine goes on with Lact. L. 7. c. 21
Lactantius, but with no better success. For he says indeed, That some men
perstringenturigne, shall be sharply touched by fire. But he speaks of such,
quorum peccata praevaluerunt, whose sins have prevailed. And they in
Bellarmine's Doctrine are for Hell, not Purgatory. As for S. S. Hilar. in Ps.
118. v. 20.
Hilary, he will not come home neither. It Is true, he speaks of a Fire too,
and one that must be endured, but he tells us, it is a Punishment expiandae a
peccatis animae, to purge the soul from sins. Now this will not serve
Bellarmine's turn. For they of Rome teach, That the sins are forgiven here,
and that the Temporal Punishment only remains to be satisfied in Purgatory.
And what need is there then of purging of sins? Lest there should not be
Fathers enough, he reckons in Boethius L. 4. Pros. 4.
Boethius too. But he, though not long before a Convert, yet was so well seen
in this Point, that he goes no farther then Puto, I think that after death
some souls are exercised purgatoria clementia, with a Purgative Clemency. But
Puto, I think it is so, is no expression for Matter of Faith. The two Pregnant
Authorities which seem to come home, are those of Gregory Nyssene, and
Theodoret. But for Theo. in 1 Cor. (...).
Theodoret in Scholiis Graecis (which is the Place Bellarmine quotes) I can
find no such Thing: And manifest it is, Bellarmine Bellarmin. L. 1. de Purgato
c. 4 Ex Graecis habemus.
himself took it but upon trust. And for S. Greg. Nyss. Orat. de Mortuis. p.
1066. Edit. Paris. 1615. Tom. 2. (...) etc. ibid. p. 1067. (...) etc. ibid. p.
1068.
S. Gregory Nyssen, it is true, some places in him seem plain. But then they
are made so doubtful by other Places in him, that I dare not say simply and
roundly, what his Judgment was. For he says, Men must be purged from
Perturbations, and either by Prayers, and Philosophy, or the study of Wisdom,
or by the furnace of Purgatory-fire after this life. And again, That a man
cannot be partaker (...) of the Divine nature, unless the Purging fire does
take away the stains that are in his Soul. And again, That after this life a
Purgatory fire takes away the blots and propensity to evil. And I deny not,
diverse other like places are in him. But first, this is quite another thing
from the Roman Purgatory. For S. Gregory tells us here, that the Purgatory he
means, purges Perturbations, and stains, and blots, and propensity to evil.
Whereas the Purgatory which Rome now teaches, purges not sin, Item definimus,
si ver's poenitentis in Ded eharitate decesserint, antequam dignis poenitentiae
fructibus de Commissis and Omissis satisfecorint, poen^ Purgatorius post mortem
purgari. Council. Floren. circa. Prin. per Bin. Edit. Colon. 1618.
but is only satisfactory by way of punishment for sins already forgiven, but
for which satisfaction was not made before their Death. Secondly, S. Gregory
Nyssen himself seems not obscurely to relate to some other Fire S. Greg. Nyss.
de Anima, and Resur Tom. 2 p. 658.
For he says expressly, That the soul is to be punished, till the Uitiosity
of it be consumed, Purgatorio igne; So the Translation renders it, but in the
Original it is (...), that is, in a fire that sleeps not, which, for ought
appears, may be understood of a Fire that is eternal; whereas the fire
assigned to Purgatory shall cease. Besides S. Gregory says plainly: The Soul
cannot suffer by fire but in the Body; and the Body cannot be with it, till the
Resurrection. Therefore S. Greg. Orat 3. de Resurrect. Christi.
he must needs speak of a fire after the Resurrection; which must be either
the Fire of the General Conflagration, or Hell, Purgatory he cannot mean.
Where, according to the Romish Tenet, the Soul suffers without the Body. The
truth is: Diverse of the Ancient, especially Greeks, which were a little too
much acquainted with Plato's School, No^ expedit philosophari al^s etc. Orig.
L. 6 cont. Celsu^.
philosophized, and disputed upon this, and some other Points with much
Obscurity, and as little Certainty. So upon the whole matter, in the fourth and
fist hundred year, you see here is none that constantly and perspicuously
affirm it And as for S. Augustine he Constat Animas p^rgari post banc vitam.
S. Augustine. Lib. 21. Civ. D^i. c. 24. vide.
said, and Justorum flagella non i^nt post mortem, sed definunt. Et Anima mix
in Paradisum etc. S. Aug. Contr. Foelicia^. c. 15. Et duo tantum loca esse.
etc. S. Aug. Ser. 10. ae verb. Apost. c. 15. Et L. 21. de Civ. Dei. c. 16 fine,
Negat, nisi sit Ignis ille in Consummatione saculi.
unsaid it, and Quari potest etc. S. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 69. Forsitan verum
est etc. S. Aug. L. 21. de Civ. Dei c. 26. Quid S. Paulus senserit 1 Cor. 3. de
Igne illo, malo intelligentiores, and d^ctiores audire. S. Aug. L. de Fide and
Oper. c. 16.
at the last left it doubtful, which had it then been received as a Point of
Faith, he durst not have done. Indeed then in S. Gregory the Great's time, in
the beginning of the sixth Age, Purgatory was grown to some perfection. For S.
S. Greg. in Psalm. 3. Poenitentialem princ.
Gregory himself is at Scio ('it was but at Puto a little before) I know that
some shall be Expiated in Purgatory flames. And therefore I will easily give
Bellarmine all that follow. For after this time Purgatory was found too warm a
business to be suffered to Cool again. And in the after Ages, more were
frighted, then led by proof into the Belief of it.

Now by this we see also, That it could not be a Tradition; For then we might
have traced it by the smoke to the Apostles times. Indeed Bellarm. would have
it such a Tradition. For he tells us out of S. Quod Vniversa tenet Ecclesia,
nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi Authoritate
Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur S. Aug. L. 4. de Bapt. cont. Donatist.
c. 24 Nec ad Summ^s Pontifices referri potest. Addit Melch. Canus L. 3: de
Locis c. 4. prin.
Augustine, That that is rightly believed to be delivered by Apostolical
Authority, which the whole Church holds, and has ever held, and yet is not
Instituted by any Council. And he adds, That Purgatory is such a Tradition,
so Constantly held in the whole Church, Greek, and Latin. And Non invenimus
initium hujus dogmatis, sed omnes veteres Graeci and Latini. etc. Bellar. L. 1.
de Purg. c. 11.. De tertio mode.
that we do not find any beginning of this Belief. Where I shall take the
boldness to Observe these three things. First, that the Doctrine of Purgatory
was not held ever in the whole Catholic Church of Christ. And this appears by
the proofs of L. 1. de Purg. c. 6.
Bellarmine himself produced, and I have. 38. N. 16.
before examined. For there it is manifest, that scarce two Fathers directly
affirm the belief of Purgatory for full six hundred years after Christ.
Therefore Purgatory is no Matter of Faith, nor to be believed as descending
from Apostolical Authority by S. Augustine's Rule. Secondly, that we can find
a beginning of this Doctrine, and a Beginner too, namely Origin. And neither
Bellarmine, nor any other is able to show any one Father of the Church that
said it before him. Therefore Purgatory is not to be believed as a Doctrine
delivered by Apostolical Authority by Bellarmines own rule; For it has a
Beginning. Thirdly, I observe too, that Bellarmine cannot well tell where to
lay the foundation of Purgatory, that it may be safe. For first, he labors to
found it upon Scripture. To that end Bellar. L. 1. de Purgat. c. 3. and. 4
he brings no fewer then ten places out of the Old Testament, and nine out of
the New, to prove it. And yet fearing lest these places be strained (as
indeed they are) and so too weak to be laid under such a vast pile of
Building, as Purgatory is, De tertio modo perspicuum est. etc. Bell. L. 1 de
Purgat. c. 11.. Tertio ex Verbo etc. and. De tertio modo. etc.
he flies to unwritten Tradition. And by this Word of God unwritten, he says
it is manifest, that the Doctrine of Purgatory was delivered by the Apostles
Sure if Nineteen places of Scripture cannot prove it, I would be loath to fly
to Tradition. And if Recourse to Tradition be necessary, then certainly those
places of Scripture made not the proof they were brought for. And once more
how can B^ say here, That woe find not the B^ (...), of this Article; when he
had said before, that he had found it in (...) places of Scripture. For if in
these places he could not find the beginning of the Doctrine c: P^y, he is
f^se while be says he did: And if (...) (...) (...) it there, then he is fa^e
here in saying, we find no beginning of it, And for all his B^ of O^s (...),
(...) the (...) ^.
Greek (...) ^ P^. Yet A^ a C^ ^
(...) honestly and plainly and (...) us, That (...) (...) in (...) Writers is
(...) (...) (...) in (...) Greeks. And he adds, That (...) Purgatory ^. And
what now, I pray, after all this, may I not so much as deliberately (...) of
this, because it is now D^? and but now in a manner? and thus? No sure. So A. C.
(...) you. Doubt? No. For ^.
when you had fooled the (...) of S^ back to Rome, there you either made him
say, or ^d it for him ^for in Prin^ and under his Name. That since (...)
defined by the Ch^, a man (...) much bound to believe there is a Purgatory, as
that there is a Trinity (...) Pers^ in the Godhead How far comes this short
of B^asphemy, to make the Trinity, and P^y things alike, and equally Credible?

Yea but A. C. will give you a Reason, why no man may (...) (...), much less
deny any thing that A C. ^7
is defi^ed by a General Council. And his Reason is, Because every such doubt
and denial is a breach from the one saving faith. This is a very good reason,
if it be true. But how appears it to be true? How? why it takes away (says
A. C.) Infallible credit from the Church, and so the Divine Revelation being
not sufficiently applied, it cannot according A. C. p. 71.
to the ordinary course of Gods providence breed Infallible Belief in us. Why
but deliberately to dou^t and constantly to deny upon the grounds and in the
manner. 38. N. 15.
aforesaid, does not take away Infallible credit from the whole Church, but
only from the Definition of a General Council some way or other missed, And
that in things not absolutely Necessary to all men's salvation, For of such
things Though every Thing Defined to be a Divine Truth in General Councels is
not absolutely necessary to be expressly known, and actually believed by all
sorts. etc. A. C. p. 71.
A. C. here speaks expressly. Now to take away Infallible credit from some
Definitions of General Councels, in things not absolutely necessary to
salvation, is no breach upon the one saving faith which is necessary, nor upon
the Credit of the Catholic Church of Christ in things absolutely necessary,
for which only it had Infallible Assistance promised. So that no breach being
made upon the faith, nor no credit which ever it had being taken from the
Church, the Divine Revelation may be, and is as sufficiently applied as ever
it was; and in the ordinary course of Gods providence may breed as Infallible
belief in things necessary to salvation, as ever it did.

But A. C. will prove his Reason before given, Paul A. C. p. 71.
Romans 10. How shall men believe unless they hear? How shall they hear
without a Preacher? And how shall they Romans 10. 14. 15.
preach (to wit Infallibly) unless they be sent, that is, from God, and
infallibly assisted by his Spirit? Here Is that which I have twice at least
spoken to already, namely, That A. C. by this will make every Priest in the
Church of Rome that has Learning enough to preach, and dissents not from that
Church, an Infallible Preacher, which no Father of the Primitive Church did
ever assume to himself, nor the Church give him. And yet the Fathers of the
Primitive Church were sent, and from God, were assisted, and by God, and did
sufficiently propose to men the Divine Revelation, and did by it beget and
breed up Faith, saving Faith in the Souls of men: Though, Ali^s (ab (...)
(...) Se rip^) (...) leg^, (...) sa^ctitate (...); prapo^ (...) (...) ver (...)
p^te^, (...) ipsi ita (...), vel scrips^. Tho. (...) q 1. A. 8. ad. 2. Ex S.
Aug. Ep. 19. Mi^i (...) (...), (...) Demonstr (...) accipias ex sa^ris Li^eris.
S. Cyril. (...). Ca^. 4.
no one among them since the Apostles, was an Infallible Preacher. And A. C.
should have done very well here to have made it manifest, That this Scripture,
How shall they preach (to wit Infallibly) is so interpreted by Union, Consent
of Fathers, and Definitions of Councels, as he A. C. p. 70.
bragged before, that they use to interpret Scripture, For I do not find How
shall they Preach (to wit (...) Apostoli (...) possunt intelligi ae Fide
infusa, illa (...) (...) a Deocreata est, and non est ex (...) (...) haec.
apertissime colligitur ex B^ 3. sent. D. 23 q. 2. A. 2. Conclus. 1. Ergo Fides
acquisiea necessaria est. ^d. sed prater Acquisitam, Infusa etiam requiritur,
and non solum propter Intentionem Act us, sedetiam propter Assensum and
Cert^nern. Quia non potest esse firmus Assensus a Fide acquisita. Quia per came
nullus credit alicui, nisi (...) scit posse f^lli and fallers, licet cred^ cum
non Uelle fallere. Scotus in 3. sent. D. 23. q. unica. Therefore in the
judgment of your own School, your Preachers can both deceive and be
deceived. And therefore certainly are not Infallible. And M. Canus very
expressly makes this but an Introduction to Infallible faith. Primum ergo id
statno juxta Comm^em Legem aliqua exterior a and hum^a inci^ ^ta (...) (...)
esse, (...) ad Evangelii fidem (...). Quomodo enim cr^nt ei, quem non audier^t
etc. Canus L. 2. de L^is. c. 8.. Primum ergo. Et iterum. St Fides infusa ita
Fidei acquisitae niteretur, tanquam suo fundamento; ipsum Fundamentum Fia^
nostra non esset Divina sed Humana Veritas. Ibid Cut and tertium. Therefore
surely A. C. ab^ses this place of the Apostle very boldly.
Infallibly) to be the Comment of any one of the Fathers; or any other
approved Author; And let him show it, if he can.

After this (for I see the good man is troubled, and A. C. p. 7^
upon this Question; If a whole general Council defining what is Divine
Truth, be not believed to be sent and assisted by Gods Spirit, and consequently
of Infallible Credit, what man in the World can be said to be of Infallible
Credit? Well, first A. C. has very ill luck in fitting his Conclusion to his
Premises, and his Consequent to his Antecedent; And so it is here with him. For
a General Council may be assisted by God's Spirit, and in a great measure
too, and in a greater then any private man not inspired, and yet not
consequently be of In^ Credit; for all assistance of God's Spirit reaches not
up to Infallibility. I hope the Ancient Bishops and Fathers of the Primitive
Church were assisted by God's Spirit, and in a plentiful measure too, and yet
A. C. himself will not say they were Infallible. And secondly, for the
Question itself, If a General Council be not, what man in the world can be
said to be of Infallible Credit? Truly I Will make you a ready Answer, No man;
Not the Pope himself? No: Let God and his word be true, and every man a liar,
Romans 3. for so, more or less, every man will Romans 3. 4.
be found to be. And this is neither damage to the Church, nor wrong to the
person of any.

But then A. C. asks a shrewder Question then this. If such a Council lawfully
called, continued and confirmed, A. C. p. 71.
may err in defining any one Divine Truth, how can we be Infallibly certain
of any other Truth defined by it? For if. 10. N. 15.
it may err in one, why not in another, and another, and so in all? It Is most
true, if such a Council may err in one, it may in another, and another, and
so in all of like nature: I say in all of like nature. And A. C. may remember
he expressed himself a little before, to A. C. p. 71.
speak of the Defining of such Divine Truths as are not absolutely necessary
to be expressly known and actually believed of all sorts of men. Now there is,
there can be no necessity of an Infallible certainty in the whole Catholic
Church, and much less in a General Council, of things not. 21. N. 5.
absolutely necessary in themselves. For Christ did not intend to leave an
Infallible certainty in his Church to satisfy either Contentious, or Curious,
or Presumptuous Spirits. And therefore in things not Fundamental, not
Necessary, it is no matter if Councels err in one, and another, and a third,
the whole Church having power and means enough to see that no Council err in
Necessary things, and this is certainty enough for the Church to have, or for
Christians to expect; especially since the Foundation is so strongly and so
plainly laid down in Scripture and the Creed, that a modest man might justly
wonder why any man should run to any later Council, at least for any
Infallible certainty.

Yet A. C. has more Questions to ask; and his How we can (according to the
ordinary Course) be A. C. p. 72.
Infallibly assured that it erres in one, and not in another, when it equally
by one and the same Authority defines both to be Divine Truth? A. C. taking
here upon him to defend M. Fisher the Jesuit could not but see what I had
formerly written concerning this difficult Question about General Councels.
And to all that (being large) he replied little or nothing. Now when he thinks
that may be forgotten, or as if it did not at all lie in his way, he here
turns Questionist, to disturb that business, and indeed the Church, as much
as he can. But to this Question also I answer again, If any Generall-Councell
do now err, either it erres in things absolutely necessary to Salvation, or
in things not necessary. If it err in things Necessary, we can be infallibly
assured by the Scripture, the Creeds, the four first Councels, and the whole
Church, where it erres in one, and not in another. If it be in non necessariis,
in things not necessary, it is not requisite that we should have for them an
infallible assurance. As for that which follows, it is notoriously both
cunning, and false. It Is false to suppose that a General Council defining two
things for Divine Truths, and erring in one, but not erring in another, does
define both equally by one, and the same Authority. And it is cunning, because
these words (by the same Authority) are equivocall, and must be distinguished,
that the Truth, which A. C. would hide, may appear. Thus then, suppose a
General Council erring in one point, and not in another, it does define both,
and equally by the same delegated Authority which that Council has received
from the Catholic Church. But it does not define both, and much less equally,
by the same Authority of the Scripture, (which must be the Councels Rule, as
well as private men's) no nor by the same Authority of the whole Catholic
Church (who did not intentionally give them equal power to define Truth, and
error for Truth.) And I hope A C. dares not say the Scripture (according to
which all Councels, that will uphold Divine Truth, must Determine) does equally
give either ground or power to define Error and Truth.

To his former Questions A. C. adds, That if we leave this to be examined by
any private man, this examination not being Infallible, had need to be examined
by another, A. C p. 72.
and this by another without end, or ever coming to Infallible certainty
necessarily required in that one faith which is necessary to salvation, and to
that peace and unity which ought to be in the Church. Will this inculcating the
same thing never be left? I told the lesuite. 32. N. 5.. 33. Consid. 7. Nu. 4.
before, that I give no way to any private man to be Judge of a General
Council: And there also I showed the way how an erring Council might be
rectified, and the peace of the Church either preserved or restored, without
lifting any private spirit above a Council, and without this process in
Infinitum (which A. C. so much urges, and which is so much declined in all
Arist. 1. Post Tex. 6 and 4. Metaph T. 14.
Sciences.) For as the understanding of a man must always have somewhat to
rest upon, so must his Faith. But a. 38 Nu. (...).
private man, first for his own satisfaction, and after for the Churches, if
he have just cause, may consider of, and examine by the Hic non loquimur de
Decisione, seu Determinatione Doctrinali, quae ad unumquemque virum peritum
spectare dignoscitur; sed de Authoritativa and Iudiciali, etc la. Almain. L. de
Author. Eccl. c. 10. princ.
Judgment of discretion, though not of power, even the Definitions of a
General Council. But A. C. concludes well, That an Infallible certainty is
necessary for that one Faith which is necessary to salvation. And of that (as I
expressed. 38. Number. 1.
before) a most infallible certainty we have already in the Scripture, the
Creeds, and the four first General Councels, to which for things Necessary
and Fundamental in the Faith, we need no assistance from other General
Councels. And some of your Sunt qui nescio qua ducti ratione sentiunt non esse
opus Generali Concilio (De Constantiensi loquitur) dicentes, omnia been a
Patribus nostris Ordinata ac Constituta, modo ab omnibus legitime and fideliter
servarentur. Fatemur equidem id ipsum esse verissimum. Tamen cum nihil fere
servetur, etc. Pet. de Aliaco. L. de reformat. Eccles. fine. So that
after-Councels are rather to Decree for Observance, then to make any new
Determinations of the Faith.
own, very honest and very Learned, were of the same Opinion with me. And for
the peace and unity of the Church in things absolutely necessary, we have the
same infallible direction that we have for Faith. But in Things not necessary,
(though they be Divine Truths also) if about them Christian men do differ,
it is no more then they have done, more or less in all Ages of the Church, and
they may differ and yet preserve the Non omnis Error in his qua fidei sunt, est
aut Infidelitas, aut Haeresis. Holkot. in 1. Sent. q. 1. ad 4. K.
One necessary Faith, and Scimus quosdam quod semel imbiberint nolle deponere,
nec proposstum suum facile mutare, sed salvo inter Collegas pacis and
concordiae vinculo, quaedam propria quae apud se semel sint usurpata, retinere.
Qua in re nec nos vim cuiquam facimus, aut legem damus, etc. S Cypr. L. 2.
Epist. 1. Concordia quae est Charitatis effectus, est ^nio Voluntatum, non
Opinionum. Tho. 2. 2 9. 37. Ar. 1. c. Dissensio de Minimis, and de Opinionibus
repugnat quidem paci perfectae, in qua plene veritaes cognoscetur, and omnis
appetitus complebitur. Non tamen repugnat paci imperfectae, qualis habetur in
via. Tho. 2. 2a. q. 29. A. 3. ad 2.
Charity too, entire, if they be so well minded. I confess it were heartily to
be wished, that in these things also men might be all of one mind, and one
judgment, to which the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 1. 10 Phil 2 2.
1. Cor. 1. But this cannot be hoped for till the Church be Triumphant over all
humane frailties which here hang thick and close about her. The want both of
Unity and Peace proceeding too often, even where Religion is pretended, from
Men and their Humors, rather then from Things and Errors to be found in them.

And so A. C. tells me, That it is not therefore (as I would the fault of
Councels Definitions, but the pride of A. C. p. 72.
such as will prefer, and not submit their private Judgments, that lost, and
continues the loss of peace and unity of the Church, and the want of certainty
in that one aforesaid soule-saving Faith. Once again I am bold to tell A. C.
that there is no want of certainty, most infallible certainty of That one
soule-saving Faith. And if for other opinions which flutter about it, there be
a difference, a dangerous difference, as at this day there is, yet necessary it
is not, that therefore, or for prevention thereof, there should be such a
Certainty, an Infallible Certainty in these things. For he understood himself
well that said, Oportet esse Haereses, 1. Cor. 11. There must, there will be
Heresies. And wheresoever that Necessity lies, it is out of doubt 1. Cor. 11. 19.
enough to prove, That Christ never left such an Infallible Assurance as is
able to prevent them: Or such a Mastering Power in his Church, as is able to
overawe them; but they come with their Oportet about them; and they rise and
spring in all Ages very strangely. But in particular for that which first
caused, and now continues the loss of Unity in the Church of Christ, as I make
no doubt but that the Pride of men is one Cause, so yet can I not think that
Pride is the adaequate and sole Cause thereof. But in part Pride caused it, and
Pride on all sides; Pride in some that would not at first, nor will not since
submit their private judgments, where, with good Conscience, they may, and
ought. And Pride in others that would not first, nor will not yet mend
manifest, great, and dangerous errors, which with all good Conscience they
ought to do. But it is not Pride, not to submit to known and gross Errors: And
the Definitions of some Councels (perhaps the Lateran, Constance, and Trent)
have been greater and more urgent Causes of breach of Unity, then the Pride of
men has been, which yet I shall never excuse, where'ere it is.

How far this one soule-saving Faith extends, A. C. it not a work for my
pen: But, A. C. p. 72.
he says, it is to be learned from that One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic,
always Visible, and Infallible Roman Church, of which the Lady, once doubting,
is now fully satisfied, etc. Indeed (though A. C. sets this down with some
scorn, which I can easily pass over) it is true that thus I. 38. Nu. 1.
said: There is a Latitude in Faith, especially in reference to different men's
salvation; But to set a Bound to this, and strictly to define it, Just thus
far you must Believe in every particular, or incur damnation, is no work
for my pen. Thus I said, and thus I say still. For though the Foundation be one
and the same in all, yet a. 38. Nu. 8.
Latitude there is, and a large one too, when you come to Consider not the
Foundation common to all, but things necessary to many particular men's
Salvation. For to whom soever God has given more, of him shall more be
required, S. Luc. 12. 48. (...) secundum proportionem suam, secundum
differentiam Scientiae vel Ignorantiae, etc. Et postea. Extenditur doctrina
hac, non solum ad Donum Scientia, etc. Cajetan. in S. Luc. 12. Ecce quomodo
Scientia aggravat Culpam. Unde Gregorius, etc. Gorran. in S. Luc. 12. Therefore
many things may be necessary for a Knowing man's Salvation, which are not so for
a poor Ignorant soul. Si quis de Antecossoribus nostris vel ignoranter, vel
simpliciter non hoc observavit, and tenuit, quod nos Dominus facere exemplo and
magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati ejus de Indulgentia Domini Venia
concedi. Nobis vero non poterit ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and
instructi sumus. S. Cyprian. L. 2. Epist. 3.
S. Luc. 12. as well in Belief, as in Obedience and Performance. And the gifts
of God, both ordinary and extraordinary, to particular men are so various, as
that for my part I hold it impossible for the ablest pen that is to express
it. And in this respect I 38. Nu. 1.
said it with humility and Reason; That to set these bounds, was no work for
my pen. Nor will I ever take upon me to express that Tenet, or Opinion (the
denial of the Foundation only excepted) which may shut any Christian, the
meanest out of heaven. And A. C. I believe you know very well, to what a narrow
scantling, some Articuli Fidei sunt sicut Principia per se nota. Et sicut
quadam little in aliis implicit continentur, ita omnes Articuli implicit
continentur in aliquibus primis Credibilibus, etc. secundum illud ad Heb. 11.
Tho. 2 2a. q. 1. A. 10. c. In absoluto nobis and facili est aternitas: Iesum
suscitatum a mortuis per Deum credere, and ipsum esse Dominum consiteri, etc.
S. Hilar. L. 10. de Trin. ad finem.
Learned of your own side bring the very Foundation it self, rather then they
will loose any that lay hold on Christ, the Son of God, and Redeemer of the
world. And as Christ Epitomizes the whole Law of Obedience into these two great
Commandments: The Love of God, and our Neighbor, S. Mat. 22. So the Apostle
epitomizes the whole S. Matthew. 22. 37.
Law of Belief into these two great Assents: That God is. And that He is a
Rewarder of them that seek hun: Heb. 11. That seek him in Christ. And S.
Peter Heb. 11. 6.
was full of the Holy Ghost, when he expressed it, That there is no salvation to
them that seek it in, or by another Name, Act. 4. Act. 4. 12.


But since this is no work for my pen, it seems A. C. will not say it is a
work And yet before in this Conference, and apud A. C. page 42. the Jesuit
whom he defends has said it expressly, That all those points are Fundamental
which are necessary to salvation.
for his. But he tells us, A. C. p. 72.
It Is to be learned of the One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, always Visible,
and Infallible Roman Church. Titles enough given to the Roman Church, and I
wish she deserved them all, for then we should have peace. But it is far
otherwise. One she is, as a particular Church, but not The One. Holy she would
be counted, but the world may see, if it will not blind it self, of what value
Holiness is in that Court and Country. Catholic she is not, in any sense of
the word, for she is not the Romana Ecclesia particularis. Bellar. L. 4. de To.
Pout. c. 4.. 1. Catholica autem est illae quae diffusa est per universum Orbem.
S. Cyril. Hiero^ol. Cetech. 18.
Universal, and so not Catholic in extent. Nor is she sound in Doctrine, and
in things which come near upon the Foundation too; so not Catholica enim
dicitur Ecclesia illa quae universaliter docet sine ullo d^ctu, vel differentia
dogmatum. S. Cyril. Hierolol. Catech 18. Unde Augustinus subscripsit se
Episcopum Catholicae Ecclesiae Hipponiregicusis. L. 1. de Act is cum Foelice
Mani^h. c. 20. Ft l 2. c. 1. Et Catholica Alexandrinorum Soz. l. 1. Htst. c. 9.
Et l 2. c. 3. And so every particular Church is or may be called Catholic, and
that truly, so long as it teaches Catholic Doctrine. In which sense the
Particular Roman Church was called Catholic, so long as it taught all and
only those things to be De Fide, which the Catholic Church it self
maintained. But now Rome does not so.
Catholic in Beliese. Nor is she the Prime Mother Church of Christianity;
Supra.. 35. Nu 9. Other Churches beside the Roman are called Matres, and
Originales Ecelesiae, as in Tertul. de praescrip. advers. hares. c. 21. Et
Ecclesiae Hi^rosolymitana quae aliarum omnium Matter. (...). etc. Theodoret. L.
5 Hist. Eccl. c. 9. ex L^bello Synodico a Council Constantinop. 2. transmisse ad
Concilium sub Damaso tum Romae coactum. Et Constantinopolitana Ecclesiae
dicitur omnium aliarum Capus. Cod. L 1. Tit. 2. Leg. 24. That is, not simply of
all Churches, but of all in that Patriarchate. And so Rome is the Head of all
in the Roman Patriarchate.
Jerusalem was that, and so not Catholic as a Fountain, or Original, or as
the Head, or Root of the Catholic.

And because many Romanists Object here (though A. C. Cyprian called the (...)
Ecclesiae Catholic (...) and Matricem agn^rent and tencrent. S. Cyp. L. 4.
Epist. 8.
Roman Church, the Root and Matrix of the Catholic Church of Christ, I hope I
shall have leave to explain that difficult place also First then S. Cyprian
names not Rome. That stands only in the Margiu, and was placed there as his
particular judgment led Edit. Basiliens. 1530. And Simanca also applies this
speech of S. Cyprian to Rome. It Is. 24.. 17. And to also P^lius upon this place
of S (...). But they wrong him.
him that set out S. Cyprian. Secondly, the true story of that Epistle, and
that which led S. Cyprian into this Expression, was this. Cornelius then chosen
Pope, expostulates with S. Cyprian, That his Letters to Rome were directed
only to the Clergy there, and not to Him, and takes it ill, as if S. Cyprian
had thereby seemed to disapprove his Election. S. Cyprian replies, That by
reason of the Schism moov'd then by Novatian, it was uncertain in Africa
which of the Two had the more Canonical right to the Sea of Rome; and that
therefore he named him not. But yet that during this uncertainty, he exhorted
all that sailed thither, ut Ecclesiae Catholicae Radicem and Matricem
agnoscerent and tenerent: That in all their carriage they should acknowledge,
and so hold themselves unto the Unity of the Catholic Church, which is the
Root and Matrix of it, and the only way to avoid participation in the Schism.
And that this must be S. Cyprian's meaning I shall thus prove. First, because,
This could not be his meaning or Intention, That the Sea of Rome was the Root
or Matrix of the Catholic Church. For if he had told them so, he had left
them in as great, or greater difficulty, then he found them. For there was
then an Open and an Apparent Schism in the Church of Rome. Two Bishops,
Cornelius and Novatian; Two Congregations, which respectively attended and
observed them. So that a perplexed Question must needs have divided their
thoughts, which of these Two had been that Root and Matrix of the Catholic
Church. Therefore had S. Cyprian meant to pronounce Rome the Root and Matrix of
the Catholic Church, he would never have done it at such a time, when Rome it
self was in Schism. Whereas in the other sense, the Counsel is good and
plain, Namely, That they should hold themselves to the Unity and Communion of
the Catholic Church, which is the Root of it. And then necessarily they were
to suspend their Communion there, till they saw how the Catholic Church did
incline, to approove, or disapproove the Election of the One, or the Other. And
thus S. Cyprian frees himself to Cornelius from the very least Touch of
Schism. Secondly, Because this sense comes home to Baron. Annal. 254. Numb.
64. where he cites this Epistle.
Baronius. For he affirms, That S. Cyprian and his Colleagues the African
Bishops did Communionem suspendere, suspend their Communion, until they heard
by Caldonius and Fortunatus, whose the undoubted right was. So it seems S.
Cyprian gave that Counsel to these Travelers, which himself followed. For if
Rome, during the Schism, and in so great uncertainty had yet been Radix
Ecclesiae Catholicae, Root of the Catholic Church of Christ, I would feign
know, how S. Cyprian so great and famous an Assertor of the Churches Unity,
durst once so much as think of suspending Communion with her. Thirdly, Because
this sense will be plain also by other Passages out of other Epistles of S.
Cyprian. For writing to Iubaianus an Africane Bishop against the Novatians, who
then infested those parts, and durst Rebaptise Catholic Christians, he says
thus. Nos autem qui Ecclesiae Unius Caput and Rad^cem tenemus, pro certo
scimus, and credimus, nihil extra Ecclesiam licere, and Baptismatis quod est
unum, Caput nos esse, ubi and ipse Baptizatus prius fuerat, quando Divinae
Vnitatis, and Rationem and veritate^ t^bat. S. Cypr. ad Iubain. Epist. 73.
Edit. Pamel.
But we who hold the head and Root of One Church, do know for certain, and
believe, that nothing of this is lawful out of the Catholic Church; And that
of Baptism, which is but One, we are the Head, where he himself was at first
Baptized, when he held the Ground and Verity of Divine Unity. Now I conceive
it is all one, or at least as Argumentative to all purposes to be Caput or Radix
Baptismatis, Head or Root of Baptism, as Head or Root of the Church. For
there is but One Baptism, as well as but One Church, and that is the entrance
into this. And S. Cyprian affirms and includes himself, Nos esse Caput, that
we are the Head of Baptism. Where yet (I pray observe it) he cannot by Nos,
We, mean his own Person (though if he did, he were the more Opposite to Rome)
much less can he mean the Roman Church, as it is a Particular and stands
separate from others. For then how could he say, Nos esse Caput, that we are
the Head? Therefore he must needs mean the Unity and Society of the Church
Catholic, which the Novatians had then left, and whereof he and his Church were
still members. Besides most manifest it is, that he calls that Church Caput
Baptismatis the Head of Baptism, where Novatian was Baptized (they are his own
words) and probable it is that was Rome, Because that Schismatic was a Roman
Priest. And yet for all this S. Cyprian says, Nos esse Caput Baptismatis, that
we are the Head of Baptism, though he were at Carthage. By which it is plain,
That as Caput is parallel to Radix, and Matrix: So also that by Caput, the head
of Baptism, he includes together with Rome all the other members of the Church
Universal. Again, S. Elaborarent ut ad Catholica Ecclesiae unit ate^ scissi
corpores membra componerent and Christianae Charitatis vinculu^ copularent. Sed
quoniam diversae partis obstinata and inflexibilis pertina i^ non tantum
radicis and Matris sinum atque complexum recusavit, sed etiam gliscente and in
pejus recrudescente discordia, Episcopum sibi constituit. etc. S. Cyprian. L.
2. Epist. 10.
Cyprian writes to Cornelius and censures the schismatic Carriage of the
Novatians at Rome. And tells him farther, that he had sent Caldonius and
Fortunatus to labor Peace in that Church, that so they might be reduced to,
and composed in the Unity of the Catholic Church. But because the Obstinate,
and inflexible pertinacy of the other Party had not only refused Radicis and
Matris sinum, the bosom of their Mother and embracings of their Root, but the
Schism increasing and growing raw to the worse, has set up a Bishop to it
self. etc. Where it is observable, and I think plain, That S. Cyprian employed
his Legates not to bring the Catholic Church to the communion of Rome, but Rome
to the Catholic Church. Or to bring the Novatians not only to Communicate with
Cornelius, but with the Church Universal, which was therefore Head and Root in
S. Cyprian's judgment, even to Rome it self, as well as to all other, Great,
Ancient, or even Apostolical Churches. And this is yet more plain by the
sequel. For when those his Legates had labored to bring those Schismatics to
the Unity of the Catholic Church; yet he complains their Labor was lost. And
why? Why, because recusabant Radicis and Matris sinum, they refused the Bosom
of the Root, and the Mother. Therefore it must needs be, that in S. Cyprian's
sense, these two Vnitas Catholicae Ecclesiae, the unity of the Catholic
Church. And Radicis, or Matricis Sinus, or Complexus, the Bosom, or Embracing
of the Root, or the Mother, are all one. And then Radix and Matrix, are not
words by which he Expresses the Roman Sea, in particular, but he denotes by
them the Unity of the Church Catholic. Fourthly, Because T^ at tanta Ecclesia
Vna est illa ab Apostolis prima ex qua Omnes. Sic omnes (...), and omnes
Apostolica, dumunam omnes probant Vnitatem: Tert de praes advers. (...). c. 20.
Porro Vnam esse primam Apostolicam, ex qua reliquae. Hanc nulli let a assigit
B. Rhenanus Annot. in Argumento. Tertul, de praescript. etc. Nulli loco.
Therefore not at Rome. But these words [Hanc nulli loco assigit] deleantur,
says the Spanish Inquisition upon Rhenanus, printed at Madrid An 1584.
Tertullian seems to me to agree in the same sense. For says he these so
many and great Churches founded by the Apostles, taken all of them together,
are that One Church from the Apostles out of which are All. So all are First,
and all Apostolic, while they all allow and prove Vnam Vnitatem, One Unity.
Nor can any possibly understand this of any Particular Church, but
subordinately. As S. Gregory Nazian. says the Church of Caesarea was Gregory
Naz. s^ the Church of Casaria was Matter prope omni^ Ecclesiarum. Epist. 18.
Matter, the Mother of almost all Churches: which must needs be understood of
some Neighboring Churches, not of the whole Catholic Church. And where Pamel
in Tertul. de praescript. advers. Haeres. c. 21. Nu. 129.
Pamelius speaks of Original and Mother Churches, he names six, and others,
and Rome in the last place. Therefore certainly no Particular Church can be the
Root or Matrix of the Catholic; But she is rooted in her own Unity, down from
the Apostles, and no where else extra Deum. And this is farther manifest by the
Irreligious act of the Emperor Adrian. For he intending to root out the faith
of Christ, took this course. He Consecrated Simulacrum Iovis, the Image of
Jupiter in the very place where Christ suffered, and profaned Bethlehem with
the Temple of Adonis. Vi quasi Radix and Fundamentu^ Ecclesiae tolleretur, si
in iis locis Ia^la colerentur in quibus Christus natus est. etc. S. Paulinus
Epist. (...). ad Se^um.
To this end, that the Root as it were, and the foundation of the Church might
be taken away, if in those places Idols might be worshipped, in which Christ
himself was born, and suffered. etc. By which it is most evident, That either
Jerusalem was the Root of the Catholic Church, if any Particular Church were
so. Or rather that Adrian was deceived (as being an Heathen he well might) in
that he thought the Universal Church had any particular or Local Root of its
Being. Or that he could destroy it all by laying it wast in any one place
whatsoever. And S. Augustine I think is full for this, That the Catholic
Church must have a Catholic Root or Matrix too. For Hareses omnes de illa
(...): tanquam (...) tainutilia de Vite prae^ (...) autem manner (...) Radice
sua etc. S. Aug. de lymb. ad Catechumer. L. 1. c. 6.
he tells us, That all Heresies whatsoever went out de illa, out of the
Catholic Church. For de illa there can be out of no other. For all Heresies
did not go out of any one Particular Church. He goes on. They were cut off de
Vite, from this Catholic Vine still, as unprofitable Branches. Ipsa autem, but
this Catholic Church remains in Radice sua, in its own Root, in its own
Vine, in its own Charity, which must needs be as ample, and as Catholic as
it self. Or else, were it any Particular, All Heretical Branches could not
be cut off from one Root. And Saint Augustine says again, Pars Donati non
considerat se proectsam esse a Radice Orientalium Ecclesiaru^. etc. S Aug. Ep.
170. prin.
That the Donatists did not Consider that they were cut off from the Root of
the Eastern Churches. Where you see again, it is still but One Root of many
Churches. And that if any man will have a Particular Root of the Catholic
Church, he must have it in the East, not in the West at Rome. And now lastly,
besides this out of Saint Cyprian to prove his own meaning (and sure he is
the best Interpreter of himself) and other assisting proofs, it is most
evident, that in the prime and principal sense, the Catholic Church, and her
Unity is the Head, Root, or Matrix of Rome, and all other Particular Churches;
and not Rome, or any other Particular, the Head, Root, or Matrix of it. For
there is a double Root of the Church, as there is of all things else: That is,
Radix Essentiae, the Root, Head, or Matrix of its Essence. And this is the
prime sense. For Essence and Being is first in all things. And then there is
Radix Existentiae, the Root of its Existence, and formal Being, which always
presupposes Being, And is therefore a sense less Principal. Now to apply
this. The Catholic or Universal Church is, and must needs be the Root of
Essence and Being to Rome, and all other Particulars. And this is the
Principal Root, Head, or Matrix that gives Being. And Rome, but with all other
Particular Churches, and no more then other Patriarchall Churches, was and is
Radix Existentiae, the Root of The Churches Existence. And this agrees with
that known and received Rule in Art: That Vniversals give Essence to their
Particulars, and Particulars supply their Vniversals with Existence. For as
Socrates and every Particular man borrow their Essence from the Species and
Definition of a man, which is Universal, but this Universal Nature and Being
of Man has no actual Existence but in Socrates and all other particular men:
so, the Church of Rome, and every other particular Church in the world, receive
their very Essence and Being of a Church from the Definition of the Catholic
Universal Church of Christ; But this Universal Nature and Being of the Church
has no actual Existence but in Rome and all other Particular Churches, and
equal Existence in all her particulars. And should all the Particular Churches
in the world fall away from Christ, save only One (which God forbid) yet the
Nature, Essence, and Being of the Universal Church would both Exist and
Subsist in that one Particular. Out of all which to me most clear it is, That
for the Churches Being, the Catholic Church, and that in Unity (for Ens and
Vnum, Being, and Being one, are Convertible) is Radix, the Root, Head, Matrix,
Fountain, or Original (call it what you will) of Rome, and all other
Particular Churches. But Rome no more then other Churches, the Root, or Matrix
of the Catholic Churches Existence or Place of her actual Residence. And this
I say for her Existence only, not the purity or form of her Existence, which is
not here considered. But if the Catholic she be not, nor the root of the
Catholic Church, yet Apostolic I hope she is. Indeed Apostolic She is, as
being the Sea Not as Bellarmine would have it, with a Hinc dicitur Apostolica,
quia in e^ Successio Episcoporum ab Apostolis d^ducta est usque ad nos. Bellar.
L. 4. de notis Eccl. c. 8.. 1. For by this Reason neither Jerusalem, nor
Antioch were in their times Apostolic Churches; Because Succession of Bishops
has not succeeded in them to this day. Dc Collegis agebatur qui possent etc.
Iudicio Apostohcarum Ecclesiarum causam suam integram reservare. S. Aug. Epist.
162. Io: de Turrecrem: enumerat sex Verbi hujus significationes. Quarum prima
est. Apostolica dicitur quia in Apostolis etc. initiata est. Hos enim instituit
quasi fundamenium Ecclesiae, etc. Io: de Turrcer. L. 1. Summae, c. 18. Et quia
Originem sumpsit ab Apostol^ etc. Ibid: Vbi dicit etiam S. Patres apposuisse
hanc Uocem [Apostolicam] in Symbolo suo, supra symbolum Apostolorum, ibid
of One, and He a Prime Apostle. But then not Apostolic, as the Church is
called in the Creed from all the Apostles, no nor the Ecclesiae Apostolicae, ut
Smyrnaeorum, and reliquae ab Apostolu sundatae. Tertul. de praescrip: advers.
Haret: c. 32. Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas etc. Habes Corinthum, Philippos,
Thessaloni^s Ephesum, Romam. ibid. c. 32. Et Pamelius enumerat
Hicrosolymitanam, Antiochenam, Corinthiam, Philippensem, Ephesinam, Romanam.
Pamel. ib. c. 21. Nu. 129. And it may be observed, that so long ago
Tertullian, and so lately Pamelius should reckon Rome last. Quin and aliae
Ecclesia quae ab bis. Apostolicae etiam deputantur, ut soboles Ecclesiar^
Apostolicarum etc. Tertul. 16. c. 20.
Only Apostolic. Visible I may not deny God has hitherto preserved Her, but
for a better end doubtless then they turn it to. But Infallible She was
never: Yet if that Lady did as the Jesuit in his close avows, or others will
rest satisfied with it, who can help it? Sure none but God. And by A. Cs.
leave this (which I said, is no work for my pen) cannot be learned, no not of
the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, much less of the Roman. For
though the Foundation be one and the same, and sufficiently known by Scripture
and the Creeds; Yet for the building upon the Foundation, the adding to it; the
Detracting from it; the Joining other things with it; The grating upon it: And
each of these may be damnable to some, and not to others, according to the
Knowledge, Wisdom, means of Information which some have, and others want: And
according to the ignorance, simplicity, and want of Information, which some
others have, and cannot help: And according to the Negligence, Contempt,
Wilfulness, and Malice, with Obstinacy, which some have against the Known
Truth; and all or some of these in different degrees in every particular man.
And that in the whole Latitude of mankind, from the most wise and learned in
the School of Christ, to the simplest Idiot that has been so happy as to be
initiated into the Faith by Baptism. Now the Church has not this knowledge of
all particulars, Men, and Conditions, nor can she apply the Conditions to the
Men. And therefore cannot teach just how far every man must believe, as it
relates to the possibility, or impossibility of his salvation in every
particular. And that which the Church cannot teach, men cannot learn of her.
She can teach the Foundation, and men were happy if they would learn it, and
the Church more happy would she teach nothing but that as necessary to
Salvation; for certainly nothing but that is Necessary. Now then whereas after
all this, the Jesuit tells us, that


F. Upon this and the precedent Conferences, the Lady rested in judgment fully
satisfied (as she told a confident Friend) of the Truth of the Roman Churches
faith. Yet upon frailty and fear to offend the King, she yielded to go to
Church; for which she was after very sorry, as so^ of her friends can testify.


B. This is all personal. And how that Honorable Lady was then settled in
Conscience, how in Judgment, Roman cause, No more whether it were frailty, or
fear, or other Motive that made her yield to go to Church, nor how sorry she
was for it, nor who can testify that sorrow. This I am sure of, if she
repent, and God forgive her other sins, she will more easily be able to
Answer for her coming to Church, then for her leaving of the Church of
England, and following the superstitions and errors which the Roman Church
has added in Point of Faith, and the Worship of God. For the Lady was then
living, when I answered thus.

Now whereas I said, the Lady would far more A. C. p. 73.
then for her leaving the Church of England. To this A. C. excepts and says,
That I neither prove, nor can prove, that it is lawful for one (persuaded
especially as the Lady was) to go to the Protestant Church. There Is a great
deal of cunning, and as much malice in this passage; but I shall easily pluck
the sting out of the Tail of this Waspe. And first I have proved it already
through this whole Discourse, and therefore can prove it, That the Church of
England is an Orthodoxe Church. And therefore with the same labor it is
proved, that men may lawfully go unto it, and communicate with it, for so a
man not only may, but ought to do with an Orthodoxe Church. And a Romanist
may communicate with the Church of England, without any Offense in the Nature
of the thing thereby incurred. But if his Conscience, through misinformation,
check at it, he should do well in that Case, rather to inform his Conscience,
then for sake any Orthodoxe Church whatsoever. Secondly, A. C. tells me plainly,
That I cannot prove that a man so persuaded as the Lady was, may go to the
Protestant Church; that is, That a Roman Catholic may not go to the
Protestant Church. Why, I never went about to prove that a Roman Catholic
beiug and continuing such, might against his Conscience, go to the Protestant
Church. For these words (A man persuaded as the Lady is) are A. Cs. words, they
are not mine. Mine are not simply that the Lady might, or that she might not:
but Comparative they are, That she might more easily answer to God for coming
to, then for going from the Church of England. And that is every way most true.
For in this doubtful time of hers, when, upon my Reasons given, she went
again to Church; when yet soon after (as you say at least) she was sorry
for it. I say, at this time she was in heart and resolution a Roman Catholic,
or she was not: If she were not, (as it seems by her doubting she was not
then fully resolved) then my speech is most true, that she might more easily
answer God for coming to Service in the Church of England, then for leaving
it. For a Protestant she had been, and, for ought I knew, at the end of this
Conference, so she was, and then 'twas no sin in it self to come to an
Orthodoxe Church; nor no sin against her Conscience, she continuing a
Protestant, for ought which then appeared to me. But if she then were a Roman
Catholic (as the Jesuit and A. C. seem confident she was) yet my speech is
true too. For then she might more easily answer God for coming to the Church
of England, which is Orthodoxe, and leaving the Church of Rome, which is
superstitious, then, by leaving the Church of England, communicate with all the
superstitions of Rome. Now the cunning and the malignity of A. C. lies in this,
he would feign have the world think that I am so Indifferent in Religion, as
that I did maintain, the Lady, being conscientiously persuaded of the Truth of
the Romish Doctrine, might yet, against both her conscience, and against open
and avowed profession, come to the Protestant Church.

Nevertheless, in hope his cunning malice would first, it is not lawful for
one affected as that Lady was, that is, for one that is resolved of the Truth
of the Roman Church, to go to the Church of England, there, and in that
manner to serve and worship God; Because (says A. C.) that were to halt on
both sides, to serve two Masters, and to dissemble with God and the world.
Truly, I say the A. C. p. 73.
same thing with him; And that therefore neither may a Protestant, that is
resolved in Conscience, that the profession of the true Faith is in the Church
of England, go to the Romish Church, there, and in that manner to serve and
worship God. Neither need I give other Answer, because A. C. urges this against
his own fiction, not my assertion. Yet since he will so do, I shall give a
particular Answer to each of them. And to this first Reason of his, I say thus,
That to Believe Religion after one sort, and to practice it after another, and
that in the maine points of worship, the Sacrament and Invocation, is to halt
on both sides, to serve two Masters, and to dissemble with God and the world.
And other then this I never taught, nor ever said that which might infer the
Contrary. But A. C. give me leave to tell you, your fellow Jesuit Quinto
quaeritur, An ubi Catholici una cum Haereticis versantur, licitum sit Catholico
adi^ Templa ad quae Haeretici convenient, eorum interesse Conventibus, etc.
Respondeo: Sirei Naturam spectemus, non est per se malum, sed sua natura
indifferens, etc. Ec postea. Si Princeps haeresi laboret, and jubeat subditos
Catholicos sub poena Mortis, vel Confiscationis bonorum frequentare templa
Haeretico^, quid tum faciendum? Respondeo: si jubeat tantum, ut omnes Mandato
suo obediant, licitum est Catholicis facere: Quia praestant solum Obedientia
officium. Sin jubeat, ut eo Symbolo fimul Religionem Haereticam profiteantur,
parere non debent. Quares iterum, An liceat Catholico obedire, modo public
asseveret se id efficere, solum ut Principi suo obediat, non ut sectam
hareticam profiteatur I Respondeo: Quidam id licere arbitrantur, ne bona ejus
publicent^r, vel Vita eripiatur. Quod sane probabiliter dici videtur. Azorius
Instit. Moral. p. 1. L 8. c. 27 p. 1299. Edit. Paris. 1616.
Azorius affirms this in express terms; And what do you think, can he prove
it? Nay, not Azorius only, but other Priests and Jesuits here in England,
either teach some of their Proselytes, or else some of them learn it without
teaching, That though they be persuaded as this Lady was, that is, though they
be Roman Catholics, yet either to gain honor, or save their purse, they may
go to the Protestant Church, just as the Jesuit here says, The Lady did out
of frailty and fear to offend the King. Therefore I pray A. C. if this be
gross dissimulation both with God and the world, speak to your fellows to
leave persuading or practicing of it, and leave men in the profession of
Religion to be as they seem, or to seem and appear as they are; Let Us have
no Mask worn here. A. Cs. second Reason why one so persuaded as that Lady
was, might not go to the Protestant Church, is, Because that were outwardly A.
C. p. 73.
to profess a Religion in Conscience known to be false. To this I answer,
first, that if this Reason be true, it concerns all men, as well as those that
be persuaded as the Lady was. For no man may outwardly profess a Religion in
conscience known to be false; For with the beart man believes to
righteousness, and with the mouth he confesses to salvation, Romans 10. Romans
10. 10.
Now to his own salvation no man can confess a known false Religion.
Secondly, if the Religion of the Protestants be in conscience a known false
Religion, then the Romanists Religion is so too; for their Religion is the
same; Nor do the Church of Rome and the Protestants set up a different Religion
(for the Christian Religion is the same to both) but they differ in the same
Religion: And the difference is in certain gross corruptions, to the very
endangering of salvation, which each side says the other is guilty of.
Thirdly, the Reason given is most untrue; for it may appear by all the former
Discourse to any Indifferent Reader, that Religion, as it is professed in the
Church of England, is nearest of any Church now in being to the Primi^ive
Church: And therefore not a Religion known to be false. And this I both do
and can prove, were not the deafness of the Aspe upon the ears of seduced
(...). 58. 4.
Christians in all humane and divided parties whatsoever.

After these Reasons thus given by him, A. C. That I neither do nor can prove
any superstition A. C. p. 73.
or error to be in the Roman I would A. C. would call it the Roman
Persuasion, as some understanding Romanists do.
Religion. What none at all? Now truly I would to God from my heart this were
true, and that the Church of Rome were so happy, and the whole Catholic Church
thereby blessed with Truth and Peace. For I am confident such Truth as that
would soon either Command Peace, or For though I spare their Names, yet can I
not agree in Judgment with him that says in Print: God be praised for the
disagreement in Religion. Nor in Devotion with him that prayed in the Pulpit:
That God would tear the Rent of Religion wider. But of S. Greg. Naz. Opinion I
am. (...), etc. Non studemus paci in detrimentum verae Doctrinae -- ut
facilitatis, and Mansuetudinis famam colligamus. -- Et rursum, Pacem colimus
legitime p^gnantes, etc. Orat. 32.
confound Peace-Breakers. But is there no Superstition in Adoration of Images?
None in Invocation of Saints? None in Adoration of the Sacrament? Is there no
error in breaking Christ's own Institution of the Sacrament, by giving it but
in one kind? None about Purgatory? About Common Prayer in an unknown tongue
none? These and many more are in the Roman Religion, (if you will needs call
it so.) And it is no hard work to prove every of these to be Error, or
Superstition, or both. But if A. C. think so meanly of me, that though this be
no hard work in it self, yet that I (such is my weakness) cannot prove it,
I shall leave him to enjoy that opinion of me, or what ever else he shall be
pleased to entertain, and am far better content with this his opinion of my
weakness, then with that which follows of my pride; for he adds, That I
cannot A. C. p. 73.
prove any Error or Superstition to be in the Roman Religion, but by
presuming, with intolerable pride, to make my self or some of my fellows to
be Judge of Controversies, and by taking Authority to censure all to be
Superstition and Error too, which suits not with my fancy, although it be
generally held, or practiced by the Universal Church. Which (says he) in S.
Augustine's judgment is most (...) (...). What not prove any Superstition, any
Err^ur at Rome, but by Pride, and that (...)? Truly I would to God A. C. saw my
heart, and all the Pride that lodges therein. But wherein does this Pride
appear, that he censures me so deeply? Why first in this, That I cannot prove
any Error or Superstition to be in the Roman Religion, unless I make my
self or (...) of my fellows Judge of Controversies. Indeed if I took this
upon me, I were guilty of great Pride. But A C. knows well, that before in
this Conference, which he undertakes to Answer, I am so far from making my
self or any of my fellows Judge of Controversies, that. 33.. 26. Nu. 1. and
11.
I absolutely make a lawful and free General Council Judge of Controversies,
by, and according to the Scriptures. And this I learned from Praeponitur
Scripturae, etc. S. Aug. L. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 3.
S. Augustine, with this, That ever the Scripture is to have the prerogative
above the Council. Nay, A. C. should remember here, that. 32. Nu. 5. A. C. p.
63.
he himself taxes me for giving too much power to a General Council, and
binding men to a strict Obedience to it, even in Case of Error. And therefore
sure most innocent I am of the intolerable pride, which he is pleased to charge
upon me; and he, of all men, most unfit to charge it. Secondly, A. C. will have
my pride appear in this, A. C. p. 73.
that I take Authority to censure all for Error and Superstition, which suits
not with my own fancy. But how can this possibly be, since I submit my
judgment in all humility to the Scripture interpreted by the Primitive Church,
and upon new and necessary doubts, to the judgment of a lawful and free
General Council? And this I do from my very heart, and do abhor, in matters
of Religion, that my own, or any private man's fancy should take any place, and
least of all against things generally held or practiced by the Universal
Church, which, to oppose in such things, is certainly (as S. Aug. Epist. ^8.
(...). 5.
S. Augustine calls it, Insolentissimae insaniae, an Attempt of most insolent
madness. But those things which the Church of England charges upon the Roman
Party to be superstitious and erroneous, are not held or practiced, in, or by
the universal Church generally, either for time or place. And now I would have
A. C. consider how justly all this may be turned upon himself. For he has
nothing to pretend, that there are not gross Superstitions and Errors in the
Roman Persuasion, unless by intolerable pride he will make himself and his
Party Judge of Controversies, (as in effect he does, for he will be judged by
none but the Pope, and a Council of his ordering) or unless he will take
Authority to free from Superstition and Error whatsoever suits with his fancy,
though it be even Superstition it self, and run cross to what has been
generally held in the Catholic Church of Christ; Yea, though to do so, be, in
S. Augustine's judgment, most insolent madness. And A. C. spoke in this most
properly, when he called it taking of Authority; For the Bishop and Church of
Rome have in this particular of judging Controversies, indeed taken that
Authority to themselves, which neither Christ, nor his Church Catholic did
ever give them. Here the Conference ended with this Conclusion.

And as I hope God has given that Lady mercy: so Instruments of the Pope's
boundless Ambition, and this most unchristian. 33. Nu 6.
braine-sick device, That in all Controversies of the Faith he is Infallible,
and that by way of Inspiration and Prophecy in the Conclusion which he gives:
To the due Consideration of which, and God's mercy in Christ, I leave you.

To this Conclusion of the Conference between me Jesuit, A. C. says not much:
But that which he does say, is either the self same which he has said
already, or else is quite mistaken in the business That which he has said
already, is this; That in matters A. C. p. 73.
of Faith we are to submit our judgments to such Doctors and Pastors, as by
Visible Continual Succession, without change, brought the Faith down from
Christ and his Apostles, to these our days, and shall so carry it to the end
of the world. And that this Succession is not found in any other Church
differing in Doctrine from the Roman Church. Now to this I have given a full
Answer. 57. Nu. 3, 4.
already, and therefore will not trouble the Reader with needless and
troublesome repetition. Then he brings certain places of Scripture to prove
the Pope's Infallibility. But to all these places I have likewise answered. 25.
Nu. 5.
before. And therefore A. C. needed not to repeat them again, as if they had
been unanswerable.

One Place of Scripture only A. C. had not urged Continued Visible Succession,
or for the Pope's Infallibility. Nor does A. C. distinctly A. C. p. 73.
set down by which of the two he will prove it. The Place is Ephe^. 4. 11.
Ephesians. 4. Christ ascending gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, etc. for the edification of the Church.
Now if he do mean to prove the Pope's Infallibility by this place, in his
Pastoral Judgment. Truly I do not see how this can possibly be Collected
thence. Pontificatus Summus diserte positus est ab Apostolo in illis verbis
Ephesians. 4. 11. and in illis clarioribus, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Ipse posuit in Ecclesia
primum Apostolos, etc. Bellar. L. 1. de To. Pont. c. 1.. Respondeo
Pontificatum. And he gives an excellent reason for it. Siquidem summa potestas
Ecclesiastica non solum data est Petro, sedetiam aliis Apostolis. Ibid. So
belike by this Reason the Apostle does clearly express the Popedom, because
all the rest of the Apostles had as much Ecclesiastical Power, as S. Peter
had. But then Bellarmine would salve it up with this, That this Power is given
Petro, ut Ordinary Pastori, cui succederetur, aliis vero tanquam Delegatis,
quibus non succederetur. Ibid. but this is mere Begging of the Question, and
will never be granted unto him. And in the mean time, we have his absolute
Confession for the other, That the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power was not in S.
Peter alone, but in all the Apostles.
Christ gave some to be Apostles for the Edification of his Church: Therefore
S. Peter, and all his Successors are infallible in their Pastoral Judgment.
And if he mean to prove the Continued Visible Succession, which, he says, is
to he found in no Church but the Roman, there is a little more show, but to no
more purpose. A little more show: Because it is added Ephesians. 4. 13.
verse 13. That the Apostles, and Prophets etc. shall continue at their work
(and that must needs be by succession) till we all meet in Unity and perfection
of Christ. But to no more purpose. For it is not said that they, or their
Successors should Continue at this their work in a Personal, uninterrupted
Succession in any one Particular Church, Roman or other. Nor ever will A. C.
be able to prove that such a Succession is necessary in any one particular
place. And if he could, yet his own words tell us, the Personal Succession is
nothing, if the Faith be not brought down without change from Christ and his
Apostles to this day, and so to the end of the world. Now here is a piece of
cunning too, The Faith A. C. p. 73.
brought down unchanged. For if A. C. mean by the Faith, the Creed, and that
in Letter, it is true, the Church of Rome has received and brought down the
Faith unchanged from Christ and his Apostles to these our days. But then it is
apparently false, That no Church differing from the Roman in Doctrine has
kept that Faith unchanged, and that by a visible and continued Succession. For
the Greek Church differs from the Roman in Doctrine, and yet has so kept that
Faith unchanged. But if he mean by the Faith unchanged, and yet brought down
in a continual visible Succession, not only the Creed in Letter, but in Sense
too: And not that only, but all the Doctrinall Points about the Faith, which
have been Determined in all such Councels as the present Church of Rome
allows: ( And so also Bellarm. Sexta nota est Conspiratio in Doctrina cum
Ecclesia Antiqua. L. 4 de Notis Eccle. c. 9.. 1.
as most certainly he does so mean, and it is the Controversy between us:)
then it is most certain, and most apparent to any understanding man that reads
Antiquity with an impartial eye, that a Visible Continual Succession of
Doctors and Pastors have not brought down the Faith in this sense from Christ,
and his Apostles to these days of ours in the Roman Church. And that I may
not be thought to say, and not to prove, I give Instance. And with this, that
if A. C. or any Jesuit can prove, That by a Visible Continued Succession from
Christ and his Apostles to this day, either Transubstantiation in the
Eucharist. Or the Eucharist in one kind. Or Purgatory. Or worship of Images.
Or the Intention of the Priest of Necessity in Baptism. Or the Power of the
Pope over a General Council. Or his Infallibility with, or without it. Or his
power to Depose Princes. Or the Public Prayers of the Church in an unknown
tongue; with diverse other Points have been so taught, I, for my part, will
give the Cause. Beside, for Succession in the general I shall say this. It Is a
great happiness where it may be had Visible and Continued, and a great
Conquest over the Mutability of this present world. But I do not find any one
of the Ancient Fathers that makes Local, Personal, Visible, and Continued
Succession, a Necessary Sign or Mark of the true Church in any one place. And
where Vincentius Vin. Lir. cont. Har. c. 4.
Lirinensis calls for Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, as great Notes of
Truth, he has not one word of Succession. And for that great Place in Hac
Ordinatione and Successione ea quae est ab Apostolis in Ecclesia Traditio, and
veritasis praeconiatio pervenit usque ad nos. Et est plenissima haec Ostensio,
Vnam and eandem Vivificatricem fidem esse, quae in Ecclesia ab Apostolis usque
nunc sit conservata, and tradita in veritate. Iren. L. 3. Advers. Haer. c. 3.
Irenaeus, where that Ancient Father reckons the Succession of the Bishops of
Rome to Eleutherius (who sat in his time) and says, That this is a most full
and ample Proof, or Ostension, Vivificatricem Fidem, that the Living and
Life-giving Faith is from the Apostles to this day Conserved and delivered in
Truth; And of which Place Per hanc Successionem confundi omnes Haereticos.
Bellarmin. L. 4. ae Notis Eccles. c. 8.. 1. There Is no such word round in
Irenaeus.
Bellarmine boasts so much; Most manifest it is in the very same Place, that
Testimonium his perh^bent quae sunt in Asia Ecclesiae Omnes, and qui usque
adhuc Successerunt Polyc^po Iren. I. 3 advers. Haere. c. 3. Constat omnem
Doctrinam quae cum illis Ecclesiis Apostolicis, Matricibus, Originalibus Fidei
conspiret, Veritati doputandam. Tettul. de praescript. advers. Haeret. c. 21.
Ecclesia posteriores non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguiinitate
Doctrinae. Ibid c 32. Ecclesia non in Parietibus consistit etc. Ecclesia autem
illic erat, ubi fides verae erat. S. Hieron. in Psalm. 133.
Irenaeus stood as much upon the Succession of the Churches then in Asia, and
of Smyrna (though that no prime Apostolical Church) where Polycarpus sat
Bishop, as of the Succession at Rome. By which it is most manifest, that it is
not Personal Succession only, and that tied to one Place, that the Fathers
meant, but they taught, that the Faith was delivered over by Succession in some
places or other still to their present time; And so doubtless shall be, till
Time be no more. I say, The Faith; But not every Opinion, true, or false, that
in tract of time shall cleave to the Faith. And to the Faith it self, and all
its Fundamentals, we can show as good, and full a Succession as you; And we
pretend no otherwise to it then you do, save that We take in the Greeks, which
you do not. Only we reject your gross superstitions, to which you can show no
Succession from the Apostles, either at Rome or elsewhere, much less any one
uninterrupted. And therefore he might have held his peace that says, It is
evident that the Roman Catholic Church only has had a Constant and
uninterrupted Succession of Pastors, and Doctors, and Tradition of Doctrine
from Age to Age. For most evident it is, That the Tradition of Doctrine has
received both Addition and Alteration, since the first five hundred years in
which Antiqua Ecclesia primis quingentis Annis vera Ecclesia fuit, and proinde
Apostolica^ Doctrina^ retinuit. Bell. L. 4. de Notis Eccles. c. 9. 1.
Bellarmine confesses, and B. Jewel maintains the Churches Doctrine was
Apostolical.

And once more, before I leave Succession which the Fathers meant, is not tied
to Place or Person, but it is tied to the Verity of Doctrine. For so Ad hanc
formam provocabuntur ab illis Ecclestis, quae lic et nullum ex Apostolis, vel
Apostolicis Authorem suum proferunt, ut multo posteriores quae denique quotidie
instituuntur, tamen in eadem fide conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae
deputantur pro consanguinitate Doctrine. ^ertul. de praescript. c. 32.
Tertullian expressly. Beside the order of Bishops running down (in Succession)
from the beginning, there is required Consanguinitas Doctrinae, that the
Doctrine be allied in blood to that of Christ and his Apostles. So that if the
Doctrine be no kin to Christ, all the Succession become strangers, what
nearness soever they pretend. And Illis Presbyteris obediendum est, qui cum
Episeopatus Successione Charisma ac^perunt Ueritatis. Iren. Lib. 4. cap. 43.
Irenaeus speaks plainer then he. We are to obey those Presbyters, which
together with the Succession of their Bishoprics have received Charisma
Veritatis, the gift of truth. Now Stapleton being pressed hard with these two
Authorities: first, Successio nec Locorum tantum est, nec personarum, sed etiam
vera and sana Do^rinae. Stapl. ^elect. Controver. 1. q. 4 A. 2. Notab 1.
Confesses expressly, That Succession, as it is a Note of the true Church, is
neither a Succession in place only, nor of Persons only, but it must be of true
and sound Doctrine also. And had he stayed here, no man could have said
better, But then he saw well he must quit his great Note of the
Church-Succession; That he durst not do. Therefore he begins to cast about,
how he may answer these Fathers, and yet maintain Succession. Secondly,
therefore he tells us, That that which these Fathers say, do nothing weaken
Succession; but that it shall still be a mai^ Note of the true Church; and in
that sense which he would have it. And his Reason is Quia Doctrina Sana est ab
ipsa vera and legi^ima Successione indiv^lsa. Stapl. Ibid.
B^se sound Doctrine is indivisible from true and Lawful Succession. Where you
shall see this great Clarke (for so he was) not able to stand to himself,
when he has forsaken Truth. For it is not long after, that he tells us, That the
People are led along, and judge the Doctrine by the Pastors; But when the
Church comes to examine, she judges the Pastors by their Doctrine. And this Nam
e Pastore L^s fieri pot^st. Stap. ibid. N^tab. 4.
he says is necessary, Because a Man may become of a Pastor, a Wolf. Now then
let Stapleton take his choice. For either a Pastor in this Succession cannot
become a Wolf, and then this Proposition's false; Or else if he can, then sound
Doctrine is not inseparable from true and Legitimate succession: And then the
former Proposition's false, as indeed it is. For that a good Pastor may become
a Wolf, is no news in the Ancient Story of the Church, in which are registered
the Change of many Vincent. Lit. cont. Har. c. 23. 24.
Great men into Heretics, I spare their Names; And since Judas changed from an
Apostle to a Devil, S. Ioh. 6. it is no wonder to see S. Ioh. 6. 70.
others change from Shepherds into Wolves. I doubt the Church is not empty of
such Changelings at this day. Yea but Stapleton will help all this. For he
adds, That suppose the Pastors do forsake true Doctrine, yet Succession shall
still be a true Note of the Church; Yet not every Succession, but that which is
Legitimate and true. Well: And what is that? Why, Legitima autem est illorum
Pastorum, qui Vnitatem tenent and Fidem. Stap. ibid. Notab. 5.
That Succession is lawful which is of those Pastors, which hold entire the
Unity and the Faith. Where you may see this Samson's hair cut off again. For
at his word I Will take him. And if that only be a Legitimate Succession which
holds the Unity and the Faith entire, then the Succession of Pastors in the
Roman Church is illegitimate; For they have had In their own Chronologer
Onuphrius there are Thirty acknowledged.
more Schisms among them then any other Church: Therefore they have not kept
the unity of the Church. And they have brought in gross Superstition:
Therefore they have not kept the Faith ^ntire. Now if A. C. have any mind to
it, he may do well to help Stapleton out of these briars, upon which he has
torn his Credit, and I doubt his Conscience too, to uphold the Corruptions of
the Sea of Rome.

As for that in which he is quite mistaken, it is his which is this. That I
should therefore consider carefully, Whether it be not more Christian, and
less brainesicke, to think that the Pope, being S Peter's Successor, with a
General Council should be Judge of Controversies, etc. And that the Pastoral
Judgment of him should be accounted Infallible, rather then to make every man
that can read the Scripture, Interpreter of Scripture, Decider of
Controversies, Controller of General Councels, and Judge of his Judges: Or to
have no Judge at all of Controversies of Faith, but permit every man to believe
as he list. As if there were no Infallible certainty of Faith to be expected on
earth, which were, instead of one saving Faith, to induce a Babilonicall
Confusion of so many faiths, as fancies; Or no true Christian Faith at all.
From which Evils, Sweet Jesus deliver us! I have Considered of this very
carefully; But this Inference supposes that which I never granted, nor any
Protestant that I yet know; Namely, That if I deny the Pope to be Judge of
Controversies, I must by and by either leave this supreme Judicature in the
hands and power of every private man that can but read the Scripture; or else
allow no Judge (...), and so let in all manner of Confusion. No, God forbid I
should grant either: For I have exp^esly. 26. Nu. 1.
declared, That the Scripture interpreted by the Primitive Church, and a
Lawful and free General Council determining according to these, is Judge of
Controversies: And that no private man whatsoever, is, or can be Judge of
these. Therefore A. C. is quite mistaken (and I pray God it be not wilfully, to
beguile poor Ladi^, and other their weak adherents, with seeming to say
somewhat) I say, quite mistaken, to infer, that I am either for a private
Judge, or for no Judge; for I utterly disclaim both, and that as much, if not
more then he, or any Romanist, who ever he be. But these things in this passage
I cannot swallow. First, That the Pope with a General Council should be
Judge; for the Pope in ancient Councels never had more power then any the other
Patriarchs: Precedence, perhaps for Orders sake, and other respects, he had.
Nor had the Pope any Negative voice against the rest in point of difference.
Patrum and Avorum nostrorum tempore, pauci audebant dicere, Papam esse supra
Concilium. Aeneas Sylvius, sen Pius 2. L. 1. de Gestis Council. Basil. Et ill^
imprimis (...) (...), quis (...) (...), ^nes qui aliquo numero s^ Concilio
subjici^nt. Ibid. in fascic. rerum Expetend. fol. 5. (...) autem, Papam esse
non solum supra Concilium Generale, sed and Vniversam Ecclesiam, est propositio
fere de Fide. Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c. 17. (...). 1.
No nor was he held superior to the Council. Therefore the ancient Church
never accounted or admitted him a Judge; no, net with a Council, much less
without it. Secondly, it will not down with me, that his Pastoral Judgment
should be Infallible; especially since some of them have been as Quum hoc
tempore nullus sit (...) ((...) f^nd est) qui sacras; Lit^ras d^dicerit, qu^
front aliquis eorum docere audebit, quod non didicerit? Arnulph. in Council.
Rhe^nsi. Nam c^ constet plures eorum adeo illiteratos esse, ut Grammaticam
penitus ignorarent, qui sit ut Sacras Literas interpretari possint? Alphons. a
Castro. L. 1. advers. H^. c. 4. versus medium. Edit. Paris. 1534. (For both
that at Antwerpe, An. 1556. and that at Paris, An. 15^ (...) been in
Purgatory.) And such an Ignorant as these was Pope John the four and
twentieth. Plati^ (...) Vitae ejus. Et 33. Nu. 6.
Ignorant, as many that can but read the Scripture. Thirdly, I cannot admit
this neither (though he do most cunningly thereby abuse his Readers:) That
any thing has been said by me, out of which it can justly be inferred, That
there is no Infallible certainty of Faith to be expected on earth. For there is
most Infallible certainty of it, that is, of the Foundations of it in Scripture
and the Creeds. And it is so clearly delivered there, as that it needs no Judge
at all to sit upon it, for the Articles themselves. And so entire a Body is
this one Faith in it self, as that the Resolutio Occham est, Quod nec tota
Ecclesia, net Concilium Generale, nec Summus Pontifex potest facere Articulum,
quod non fuit Articulus. Sed Ecclesia been determinat de Propositionibus
Catholicis, de quibus erat dubium, etc. Ia. Almain. in 3 Sent. D. 25. q. unica
Dub. 3. Sicut ad ea quae spectant ad Fidem nostram, and nequaquam ^x voluntate
humana dependent, non potest Summus Pontifex, nec Ecclesia ae Assertione non
vera, veram: nec de non falsa falsam facere: it a non potest de non Catholica
Catholicam facere, nec de non Haretica Hareticam. Et ideo non potest ^ovum
Articulum facere, nec Articulum Fidei tollere. Quoniam sicut Veritates
Catholicae absque omni approbatione Ecclesiae ex natura rei sunt immutabiles,
and immutabiliter verae, it a sunt immutabiliter Catholica reputandae.
Similiter sicut Hareses absque omni reprobatione, and damnatione sunt falsae,
it a absque omni reprobatione sunt Haereses reputanda, etc. Et postea. Patet
ergo quod nulla Veritas est Catholica ex approbatione Ecclesiae vel Papae. Gab.
Biel. in 3. S^nt. Did. 25. q. unica. Art. 3. Dub. 3. versus sinem.
Whole Church (much less the Pope) has not power to add one Article to it,
nor leave to detract any one the least from it. But when Controversies arise
about the meaning of the Articles, or Superstructures upon them, which are
Doctrines about the Faith, not the Faith it self (unless where they be
immediate Consequences) then both in and of these a. 26. Nu. 1.
Lawful and free General Council, determining according to Scripture, is the
best Judge on earth. But then suppose uncertainty in some of these
superstructures, it can never be thence concluded, That there is no Infallible
certainty of the Faith it self. But it is time to end, especially for me, that
have so Many Things of Weight lying upon me, and disabling me from these
Polemicke Discourses; beside the Burden of sixty five years complete, which
draws on apace to the period set by the Prophet David, Psalm. 90. and to the
Psalm. 90. 10.
Time, that I must go, and give God, and Christ an Account of the Talent
committed to my Charge; In which God, for Christ Jesus sake, be merciful to
me, who knows, that however in many Weaknesses, yet I have with a faithful
and single heart (bound to his free Grace for it) labored the Meeting, the
Blessed Meeting of Truth and Peace in his Church, and Psalm. 85. 10.
which God, in his own good time, will (I hope) effect. To Him be all Honor,
and Praise for ever. Amen.


FINIS.

