(...)

TO THE (...) Matrons and Mirrours of (...) gracious Lady Anne Duchess of
Sommerset, (...) right honorable Lady Brigirt Countess (...) Bedford, the
right worshipful Mis^resse PHILIP PRYDEAVX, Mistress LVCE COTT^N, and
Mistress Mary VVatts, EPHRAIM PAGITT wishes the increase of all spiritual
graces meet for this life, and a full assurance of that honor which lasts
for ever.
I Have not that liberty (most noble Ladies and grave Matrons) in this my
Epistle, to set forth the praises either of you, or of the work which I have
labored to send unto you in English: But a^ enforced as in an Apollogie, to
defend my self, that I a child of eleven years of age have dealt in a matter
of religion, and presumed to dedicate the same to you. For the first I
answer, there is no age freed, nor exempted from the knowledge of God, and
the setting forth of his glory, so far as he has en^^bled them, but as
children are asson^ subiect^ to death as the old, so must they learn to dye
and to yield account of that one talent which the have ^^ether they have
employed it to the use of God, who (...) it them, or no. Besides that I was
employed in it, by the appointment of those my friends, that in respect of the
interest they have in me, the love they bear me, the good they wish to come
of this labor, to such step-parents and children in law, which understand
not Latin, that I could not deny them.

For the second, it is not presumption, that has made me to dedicate it unto
you (right Honorable Ladies and worthy Gentlewomen) but a desire to yield
thanks for the comfort which I, my brother and Sisters (poor children) have
received by the kindenes, which has often come from you to us and our parents
in our necessities. Therefore I beseech your H. and Worcester. in good part to take
this book which I with all humility do here offer unto you, humbly praying
that you widows will receive into England, these good widows, Naomie and
Ruth, come out of Moab, sent as excellent paterns of virtues and godlynes, by
the holy ghost to all christians, described and lineated by the sermons of that
worthy Minister, Master Lauaterus of Tygurine, Like will to like, widows
come to widows, disdain the^ not for their pouertye. Have they been in
trouble? so have al you? Was Naomie a soiourner in a strange country, and
lost there her husband? so have some of you. Did Ruth leave her country for
religion? So have some of you. Were they disdayned, skoft and scorned at? so
are you of the world for your zeal in religion, and love to the glorious
gospel of Jesus Christ. Of the other (...), are you come of noble birth? are
you of honorable calling? so was Naomie of the royal and kingly tribe of
Judah, and Ruth was married to Boaz, a man that sat in the gates of Judah,
judged Israel, and was great grandfather to David the king, end so from these
good women came kings and princes to rule Gods people, and at length, the
hope, joy and comfort of all mankind, our Savior Christ according to the
flesh. Therefore Noble and Worcester. matrons, I pray you take it in good part, that
I have been so bold to join you of several estates together in this short
Epistle: but because ye are all in one estate of widdow-hode, in one course of
religion, in like regard of the weal of us and our parents, I was so bold
to knitte you together, entreating you that my childishnes, which in this I
have showed, your wonted virtues may bear out toward your selves, and as a
veil to cover from others, till God give me more knowledge and understanding to
amend it. And I humbly pray the Lord to grant you as much comfort in your own
children, and in your sons and daughters in law, as ever Naomie had in Ruth.
And as they had rest after their traueils, and joy after their sorrows, so the
Lord give you peace of consciences here, and after this pilgrimage that
everlasting rest which never shall be taken from you.

THE BOOK OF Ruth expounded in 28 Sermons.
The first Sermon.
THIS Book is named after RVTH a most excellent woman: The (...) this (...)
not for that she wrote it: but because the historye is especially made of her:
for it makes mention that she was a MOABITE, and by what occasion she was
converted to the religion of ISRAEL and what she did; likewise how she was
married to BOAZ a man of great authority, and was mother to OBED, DAVID'S
Grandfather. So the little book ESTER has the name from Queen ESTER the
principal person which is spoken of in that book. Also the books of SAMVEL
(that I may at this time speak nothing of others) are named of the chief
person. For though we do willingly grant, that SAMVEL the Prophet wrote the
first book unto the 24. chapter: yet it is certain that he could not proceed
any further. For in the beginning of the 25. chapter is his death set down,
and the other six chapters to the end of the book, do contain things done
after his death. The second book which is also named after SAMVEL, does
entreat only of those things which were done after his death, and therefore
could not be put in writing by him: Yet it seems that it was therefore called
by the name of SAMVEL, because it prosecuteth the history of DAVID, whom
SAMVEL anointed king by the commandment of God: and for that it was written
by some of his disciples, as NATHAN or GAD, and put forth under the name of
their master. Some think that this little book of RVTH was written by
SAMVEL, other some, that it was gathered out of that great book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of ISRAEL and IVDA: whereof there is mention made often
times in the books of the kings: The which is lost without the loss of
doctrine necessary to salvation. For that it is, not that book of the
Chronicles which is yet extat, I have showed in my commentaries upon that book.

But who gathered this history out of that book spoken of before, or who
wrotte the same, ESRA, or rather some other Prophet, which flourished in the
time of the Judges or afterward, I cannot certainly tell, neither is it any
great matter to know: how soever it was this ought to satisfy us, that this
book by the agreement of al men, is nombred amongst the canonical books of
holy scriptures, which by the motion of the holy ghost are written of holy men,
and delivered of God to his church, and so wonderfully preserved through so
many dangers, to our comfort and learning. If thou have a notable privilege,
confirmed by the seal of some Emperor or king, thou have not regard of the
name of the writer, or of the pen which he used in writing it: so since it
appears by the general consent of al godly me^, that the holy ghost is author
of this book, we ought not to use much labor to know the instrument which he
used in writing it.

The argument or matter of this book, (...).
is this: ELIMELECH in the time of a famine, went with his wife and his two
sons out of BETHLEHEM into the land of MOAB. There the father dying, the
sons took them wives of the MOABITISH woman, who after certain years died
themselves out of their own country, leaving their mother and wives alive.
NAOMIE in the mean season being certified that God had given plenty to his
people, consulted for her return into her country. Both her daughters in law do
accopanie her, she does exhort both of the^, that they would tarry with their
kindred. ORPAH therefore does return to her own: But RVTH, when she could not
be drawn away from her, came with her mother in law to Beth^ehem in the
beginning of harvest. The Bethlemites marueiled what NAOMI meant by her coming.
In the mean season RVTH, went forth to gather ears, for to norish her self
and her mother in law, and it was not without the providence of God that she
came into the field of her kinseman BOAZ. When he coming into his field
understood of his bailey what she was, he does speak to her courteously, and
charge his servants and reapers, that they hurt not her, she thanking him,
being laden by him went home, and she told her mother in law in order every
thing that befell to her. She does give her counsel that she should go
privily into BOAZ barn, and that she should lie down at his feet being a
sleep, and require him to be her husband according to the law of God, which
commands the brother or kinsma^, to marry the wife of the brother or kinsman,
that is departed without a son. RVTH does obey her mother in law she does
demand marriage of BOAZ, who does answer, that there is another who is
nearer of kin to her, then he was: and if he would yield his ^ight, he would
marry her. And when on the next day, that kinsma^ renou^ced his right before
the Judges, BOAZ married her, and begat of her OBED DAVID'S gra^dfather.

This whole history, (...) parts.
seems especially, to consist of two parts: The first in the rehearsal of
the miseries of NAOMI and RVTH: The next in the change of the estate of those
women etc. namely how God had made the rich again, whom he had thrown down
into great poverty.

The scope and the especial intent of this history is, ^he scope.
that the genealogy of DAVID, and so of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ might
be showed, who was of his seed according to the flesh. Christ is the scope
and end of the law and prophets. Also we shall hear hereafter, that this
matter befell when the Judges reigned over Israel, therefore it is well placed
after the book of the Judges.

And though this book is small, yet it does contain many notable things, The
profit.
, and yields great use to all the parts of life, and therefore it may be
compared to precious stones, of which though many are little, yet they have
certain excellent virtues. This comme^dation of holy scripture, which is
written in the second Epistle of Saint PAVLE to TIMOTHY and the 3. chapter,
does appertayn to all holy books, and therefore to this also. The whole
scripture is given by the inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. And also in the 15. chapter
to the ROMANS. For whatsoever things are written before time, are written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have
hope. That we may the better see the use of this writing let us mark some
principal heads, which are propounded in it. Afterward every thing shall
follow more fully in their places. First, as all holy books do further us to
the knowledge of god, so does this also. For it does teach that Christ the
son of GOD came of the JEWS, and of the GENTILES which are sinners, and
therefore appertains to them both. It does teach that al things are
governed by the providence of the most excellent and great God: and also that
by his direction marriages are made between husb^ndes and wives. RVTH being
willing to gather ears of corn, that she might ^ether living, fell into BO AZ
field, which was the occasion that she b'ecan^e his wife and mother to OBED.
We shall see how God does always exercise the godly, with diverse afflictions,
as poverty, barrennes, bannishment and hunger, and bring their estate to that
pass, so as they may seem utterly to be undone, but if they be not
overwhelmed with adversities, but bear al things patiently, looking for his
heavenly help, and calling on him, oftentimes their afflictions are changed
into a notable estate: yea, even in this life.

Moreover, we shall learn out of this history, how God has a care of the
GENTILES, and also that he has his chosen amongst them, as IETHRO, NAAMAN
the SIRIAN, the widow of SAREPTA, and the NINEVITES, etc, Not that we say that
they were saved without Christ. Also he would have RAHAB and RVTH joined to the
seed O ABRAHAM, that the MESSIAH might be born of them in his appointed time.
Wives, Mothers in law, daughters in law, widows, fathers of households,
seruau^ts, laborers, have here notable examples to follow. Let us learn, that
strangers and poor men, our kinsme^ and those which are newly converted to
true religion are to be well handled, neither to be hurt in words nor deeds.
We have a notable example propounded to us, how BOAZ kept his faith, also there
are rewards ordained for our virtues in this life. Therefore let not any man
say, that it is all one whether we do well or evil.

There are nine notable persons made mention of in this little book,
ELIMELECH, NAOMI, MAHLON, CHILION, ORPAH, RVTH, BOAZ, his bailiffe, and the
kinseman that did yield his right, by every one of them, examples of our
duties are propounded to us, which by Gods assistance we will mark in their
places. Let us give great thanks for the unspeakable gift of God, that he would
have his holy scriptures to be written: and to be preserved through so many
sharp tempests, and read out of those fountains to his Churches, and let us
be occupied in them both day and night, and cast away those lying and
unprofitable books in which fools are most exercised.

CAP. 1
The 2. Sermon.
1 In the time that the Judges ruled, there was a dearth in the land, and a man
of Bethlehem Judah went to soiorne in the country of Moab, he, and his wife,
and his two sons.

2 And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife, Naomie: and
the names of his two sons, Mahlon, and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehem
Judah: and when they came into the land of Moab, they continued there.


THe things that are especially handled in this chapter are these: The
division of the chapter.
ELIMELECH in the time of famine went into the land of MOAB, and there he dyed:
his sons also when they had married them wives of the daughters of MOAB
departed this life. NAOMI being left a widow, returned to BETHLEHEM: both her
daughters in law do accompany her some part of the way. But ORPAH returned by
and by to her kindred. RVTH accompanied her mother in law, returning into her
country. All men marueiled at NAOMIES coming. Lastly, is the time noted when
she returned home.

The first part, or first member of this Chapter, does show how ELIMELECH went
with his wife and his two sons, out of BETHLEHEM into the land of MOAB in the
time of famine, and it contains many things in few words. First, it shows
when this history happened, namely in the time of the Judges of ISRAEL. But
under what Judge, (of which many are named) this befell, it is doubtful. Some
do report, this history, to be done in the time of EHVD: some are of that
opinion, that it was done in the time of DEBORA and BARACK, other some say, it
was done in the time of IEPHTE, who after great mischiefs which the MOABITES
had done to the Israelites, (from whence this famine arose which is made
mention of here) at length he tamed them. If you say ELIMELECH should not
have place amongst the MOABITES, being overthrown by war, but rather that
he should have been torn in pieces of the^ at that time, they will answer
that they were so oppressed, and beaten down that they durst not hurt the
Israelytes. IEPHTE governed the people six years his history is extant in the
tenth eleue^th and twelfth chapters of the IVDGES. IBSAN succeeded him, whom
the Hebrew doctors will have to be BOHAZ DAVID'S graundfather and to have had two
names. This man governed ISRAEL seven years as it is in the twelfth chapter
of the IVDGES. JOSEPHUS includes this history in the time of HELI: but LIRA
shows upon the first chapter of this book, that that agrees not with the
account of times. But it nothing avails to our salvation to know the
particular time wherein these were done, otherwise the holy Ghost would not
have let it pass. It is enough for us generally to know that this was done in
the time of the IVDGES.

The cause which does move this man to leave his country does seem to be a
famine, The (...)
for the text says that there was a famine in the land of Israel. For
oftentimes holy fathers, will go from one place into another in the time of
famine that they may nourishe themselves and their family more fitly. As in the
12. chap. of GENESIS: ABRAHAM went into AEGIPT in the time of famine, which is
called the barn of the world. So in the 26. chapter ISAAKE when there was a
famine went unto GERAR to ABIMELECH. But God appearing to him in a dream
warned him that he should not go to EGYPT, but should keep himself in those
places which the Lord should show him. Also the history is known of JACOB or
ISRAEL, how he sent his sons for food, into AEGIPT oftentimes. Afterward
the famine continuing long he went himself and his household to his son
JOSEPH. Here also may be added, the story of the SHVNAMITE, whose son ELISHA
raised from the dead, he bad her go into another country, for God would
bring upon the land a famine, which should endure seven years, as it is in
the second book of the kings and the 8. chapter: which woman following the
counsel of the Prophet was preserved in the time of famine. And for the same
cause ELIMELECH went together with his into the land of MOAB, which
peradventure then abounded with fruit: but the Hebrews (as LIRA says) do
imagine some other cause. For they say that ELIMELECH was a mighty and
wealthy man, of whom when the famine reigned many of his kinsmen and poor men
did require things needful for them, and therefore that he might be rid of
his trouble, and not spend his goods, left his country and went into the land
of MOAB with his household, where he being driven unto great poverty, died
with his sons. If he travailed for this cause, as it sometimes appears some
do, he could not be excused, for it is in the Proverbs of SOLOMON. 21.
chapter. He that stops his ears at the crying of the poor, shall also cry
and not be heard for there is a just revenger of the poor and afflicted. It is
known to all men what happened to that rich man clothed in Purple, mentioned
in LVKE. 16. But who can but marvel from whence the HEBRVES have these
fantasies, they do bring in many monstrous fables in the expounding of the
holy Scriptures. For when they had cast away Jesus Christ the light of the
world, they were worthy to walk in darkness. And the doctrine of the Gospel
being oppressed, and overwhelmed Christians harkened to monstrous lies.

As concerning famine, A famine.
against the Prophets, it is numbered amongst the four plagues, with the which
GOD does punish men, and these are they: the pestilence, famine, war, and
cruel beasts. How grievous the trouble of famine is, may be gathered by
this, that it does drive men oftentimes into bannishment. Truly God does send
famine for the sins of his people, where and when he pleases.

It is not to be gathered that those that be oppressed with famine are worse
the^ others. For oftentimes godly men are oppressed with famine, not because
he would overthrow them, but that he might prove them with this cross, and
also stir them up therewith as by oth^^ (...). They do provide for their
thinge^ by lawful means, true religion being kept safe, and they govern
themselu^s far otherwise, then wicked ones do when they be in that case. The
HEBRVES say that God punished the ISRAELITES, with sharp and cruel famine
because that after IOSHVA and the ELDERS were dead, who had seen the miracles
of God, they were slack in keeping his commandments. For it appears by the
story of the IVDGES how the Israelites forsaking the laws turned to Idols, and
so they were afflicted with diverse afflictions.

The sons of ELIMELECH are called Ephrathites, of BETHLEHEM IVDA: which is
called so, that it may be distinguished from another City of the same name that
is in GALILIE of the lot of ZEBVLON. As it is in the 2. chapter of MATTHEW:
The Priests and Scribes of the people, being demanded of HEROD where the
Messiah should be borne, answered in Bethlehem Judah. This City is also
called Ephrata as it is in the 35. chap, of Genesis, RAHEL died of childbirth
in the way to Ephrata that is Bethlehem: and JACOB raised a pillar upon her
grave. For the Fathers were wont to have their graves near the high ways,
and that is testified by many Epitaphes set up for trauelers. As concerning
the etimologie of these names, Bethlehem does signify the house of bread, that
is after the Hebrews abundance of fruit: it was situated in a good and a
fruitful place.

Some will have Bethlehem to be called the house of bread, for that mystery
that Christ (who said in the 6. chapter of JOHN, that he was the bread of
life) should be borne there. But HIEROME calls EPHRATA KARPOPHORIAN which
signifies plentifulnes. So this City for the agreement of the signification
of the names is called both Ephrata and Bethlehem. Some will have this City to
be called EPHRATA of EPHRATA CALEBS wife, but that does not please me, for that
City was called so long before. This City has a third name, for it is called
the City of DAVID, as it is in the second chapter of LVKE. Joseph went into
the City of DAVID which was called BethleHEM, and afterward the Angel said
unto the Shepherds, this day a Savior is borne unto you in the City of DAVID
which is Christ the Lord. It was so called because it was DAVID'S country,
partly because he did reedifie it: partly because Christ the son of David was
borne there, who is also by the Prophets simply called DAVID.

ZVPH in the 1. of SAM. 1. chap. is called an EPHRATHITE, because he dwelled in
mount EPHRAIM: these men were called EPHRATHITES because they dwelled in the
country of Ephrata, an EPHRATHITE and a Bethlemite are both one. SO ISAI DAVID'S
father is called an Ephrathite: because he came out of Bethlehem which was
wont to be called Ephrata: for it is written in the 1. book of SAMVELL the
17. chap. David was the son of an Ephrathite of Bethlehem named Ishai, or
peradventure those which have been of that family, are called Ephrathites:
either for some excellency in them or by the figure antonomasia: the Chalde
interpreter does add noble men.

It is accounted amongst the external goods to be borne in a notable
country, and of noble parents: who have descended of good and noble families,
let them take heed that they do not any thing unworthy of their parents: But
they that come of base parents: let them use diligence that they excel their
parents in virtue. It was set down where they are borne, that it should not
be thought, that they were borne in the land of MOAB.

What did ELIMELECH when he went with his out of the land of IVDA, into the
land of MOAB and dwelt there, did he well to depart from the habitation of his
ancestors into the land of Moab? Of this deed it may be disputed of in both
parts. They which do accuse him may use these or some other arguments.
First the Israelites were forbidden the company of that nation. For in the 23.
chapter of DEVTERONOMIE: God made a law that the Ammonites nor the Moabites
should come into the Church until the tenth generation: not that he would
forbid them from the hearing of the word of God, or embrasing of the true manner
of worship, but that they should not be put in any office in the church or
common wealth, and least they should have any voice in the elections or marry
with the Hebrew daughters: the Interpreters say that the Hebrew phrases do
signify this. There may be two reasons of that law, the first is, because
they denied their brethren the Children of Israel passage coming out of
Egypt: The other is that the hired Balaam the false Prophet to curse the
Israelites. NVM. 22. and 23. chapter: and because they made them sin in
BAALPEOR for the which cause many of them fell, etc. Therefore because
Elimelech, went with his to that nation which is an enemy to God it seems a
matter not to be praised: next to forsake Israelll in afflictions again they
were not his kinsemen.

For as they who do forsake theirs in the time of war and pestilence, do
seem to offend: so they which forsake theirs in the time of famine.
Especially when it may be gathered by the words of NAOMI that he was rich.
Men fleeing out of their country are always badly spoken of. Who will not
disalow of their purpose now at this time, who will get themselves in dangers
amongst the enemies of the Gospel. Also those things seemed to fight with
says: for he thought that he could avoid the punishment of God. The
Israelite^ had the promises, that God would help them in afflictions, and that
they ought to believe in him, and hang upon his providence, and pray, and
look for a good and happy end of the famine. For God might as well have
preserved him in so fruitful a ground as in the land of Moab. For that which
he does is against the fortitude and courage of the mind: For he should
rather have borne any thing, then forsake the tabernacle and worship of God,
and go to a profane people.

Further he casts his wife, and children into danger of idolatry. For every
body knows how dangerous a thing it is to dwell amongst Idolaters. Amongst
men of our own profession we are not without danger: what then if we dwell
amongst wicked men? Some of the event does argue of his going that he did not
well, because he was punished for forsaking his country: for he fell into
extreme poverty the which he fled, and died with his sons in a strange land.
After this sort it fell out with JACOB and JOSEPH and diverse of good men, so
that they may not judge of the manners and faith of a man, by things which
befall to him here.

They who defend this deed, may bring in these arguments: first that that he
did, he did not by wordly counsel without the commandment of God: but by the
examples of godly men recited above: whom famine has not once constrained,
but many times to live as strangers. Next we must not tempt God: his
promises makes not us slothful, and that he ought to provide for himself
and his, and he left his country without the hurt of his cou^trimen: that he
might get food for his own household. Further these things that he did
prospered well, by this the glory of God was set forth, and the oracles
fulfilled. Although this argument may be answered, that God oftentimes uses
the falls of his to good, and in his goodness co^uerteth those things which are
evil to a good end.

It is true, holy men do fall, sometime into great sins: But because we know
not whether he went to the MOABITES in contempt of the laws, or of
covetousness, as the Hebrews will have, or by the commandment of God, or by
some special revelation, or led by some other necessary cause, nor how he
governed himself in a strange land: we will neither praise his deeds nor
condemn him. When the scriptures do not accuse men let not us accuse the^,
especially when the matters are doutful: we ought rather to think the best of
men. It may be that they had the liberty of their religion. Truly it
appears that the JEWS kept their religion under the ETHNICKE kings, as
they do this day under the Christians. There was not so great cruelty of
those kings against the JEWS, as there is now at this day of some Kings
and Princes (which will have themselves to be called Christians) against the
professors of pure doctrine. In this place also may be noted that it is written
that ELIMELECH was a stranger in the field of Moab. Sometime it is said that
NAOMI returned out of the Field of Moab, the Hebrew word signifies a field,
also a country, and the earth. Peradventure he would not dwell in the Cities
but in the fields that he might the less be corrupted. In the Cities many
occasions are laid before us to entrap us: For this cause it was that many
dwelt in vilages and desert places. IONADAB counseled his sons the
RECHABITES as it is in the 35. chap. of Iere. that they should dwell in
Tabernacles, and keep sheep: by which means they might serve God best.

Generally we say out of the word of God, that we must not forsake those
places where the pure word of God is preached openly. For it is most
dangerous to dwell there, where the word of God has no free passage. For if
thou be in those places where thou have the pure exercise of the word of God
and then thou art sometimes in company with the^ who do not love the truth,
although thou do hear some sermons yet by little and little thy faith will
be weakened: what will be done then, where no mention is made of Christ or of
true religion and where we have so many things before our eyes which may weaken
our faith.

But if necessity does constrain us to dwell in those places, as it sometimes
does where wickedness does reign, we must take heed that we do not deny
Christ. JOSEPH lived holily in the court of Potiphar in Aegipt, at last being
governor of al Aegipt the called unto him his father and his brethren for the
greatness of famine to come to him. DAVID with six hundred men went into the
land of Moab, great necessity driving him thereto: though many interpreters
find fault with this his flight. 1. SAM. 27. NEBVCHAD-NEZZAR took Daniell,
his fellows, and many others captives: as the Turk now has in captivity
flocks of Christians in everlasting bondage, and to dwell amongst idolaters
whether they will or no. But they should endeavor, to live amongst wicked men
unblameably. Ierem. 29. chap. he does teach his people how they should behave
themselves in Babylon, under Nebuchad-nezzar. There are some who will say
commonly: If thou be at Room, live after the manner of Room. They command
to apply themselves to the times. But Christ in the 10. chap. of MATTHEW, does
require of his believers a confession of faith. They are greatly to be
reproved who of their own, will for gain and such other light causes forsake
Jerusalem and go into Babylon.

We may learn by the example of the Moabites to yield harbor to good men: for
though they were molested by the Israelites: yet we read not they did annoy
ELIMELECH or any of his. If thou say that they were so oppressed of the
Israelites, that they did that against their will: yet it is evident that they
did yield harbor to DAVID'S parents when they were old, as it is in the 1.
SAMVEL. 22. chap. So the Aegiptians yielded harbor to Christ and his mother.
God does oftentimes commend unto us the state of strangers. Men are banished
for many causes, we cannot always stay in our own country, though we would
most willingly there live, let us not show our selves in this part worse than
Gentiles. Advise with thy self that the ancestors were not always in their
own country but were strangers and pilgrims: and consider the wonderful
conuersions which are of things, and the daily changing of Empires, so that
grievous wars may easily arise, by which many men are shutt out of their
seats, and possessions, and being mindful of the changes of worldly things,
let us deal well one with an other. ELIMELECH is constrained to depart with
his. But if thou say that he was wicked, and that he went with his will and
no necessite driving him: yet it is evident that there have been many godly and
good men in all ages, which have forsaken their country and left their houses
against their wills. God does in ISAI. 16. chap. threaten the Moabites that
he will pull them out of their nestes, and yields this reason, because they
do not harbor the Israelites that flee in the time of war, or if they do
receive them they betray them to their enemies.

Also women have a notable example of NAOMI, who followed her husband into a
strange country. SARA also did not forsake ABRAHAM for his troublesome
estate, though she did suffer great danger not only once for his sake and
fault. And also other godly matrons have with their husbands, borne
bannishment and other troubles patiently. But if men are despisers of true
Religion and go into a place, in which godly men cannot be conversant with a
safe conscience, they ought not to cast themselves into open danger. What
do thou think of those women which will show themselves hard to go with
their husbands from one street to another? what do ye think say I, of those
women, if their husbands should take great iournies with great dangers and
labors? Truly it is a troublesome thing to dwell amongst strangers* but
necessity that sharp darte, does oftentimes prick us.

The 3. Sermon.
3 Then Elimelech the husband of Naomie died, and she remained, with her two
sons.

4 Which took them wives of the Moabites: the ones name was Orpah, and the
name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there about ten years.

5 And Mahlon and Chilion died also both twain: So the woman was left
destitute of her two sons, and of her husband*


IF any man will be conversant in the reading of the holy scripture with
profit, first he must mark the sense and scope of every place, next every
thing must be referred, to the confirmation of faith, and the amending of
manners, as to the especial end. As concerning these few words, our writer
says ELIMELECH departed out of this life, leaving NAOMI, and her two sons
which married them wives of the Moabites: as it is noted after in the fourth
chapter. MAHLON married RVTH: CHILION married ORPAH: and they tarried ten years
out of their own country. Afterward they both died, NAOMI was left alive
destitute of her husband and her two sons.

The Hebrews say, that this RVTH was the daughter of EGLON King of Moab, whom
EHVD (who is also called A^OTH) thrust through with a dagger, IVDG. 3. whom
some Christian interpreters do follow: but it is not probable, that that king
would marry his daughter, to a Hebrew, a poor man, and a man dwelling out of
his country: or suffer her, to live in poverty: neither seems it to agree
with the account of the times. But the Jews are wont to vaunt much of their
country men, and ambitiously to counterfeit, I know not what nobility,
according to the manner of them which being poorer then Co^DRVS and of no
estimation, yet sometime they do falsely brag of great riches, and nobility of
their family when they are amongst strangers.

Here this question may be asked, whether did these two, being Israelites, born
in Bethlehe^, well in marrying Moabitish women? For God had made a law, that
such marriages should not be made. NVMB. 25. chap. The women of Amm^n did entise
the Israelites to fornication and Idolatry, and of this it arose, that they
ought not to marry or make a league with the Ammonites or Moabites. EXODUS 23.
So it is not lawful for the Jews to marry with any other Infidels, for the
same danger. EXODUS 34. least thou should take of their daughters to thy
sons, and they should commit fornication after their Gods: and also entise
thy sons to commit fornication after their Gods. Idolatry (that I may note
it by the way) is every where in the scripture figured out by whoredom. For
God does espouse to him, as a wife, not only his whole Church, but every
member of the same. And therefore they ought only to depend upon him: but if
they do allow other Gods and forsake him, they commit adultery. This
Metaphore does express notably the disposition of Idolaters. For adulteresses
and adulterers, do think night and day of their filthy loves: neglecting the
care of household affairs, and spending their goods upon adulteresses and
adulterers: They do excuse the vices of adulteresses and adulterers: they
cannot be brought from the love one of another, they can abide no warning.

DEVTER. 7. Thou shall not join in affinity with them (the seven nations
spoken of before) give not thy daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter
unto thy son. For she will cause thy son to turn away from me, and to
serve other Gods: then will the wrath of the Lord wax hot against you and
destroy you suddenly. IOSHVA does repeat the same in the 23. chap. in those
great assemblies, which he called a little before his death: so likewise in the
3. chap. of the IVDGES, and 1. book of the KINGS the 11. chap. And that those
laws, are not to be understood only of those seven nations spoken of before:
but of other also, it is understood of the general reason, which is joined
to the law: for he says it will come to pass, that they will be called back
from the embracing of the true GOD: the which danger they do run into,
which do marry Idolaters. EZRA in the 9. and 10. Chap. and also NEHEMIAH in
the 13. chap. are angry with them because they did break the law of GOD, who
did marry the women of Moab and Ammon. The like is read in the 2. chap. of
ZEPHANIAH. Neither is there want of examples, which do show, how unprosperous
those unequal marriages are. SOLOMON married many strange women against the
kingly law wrote in DEVTER. 17. amongst whom, the scripture makes mention of
the Ammonites and the Moabites. 1. book of the KINGS the 11. chap. to whom he
granted, that they should build them temples to their Gods, neither is it to be
doubted, but that he had many probable reasons for the defense of his deeds:
but he threw both himself and his into great dangers. He had REHOBOAM of
his wife which was a Moabitish woman, who was a most wicked man, and a great
cause of the division of the kingdom. IEHOSAPHAT joined affinity with the
wicked family of ACHAB: For he gave ATHALIA the daughter of ACHAB for wife to
his son IORAM: the which without doubt he seemed to himself and others to
have done of a wise forecast, who had persuaded themselves that by this means
that kingdom which was cut and divided, might be made whole: but there wanted
but little, but that the whole family of Iehosaphat was almost overthrown by
this marriage. 2. Chronicles, 21. chap. It is said that IORAM the son of
IEHOSAPHAT lived no otherwise then AHAB did, the cause is showed because he
married AHABS daughter: wicked women do not only entise their husbands to
Idolatry, but they instill the same into their children with their milk. But
these things are not so to be taken, as if it were not lawful by any means
for the Israelites to marry strangers, though they had been converted to the
truth. For there is a law extant in the 21. chap. of DEVTER. that a woman
taken captive might upon certain conditions be married with an Hebrew. SALMA
who is also called SALMON, a Prince of the tribe of Judah, married RAHAB a
Cananite. BOAZ married this RVTH, which women are placed in the genealogy of
Christ, MATTHEW. 1. DAVID married MAACHAM the daughter of the King of GESVR.
Neither is it to be thought, that those marriages were unlawful.

That we may come nearer to the matter, whether did these two brethren well or
no, in marrying wives of the Moabites, there can be no certainty said of it.
They who say that they did evil, do urge this, that the Scripture says, they
did take to themselves wives of the Moabites, saying that their Mother did not
give those wives to them: but it may be as easily answered that they took
their wives with the consent of their mother. Next that they had no children of
them, which was had in reproach amongst the Israelites: and God does threaten
barrennes to them which do break the law of marriage. MALAC. 2. chap. also for
that they died a sudden death, which is numbered amongst the punishments of
sinners. But these arguments are weak, I will rather hold with them, which
say, that they sinned in that, that they took them wives of the Moabites, not
yet converted to the true faith and worship of the only God. For I do gather
that although ORPAH was daily in company with the faithful, yet she was not
turned to the true faith, then that she returned to her country Gods. Also
RVTH was not fully converted to the true religion, I gather of that, that LIRA
says in the last chapter of this book: that NAOMI does persuade her to return
also: which she would not have done, if she had bin converted before, because
she would not persuade her to return, from the faith and worship of the
only true God: but of this we will speak at other times. But God would not
have them that they should marry with the Moabites and Ammonites, not only
because they were Idolaters, but also for other causes, set down in EXODUS 23
Chap. But NAOMIE does confess afterward, that both these, did show their
marriage faith to their husbands. Those two sons ought to have returned into
their country and married wives there: For they were not ignorant that by the
law the Israelites were forbidden marriage with strangers, and this law was
repeated oftener the^ once. But it is most danger when the Israelitishe
virgins do marry the Moabites, and other strangers. Also in the new testament,
marriages with Idolaters are disalowed of. 2. COR. 6. chap. PAVLE says, thou
must not draw the yoke with unbelievers, which does chiefly belong to
marriage. For this word Wedlock is taken amongst the Latins from a yoke: for
that married folks are as if it were bound under one yoke. But though thou
do understand these words of PAVLE generally, that we must not keep
company with unbelievers: yet hereof it may be inferred that much rather we
must not marry with them. 1. COR. 7. chap. when the Apostle says, that the
faithful must not forsake the unfaithful wife (he does speak of marriage
contracted) and not to be contracted. Therefore we must take heed, least we
marry with the wicked, for wealth, for power, or for other temporal profits.
Yet at least some regard ought to be had of these Children, which coming of
unequal matrimony, are commonly badly brought up: In GENESIS 6. chap. the sons
of the holy Fathers did marry wives of the daughters of CAIN, because they were
bewtifull, and of them they had Giantes, that is despisers and contemners of
religion. Superstitious mothers do corrupt their children with false opinions,
which they do hold obstinately, and that they may do very easily, since they
are daily conversant with them, and they do refuse no labor that they may do
these things. IVDG. 3. chap. there is an other example of the Israelites which
did marry Idolaters. And there may many new examples be brought of them, who
this way have cast both themselves and their children into great danger of
wealth, estimation, and the soul. Therefore let the parents being mindful
of these dangers, beware least they give their sons to wicked women, much
less to give their daughters to wicked husbands, in which there is greatest
danger: let not children choose them such wives, their parents being against
them. Although many say that they can turn their wives to the truth, yet they
know that they are not wiser then SOLOMON: who did hope (without doubt) that he
could do the same, but by the flatteries, of women he forsook God, and so
forward.

Of that that it is said that ELIMELECH died, and both his sons, we must
call to mind that all men must die. HEB. 9. this is called the way of all flesh
in the scriptures, in which they may not linger at their pleasure. As many as
were before us are dead. In the book of GENESIS the 5. chap. wherein those
fathers which lived long, are numbered, who flourished before the flood, and of
every of them it is said, they re dead. All other dangers may be avoided by
some means, but the danger of death cannot be shunned. For he must die whom
order does require, whether he will or no: if that another would dye in his
place, that would not be granted. Every body does depart sooner for the most
part then they think them selves. Not only old men but also young men do
sometime dye suddenly. Who would think that NAOMI should have out lived her
sons? we know not when, where, or how we shall dye.

These things ought to stir us up, the fatal hour being at hand: for who
will not willingly die, having so many companions in this journey? who is so
bold to ask of God that he might live alone? If thy friends dye, thou
should think that they go before thee: and that thou shall follow by and
by. For there are far better comfortes in the scriptures, but these are not
to be despised. If thou art troubled with diverse and grievous afflictions, thou
should think that thou shall dye, and that shortly: do not therefore lay thy
hand upon thy self, but wait for it patiently. Next when we hear that we must
look for death, let us furnish our selves with necessary things, as men do
when they are going a journey, we must beware of wickedness, we must follow
after godliness and innocence of life. They are to be reproved which are
troubled when they hear any mention of death. For who will hope to have help
in war of him who does fear a sheathed sword in peace? danger is not overcome
by despising.

And since NAOMI being compassed with many evils, did not despair: we also
being cast of God into grievous troubles and miseries, let us not despair or
accuse him. A woman for this only canse or name that she is a widow, is
miserable. For the husband in the scripture is called the head of his wife: for
the body without the head is not a man but a stock. Widows are often times
despised of their friends: this evil is somewhat mitigated, if their husbands
do leave behind them sons, to be a comfort and help, to their mother ae
widow: But the death of her sons followed the death of her husband
ELIMELECH: so that she seemed wholly to be destitute of man's aid. To these was
added poverty, for the goods that she had, were spent by little and little in
iourneis and other causes, which are not known to us. For what is more
despised than a poor widow? Add to these that she was now old, and such
cannot well nourishe themselves, because they are froward, and subject to many
diseases. And old age is a disease by it self. Old women as the common people
say, are unworthy of life, and they are mocked with many reproaches.

To this heap of troubles is added that they were strangers amongst the
Moabites a nation noisome, cruel to Israelites and superstitious. If her
husband and children had died in their country, she had her kinsmen and men of
affinity to comfort her: if she had been a stranger amongst people of of her
own nation, it would have been grievous, how much more amongst these? But if
as some think she went into the land of Moab against the word of God, she felt
then the bites and stinges of conscience, she remembered that those troubles
befell to her for her own sin: yet for all these heaps of troubles, NAOMI did
not despair, for she knew that this is the lotte of the saints in this
world, that they are exercised with many and great afflictions.

We must think in great afflictions that they are not sent us by chance, but
of God a most merciful father to ou^ profit, and also that he will
mittigate those troubles and take them away by and by if it be for our profit:
we must think what we have deserved by our sins: for God is wont to cast
his own children oftentimes into great troubles, that he may make them rejoice
the more afterward. Furthermore others have also their burdens. Let us not
say that neuerman was so oppressed with so many troubles: for as PAVLE says
we have not withstoode as yet to blood. God does tame us with great troubles,
that we may seek for eternal life, in which we shall be freed from all
trobles. There are also other ends of troubles which God does send. Satan
does endeavor to persuade us in troubles that God does hate us, and therefore
that it is needful that we provide for our selves, but we must patiently
look for help from God, who also in his good time did mercifully at the
length deliver out of great troubles.

The 4. Sermon.
6 Then she arose with her daughters in law and returned from the country of
Moab. For she had heard say in the country of Moab that the Lord had visited
his people, and given them bread.

7 Wherefore she departed out of the place where she was and her two daughters
in law with her, and they went on their way to return unto the land of Judah.

8 Then Naomie said unto her two daughters in law, go return each of you unto
her own mothers house: the Lord show favor unto you as ye have done with the
dead and with me.

9 The Lord grant you, that you may finds rest, either of you in the house of
her husband. And when she kissed them, they lift up their voice and wept.


NOW he entreats of the return of NAOMIE into her country. In the first
place is showed how as soon as she heard that the Lord had given plenty to
the Israelites, she presently betook her self to her iourny, that she might
return into her country. Both her daughters in law kept her company and
followed her a little way as it seemed of no other purpose then to leave their
own country, and to go with her into the land of Moab.

We do learn out of this place from whence abundance of things do come.
For the scripture says, God visited (which word is taken both in the good
part and evil) his people and gave them bread: that is, fruit, corn, and
other things necessary for the sustenance of life. All which amongst the
Hebrews is called bread, as also in that petition, Give us this day our daily
bread:: GOD therefore does give us all things necessary. But as God in his
mercy does give us abundance: so of his justice does he give us scarcetie: He
works by second causes, yet he is not bound to them. Therefore let us pray
that he deal not with us according to our deserts, but according to his
great mercy.

But here is a notable example to be followed of NAOMIE. For she by and by
as soon as the famine ceased, went out of the idolatrous nation to the people
of God, as if it were to a haue^: so let us also as often as occasion is offered
fly to that place, where we may serve God with a pure conscience, let us
embrace him with both hands especially if the word of God be preached
publicly in our own country. DAVID in bannishment did first complain of
this, that he could not be present in the holy assemblies, and as the Heart
does earnestly desire the rivers of waters, after that he is chased of the
hunters, so his soul thirsted after the Lord. 2. SAMVEL. 2 chap. DAVID hearing
that Saul was dead, by and by he consulted with the Lord, if he should go
unto ZICLAG into some City of the tribe of IVDAH esteeming nothing more then
to return home with speed, he being commanded of God without delay went with
his wife and fellow soldiers to Hebron. If we live in those places, where
religion is freely exercised we can scarce contain our selves in our
callinges, what then will become of us, there where no mention is made of the
word of God, and so many wicked examples are daily set before our eyes?
Wherefore if thou fallest by some necessity amongst wicked men, as soon as thou
can commodiously, chaung thy place: For there is a greater care to be had of
our eternal safetye the^ of all other things. Those Israelites are evil
spoken of, and also deservedly, which did not accept the allowance of CIRVS,
and would not return into their country, but rather die in Babylon, than leave
their nestes.

It is said in the 18. APOCA. allegoricallie, that we must leave Babylon and
Moab, that is idolatry and wickedness.

NAOMIE does exhort her daughters in law, that each of them should go home to
their mothers house, she does call it their mothers house not because their
fathers were dead, for afterward in the 3. chap. BOAZ does praise RVTH
because she did leave her father and mother and came into the land of Israel:
but because children and especially daughters are most conversant with the
mothers and most familiar with them. GENESIS. 24. REBECCA does call it the
house of her mother and not of her father. Of what purpose she did persuade
them not to come into the land of Judah we will speak in place convenient.

She does pray for their prosperity, first that God would bless them: next
that God would be merciful unto the^, as they were to the dead and her. The
word chaes^d signifies godliness, mercifulnes, benignity, and bountifulnes,
not after a certain manner but which does proceed from an ardent affection,
that speech is oftentimes found in the scriptures and this word EMETH is added,
that is, truth or faith. GENESIS 24. ABRAHAMES servant says if ye now consult to
deal mercifully with my master, show it that is if ye will do him a good
turn and deserve well of him, give your daughter to wife for his son. 1.
SAM. 15. It is said of the Cenites, that they did show mercy to all the
children of Israel when they came out of Aegipt, that is that they gave them
benefits: therefore they were preserved when the Amalekites were destroyed.

2. SAM. 3. chap. ABNER says to ISHBOSHETH I have dealt mercifully with thy
house, that is, I have bestowed benefits upon it. chap. 10. DAVID said I will
deal mercifully with HANON the son of NOHAS as his father dealt mercifully
with me, sending Ambassadors who should comfort him after his fathers death.
And because he had received benefits of them, his will was to give them
thanks. etc.

What did these widows? they did love their husbands when they were alive,
and they did serve them withal kind of honest duties so far as it became
honest wives, they did speak honorably of the dead, and they did so lead
their lives that the dead should not be evil spoken of for their causes.
Furthermore for their husbands fakes they did help their mother in-law, being
left alone, so they did show mercy to the dead. But no man ought to think that
of any preposterous zeal, they did offer I know not what sacrifices, or mu^ble
up some prayers for them which were departed. For without doubt RVTH knew
that those souls which are departed in the faith of the Messiah are in rest.
etc. The Mass Priests do exhort men that they show mercy to the dead, that
is, hier Masses to be said for the forgiveness of sins, and that they should
provide to celebrate the seventh days the months days and year days. etc.
that their souls might be freed out of purgatory. But since that God has
appointed so many kinds of sacrifices yet (as PETER MARTER observes) it is
not read that he did appoint any at all for them that are tormented in
purgatory, which he would have done if our souls should suffer any torments in
purgatory. It is evident by the holy scriptures that there are only two places
for souls to be in, namely a place of rest and a place of torments, the third
place which is called purgatory is invented of man. If any man will do good to
the dead, let him bestow it on the widow and his Children and friends: also
let him declare the noble deeds done by the dead man, neither let him do this,
as at the request of the man when he was alive. etc.

The other thing is that NAOMI does pray for her daughters in law, that they
may each of them find rest in their husbands house, that is, she does wish for
their happy estates and peaceable marryages, she prays for good husbands and
tractable with whom they may lead their lives prosperously without poverty
(which is a common burden of marriage) and without strokes and blows.
Afterward in the 3. Cap: NAOMI said to RVTH, I do seek thee rest, that thou
may be well, that is, I do seek that thou may have a good husband. She
did not think that marriage did lack all troubles. For marriage has her
troubles as diverse diseases, troublesome childbyrthes, faults, burialles, and
other heavy lottes of children and many more of this kind, but God as NAOMI
knew will be present at godly matches and mitigate their troubles. But it is
manifest that such husbands as NAOMIE wishes for her daughters in law are
given of God. Let not young men, nor virgins enquire by superstitious oracles
what wives or husbands they shall have, but let them rather pray to God that
he would prosper them in that matter and let them depend upon his providence.
We gather of this wish or prayer of NAOMIE, that she believed that God had a
care of mortal things, and that he does reward good deeds with rewards and
punishes evil deeds with punishments.

Next we do learn what things to desire and pray for, for others and
especially for them which have done us good, namely all those things which
pertain to the leading of our life in godlynes. The Apostles also do begin
their Epistles with prayers for grace and peace from God. The Satiricall Poet
does somewhere reprove the foolish desires of those parents which do wish
riches, and beauty for their children, and other such like things: not those
things which are of great importance. Truly external goods without the
goods of the mind do profit us little. Furthermore they do make bad
provision both for them selves and their children which do curse them as we do
see them commonly do. If thou do bless them, yet they are almost without
any good, what then will become of them whom thou do curse? Furthermore
see what we are to look for of them which do deal well and rightly with
others, love, faith and other virtues are rewarded of God. If thou do
nourish thy parents when they are old, and do to them all the duties of a
son thou shall find the like to be done for thee of thy sons, but if thou
do trouble them, thou shall look for the same of thy sons toward thee,
and whether thou will or no thou will say or at least think I am well dealt
with, for that I have dealt wickedly with my parents, the same will be said of
others toward whom we have not been merciful.

Also the office of married people is here to be observed. NAOMIE does praise
her daughters in law because they showed all the duties of humanity to her
sons, let other women perform the same toward their husbands if they
govern themselves well they may have good husbands and tractable for the most
part: but if otherwise, they procure to themselves and others, great troubles:
she does wish them rest, that is peaceable marriage. For married people ought
not to braule and fight amongst themselves but live peaceably, for peace and
concord is especially praised in matrymony. Many things are read of the offices
of married folks in the epistles of S. PAVLE and PETER which is not needful to
be repeated in this place.

NAOMIE kissed her daughters in law they shed tears plentifully which shall be
spoken afterward in place conuenyent: NAOMIE afterward in this book did call
her daughters in law, daughters, who did love her better then their cou^trye,
their parents and kinsemen. Good Lord how seldom at this day do mothers in
law and daughters in law agree? for braules do often arise amongst them for
light causes, many do wish their mothers in law to be at the furthest side of
Garamantes. etc.

The 5. Sermon.
10 And they said unto her, surely we will return with thee unto the people.

11 But Naomie said, turn again my daughters: for what cause will ye go with
me, are there any mo sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?

12 Turn again my daughters, go your way: for I am too old to have an
husband. If I should say I have hope, and if I had an husband this night yea if
I had borne sons:

13 Would ye tarry for them till they were of age? would ye be deferred for
them from taking of husbands? nay my daughters, for it greeueth me much for
your sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me.


WHen NAOMI wenton her journey toward her country, both her daughters in law
accompanied her a little way not only for courtesy, but they purposed to
accompanye her into the land of Judah. But she dissuaded them from their
purpose, and bid them return again to their houses, showing these causes, for
she says, she is now farther stricken in age then to determine to marry
again and to have sons who according to the law of Mosis may marry them and
raise up seed to their brothers. NAOMI had not offended if she had bin married
to another though she were old. For Matrimony is not only instituted for the
avoiding of filthy lusts, and procreation of Children, but also for the help
and co^^ort of each other. For God said it is (...) good for man to be alone,
let us (...) therefore a help, etc. Many widows d^e marry other husbands
that they may (...) their living more easily. But if she being stricken in age
should marry any young man, she might have been accused of wantonness and
lightness. An old widow ought rather to think of another life, than of the
delights of this life and new marriages, and prepare themselves for heaven,
and they may do that better, if they remain sole, then if they were married.

Old folks may learn by this example to be mindful of their old age, and
forsake their nuttes, as it is in the Proverbs. Next she says if she should
be fit for marriage, and determine to marry and have by and by a son by him,
yet it were not good for them to tarry until they should come to age, and in
the mean season neglect the occasions of marrying with others, who would marry
the^. Sometimes maidens do wayt until those whom they will marry do come to
age, which is not without danger, as also that boys and wenches are joined
together by their parents in some countries. Afterward when they be old,
either they do not agree, or their wills are easily changed. THAMAR the
daughter in law of IVDAH did wayt until SELAH IVDAHS third son came to age
that he might raise up seed to his ii. brothers which departed without sons.
GENESIS 38. She does add that she is moved, and very much grieved for their
troubles, and that her sorrow did increase. Or she would say this, it should
grieve me more than you, if for my sake you should come into any hard case.
Because the hand of the Lord is gone out against me: that is, I am pressed of
him with poverty and other troubles, what will ye do with me, since that I
cannot provide for your profit. She is not so minded as they, who when they
are oppressed with evil, do wish all men to be oppressed with the same
troubles: and do advise for their own commodity by other men's troubles.
Sometime many men can provide for their daughters and children good marriages,
but they will not because they shall lack their service and be at great
charges. I will speak nothing of them who do drive their children to
filthiness, that they may in the mean season pamper their paunches.

NAOMI acknowledged that she fell into those dangers not by chance, but she
confessed that the hand of the Lord was stretched out against her, for no
afflictions fall out to the godly, except God decreed to exercise them with the
same, the consideration of the which does much avail, to persuade to bear
all things patiently. But what she prevailed by this her speech we will show
hereafter.

But thou do ask? wherefore she did drive back both her daughters in law,
offering their company so willingly? Was it not profitable, that they should
be brought from idolatry to true Religion: as if it were to be delivered out
of burning fire? I answer that NAOMIE earnestly desired her two daughters to
have bin converted to the worship of the true God, but she would by her
disswation try their faith, peradventure she did sufficiently know their
minds. For we may not trust their first motions, especially being young women,
who will easily chaung their minds and yield some times to light temptations.
The wise woman feared least the matter peradventure should otherwise fall out
in a strange land, then they immagined, and they then should by and by fall
back to Idolatry: how often do we see men embracing the Gospel, when they do
not obtain that which they dreamed of, slide into errors to the great offense
of others? For it had been better for those Apostaties, as it is in the 2.
PETER 2. never to have known the truth, then when they know it to fall away
from that holy commandment which was given to the^ etc. Christ him self in
the 14. chap of LVKE does command them who will follow him, to think what
remains for them by two similitudes. Also in the 9. chapter of LVKE he says
after the hand is laid to the plowe, we must not look back to things which
are behind us, and in the 17. chap. he puts us in mind of LOTS wife which
was turned into a pillar of salt, they do not well who will drive others to
Christian religion by devises or vain policies. For if afterward they
understand the matter to be otherwise then they heard, they will prosecute true
religion with deadly hatred: we must deal with them with such arguments as are
drawn out of the word of God. How much then do they offend, who do drive men
to the profession of false religion with promises, deceites, threatninges and
torments? 23. MATT. Woe says he be unto you scribes and Pharisees, for ye
compass sea and land to make one of your profession, and when he is made, ye
make him two fold more the child of hell than you be. Because they who were of
their sect, were instructed by the^ to this, that they should be cruel enemies
to Christ. There are some at this day who do study to bring the Jews to their
religion and, cast the^ into greater dangers, teaching the^ against the law
prescribed to them of God to worship Idols and believe in a MESSIAH made of
bread, etc. Also no man is to be forced to those things from whence he cannot
return. A young man is not to be driven unwillingly to take a wife, nor a
Virgin to take a husband, for consent is required in marriages. Much less are
they to be driven to live always sole, with entisementes, or by craft, or by
force or threatninges. If NAOMIE should have had sons, yet she would not
have her daughters in law to tarry till they were men, for the danger of the
same: but now she wished them good marriages, much less she would that they
should vow to live always widows, being in their flower of youth. In the
counsel that was holden at Cesaraugusta it is recorded that Virgins were not
to be accepted if they had vowed to GOD, except it could be proved that they
were 40. years old, etc. Afterward they were taken in at 30. years of age,
all religion being overthrown, and at last all were taken how young soever
they were no exception. The Apostle, 1. TIMOTHY 5. chap. does command widows
not to be taken to the service of the poor until they be 60. years old, and
young widows to marry and to have children and be housekeepers etc. At this
day snares are laid for children of tender age. For many which were more fit
for marriage are thrust unwillingly into Monasteries, and of this are many
monsterous wickednesses begotten. It is not only a sin in that, that simple
young ones are put in the Monasteries, but this whole kind of life as it is
this day in use, is against the holy Scriptures. Though men may see and
understand this, yet do they defend their inventions obstinately.

But if any will contend that NAOMI did therefore persuade them to return
into their country, that they might live better amongst their acquaintance
than amongst strangers, not that she would try their minds. We answer
that she, if the matter was so, did sin no less than they which persuade
the^, which are willing to forsake their country at this day, where they cannot
worship Christ as they desire, and exhort them that they should not do so,
but believe in the heart what they list, it is no matter what they do believe,
so that they beware of gross crimes and obey the Magistrates, and wait for
better times, etc. For Christ does require a public confession of them that
believe in him. MATT. 10. chap. We ought to further the kingdom of heaven and
look to win others: yet we must do it wisely and not rashly, and every man
ought especially to apply, to instruct their children and household rightly in
true Religion.

The 6. Sermon.
14 Then they lift up their voice and wept again, and Orpah kissed her mother
in law, but Ruth abode still with her.

15 And Maomi said, behold thy sister in law is gone back unto her people and
unto her Gods: return thou after thy sister in law.


Now afterward, here is declared, what NAOMIE prevailed by her speech with
her daughters in law, or rather what befell after she commanded them to
return home. ORPAH returned to her mothers house, but RVTH tarried with her
mother in law. Let us hear what may be gathered out of these words for our
edification. After NAOMIE had exhorted them both, with many reasons to return
home, they wept again very much, which was a sign of great sorrow which they
took of this, that they were to part asunder. For sorrow brings forth tears:
as blood springs out of the body if it be wounded: so if the soul be wounded
tears break forth. Wherefore some do call tears the blood of the soul. As
they offended not in weeping, so neither do they at this day, which shed tears
when they are drawn from their good friends. The Stoyckes say, that it
becomes not a man of courage to weep, for that it is a sign of a weak and
effeminate mind. But the holy scriptures teach otherwise, for in them there are
many examples not only of women: but of most valiant men who by tears have
testified their sorrow, and are not yet accounted to have offended therein.
JOSEPH wept four times when his brethren came to him into Egypt to buy
corn. DAVID who overcame, and slew a Lion, a Bear and Giants, when ZIGLAG was
destroyed he wept so much that his strength failed him: his soldiers also did
the like. 1. SAM. 30. and 2. SAM. 15. DAVID descending the mount of Olives
wept. PETER also wept abundantly: PAVLE and all they whom he had called to
Mille^um wept. ACT. 20. Our savior Christ himself wept often, therefore that
Stoicall sencelesnesse is not approved of God. Yet as in other things so also
in weepeing their must be kept a mean, neither must we weep for every cause.
For all kind of weeping cannot be excused. SENECA although he was a Stoic
himself, yet he says we may weep but not howl out. But this makes
greatly to our comfort, that in this little book it is written down twice,
that these pore women wept abundantly, for hereby we do gather, that God
regards the tears even of them that be very poor. DAVID in the PSALM. 56. 8.
declares that God puts their tears, and so the tears of the godly into
his bottle, and and notes them in his regester. Good Lord how few daughters
in law are there at this day, who if their mothers in law, should depart from
them into other countries or else out of this life, would shed tears for them,
or if they do shedd any they may be called Crocadiles tears:

ORPAH kissed her mother in law: kissing was commonly used in Palestyne and all
Syria, and as at this day other nations also do, so they entertained their
friends and guess, at their coming, and bad them farewell with a kiss: in
like manner they saluted them whom they met with a kiss. Christ in LVKE. 7.
reprooueth SIMON the Pharasie because he entertained him not with a kiss.
ORPAH bidding her mother in-law farewell kissed her. A kiss is a token of
friendship, and kindness, and also of reverence, faith and obedience. PLVTARCH
in the life of CATO VTICENSIS writes, that when he departed out of his
province, the soldiers reverently kissed his hand, the which kind of honor
was at that time only given to Captains or Emperors, and that to very few
of them. POMPEIVS LETVS in his compendium of the Roman histories writes
thus, The Emperors first reached out their hands for their nobles to kiss,
after with their own hands they lift them up to kiss their mouths:
DIOCLETIANVS by a decree appointed that all me^ without difference of degree
should fall down and kiss his feet, the which he set forth magnifically,
adorning his shoes, with gold, pearls and stones, the which they do record
was done before by C. CALIGVLA, etc. this says he. Afterward the Roman
bishops also, like unto those tyrauntes which sought to have done unto
themselves the honors due to God, offered to others their feet to be kissed:
the which SIBILLA CVMANA foretold in the 8. Sermon: (...). that is, there shall
be a king with a hoare head, or a helmet, having a name near unto the sea or
bridge, regarding the world, bestowing his gifts with an evil foot, for they
must think that he does them great honor whom he allows to kiss his
feet. S. PAVLE, 1. COR. 16. says salute you one another with an holy kiss
excluding the sins of unchastity and hypocrisy, and he does not in these
words prescribe a law that all nations should receive this custom of
kissing one another. 2. SAM. 20. IOAB kissing AMASA slew him. IVDAS with a
kiss betrayed the son of God. This is too too common at this day that men
whom they kiss, that is whom they flatter before their face, they do
secretly backbite. It is to be supposed that this ORPAH kissed her mother in
law of a sincere mind, not as that son of whom it is in the fable, who
faining that he would kiss his mother when he was led to execution, with his
mouth bit off her ear. It is said that she returned to her own: If that she
had as it is very probable some taste of true religion, she is a figure of
them, whom the Lord in the Gospel, calls (...) which for a time profess
the true faith, but do afterward fall back again, either for hope of
prosperity or being discouraged for fear of troubles. It is not sufficient to
lay some foundations of true religion but it must be builded up until that
spiritual building be perfected. It is not enough to run except we obtain
to the goal. Who so perseuereth to the end says the Lord he shall be saved and
not he that began well and goes but a little forward. LOTS wife is to us an
example, who when she looked back again was turned into a pillar of Salt. If
this ORPAH had come into Judea, it does not seem that she would have
perseuered. But whether she perished in her errors, or was afterward
converted or repented without the loss of the truth we know not: neither
should there concerning this or of others such like be any questions moved
which tend not to edification.

RVTH tarried with her mother in law and could not be drawn from her by any
perswations there is a like example. IOH. 6. of Christ's apostles, when many
fell away from him, he asked them whether they would also go away: Therefore
SIMON PETER answered: to whom shall we go Lord? Thou have the word of eternal
life, and we believe and know that thou art the Christ the son of the living
God. We must pray to God that he will suffer us neither by flattering
perswations, nor threatenings and terrors, to be led away from true religion.

When ORPAH was departed, NAOMIE again persuaded RVTH, that she should also
return home, because her sister was returned to her people and her Gods. But
what Gods did the Moabites worship? besides others they had especially
BAALP^OR, as it is read. NVM. 25. who^e some called PRIAPVS, as ISIDOR and
THEOPHELAT as Gradus de dijs gentium witnesses. Others call him SATVRNE, and
BAAL was the name of the God, and PIOR of the mountain or place where he was
worshipped. Or the idol, PEOR was so called because he was naked, for PAAR
signifies to discover, to make naked, namely because that PRIAPVS, as the
author of a filthy verse says, had his secret parts always naked, and never
covered with any garments.

The manner of the worship of this Idol was so filthy, that in holy assemblies
it may not be spoken of for shame, whereby we gather how far men fall away from
God when the light of the truth is lost: they also worshipped the God CHEMOS.

For it is said. 1. KINGS. 11. That SO. LOMON built an alter to CHEMOSH the
abomination of MOAB in the Mount of Olives. And that which is written in IVD.
11. that CHEMOSH is the God of the Ammonites, is not contrary to this place,
for it seems that both the nations worshipped it. Who this CHA^MOSH was it is
uncertain. KAMAS signifies to hide, hereby some do gather that he was PLVTO
the God of the hels, or of things under the earth: GYRALDVS seems to say
that VENUS ASTART was called CHEMOS, which in the figure of a star was
worshipped of the Sidonians and the Moabites. There are some which will have
BAAL PEOR, and CHEMOSH to have bin one and the same God, to whom I do not
assent because it is certain that the nations worshipped many Gods, some
think that CHEMOSH was that God of banquets and drinkinges, who is called of
the Grecians, (...), because that the Greek alludeth to the Hebrew word. The
nations adjoining to them had also their Gods or Idols. The Ammonites had
MELCHOM 4. KIN. 23. IER. 49. which signifies their king, peradventure he was
so called, because he was chief among many Gods which (...) worshipped for
their defense. (...) 11. The God of the Ammonites is called MOLOCH, some think
that he was Saturn^ what if he and Molcome were one? the Philistines had
Astaroth, that is Juno or Venus. 1. SAM. 7. The Accaronites had Beelzebub, that
is they worshipped the god of a fly. 4. KIN. This seems to be the ^^me with
that, which is called of the Grecians (...). PLINY in his 29. Book. 6. chap.
ca^^eth it miodes, but lib. 10. cap. 2. in the old edition he calls it
achores. GREGORIVS NA^IANS: calls it ACARON. The God ACARON was called so of
ACARON a City of the Philistines where he was especially worshipped. IVBITER
also was called Apo^^nios MVSCA^IVS, of driving and chasing away flies, for the
multitude of flies did great harm to the Phenetians, therefore they sacrificed
to that God and prayed him to drive them away. The Philistines also worshipped
DAGON, of whom there is mention made. IVD. 16. 1. SAM. 5. The Hebrews say that
he had the upper part of a man, and the nether part of a fish as NEPTVNVS and
SIRENE^ are painted. Dag signifies a fish: others say the picture of a man set
forth with a women's face. The Grecians call him derceto or derce. EVSEBIVS:
lib. de praparatione Eua^gelica: says DAGO invented corn and the plow, and
therefore IVPITER was called arotrios amongst the Phaenecians. This seems
well to agree with the Hebrew etimologie for Dagan signifies corn or wheat.

This was a great temptation to RVT* For no man will willingly forsake his
Country and friends. Neither does piety persuade to do it, unless weighty
and necessary matters do enforce us. Our country does allure us to it,
according to that saying of OVID lib. 1. de ponts. Nescio qua natale solum
dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.


Next men are of this quality that they can hardlye be drawn from their
country religion. God in I^REM. 2. cap amplif^ing the sin of his people
being fallen away, says if they should go through the whole world, they should
not find any nation, which will change their Gods with other Gods: yet, that
they have changed his glory with a vayn thing, and with those which are not
treue Gods. All nations do straightly keep those Gods which they have chosen.
Therefore it is a hard matter to turn men from the worship of false Gods to
the worship of the true God. Wherefore it had been no marvel if RVTH had
worshipped strange Gods, and refused to embrace a new religion. Furthermore
householde examples do much move the minds of men, for if they return to
idolatry whom we love, especially if they be great men and many, diverse men
although they love true religion begin to fall away. Therefore it had been no
marvel if RVTH had returned to hers, being shaken and weakened by the
perswations of their mother in law, And it seemed that NAOMIE was not of that
mind to constrayne RVTH to go back, but to try her faith, and she had a
care least it should be said after that she was forced by her mother in law
to receive the Israelitish religion.

In such like cases the minds of men are to be confirmed by contrary examples
promises and threatninges drawn out of the word of God. MAT. 10. says the
Lord: He that loves father or mother above me is not worthy of me, he that
loves son or daughter above me is not worthy of me etc. So he that
prefers his country, his religion and other things before Christ. We must
not look what other men do whether they be many or few, but rather how well
they do it and what God does require of us: and he is to be solicited with
daily prayer, that he will confirm and preserve us by his spirit in true
religion.

The 7. Sermon.
16 And Ruth answered entreat me not to leave thee, nor to depart from thee,
for whether thou go I will go: and where thou dwell I will dwell: thy
people shall be my people and thy God my God.

17 Where thou die I will die, and there will I be buried, the Lord do so to
me and more also, if ought but death depart me and thee.

18 When she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, she left
speaking unto her.


RVTH could not be persuaded by any means to leave her mother in law: but as
hot lime whereupon cold water is poured, she by disswasion becomes more
earnest and forward: and in many words she declared that she would not depart
from her, but that she was ready to suffer all estates with her, and that she
would embrace the Israelites religion, and avoid the superstition of the
Gen^^es: as it appears by her words. Entreat me not to leave thee etc: or
set not against me nor trouble me with thy disswasions, neither hinder me from
going with thee. Whether thou go I will go. I am ready to suffer all
troubles with thee: and because she had said ORPAH was going to her country
and her Gods, she adds thy people my people (understand is or shall be) Thy God
my God. I will acknowledge no other God nor other people but that God of Israel
whom thou do worship and in whom thou do hope and believe: neither
will I hereafter worship BAAL PEOR or CHEMOS the Gods of my nations, or of
any other nations. Where thou die will I die, and there will I be buried.
This is the affection of men that they would be buried in the graves of them
whom they love dearly, and not be separated from them after they were dead.
It it read. In GENESIS. that ABRAHAM bought ground of EPHRON the HITTITE wherein
there was a Cave which he conu^^ted to a burial place for him and his: first
he was buried there, then ISAAKE, then JACOB would not be buried in Aegipt but
bound JOSEPH by an oath, that when he was dead he would bury him in the land
of CANAAN in the Sepulcher of his fathers. GENESIS 47. 49. TO^IAS said unto his
son, I shall die, bury me honorably, and honor thy mother, and also bury
her honorably by me in my sepulcher.

MEZENTIVS although he was a wicked man yet in Virg: in the end of the 10.
Aeneid he entreats Aeneas that he might be buried in the sepulcher of his
son LANSVS, It is accounted as a curse to lack the honor of burial, and
not to be buried in the Sepulchers of their fathers, contrariwise it is
accounted as a blessing to be buried honorably. But true Religion being
decayed, superstitious men did think that pompous burials profited the souls
departed. etc.

RVTH adds an oath by the which she confirms that she will not leave her
mother in-law. The Lord do so to me and more also, if ought but death depart
me and thee. She does not simplye swear but curses her self if she keep
not her promise. This kind of swearing is often times used in the scriptures.

The Lord do so to me and more also. But it is not expressed what evils they
do wish for themselves which use those words, or to what vengeance they yield
themselves if they falsify their faith: For the holy Ghost by these
Aposiopeses would teach us, that we must deal warily in swearing, and beware
least that our tongue run before our mind, for here that saying ought
especially to have place: Tongue whether do thou go? It is to be observed
that godly men oftentimes used swearinges in the old and new Testament. Not in
all causes but only in grave and weighty matters. And the manner which they
used is noted, for all oaths are not of one sort. This manner which RVTH used,
shows that all they should at length perish, who profane the name of God by
violating their oath, moreover the saints do perform in deed, those
things which they promised by oath, as RVTH also did. There are some who do
enterpret these words conditionally. The Lord do so to me: and so forward: if
God give me power and ability as he has done hitherto I will be constant:
and so forward. But the first sense, that it should be the form of an oath is
more plain and simple.

Here is a notable example in RVTH propounded to us, first her conversion to
God, and confession of her faith, denying her own nation and religion. She does
confess that she will join her self to the true God and his people. RAHAR
made the like confession In IOSVA. 2. cap. for the Lord himself is your God
and so forward.

Next here is an example of love to God and our neighbor. Because without
doubt she had learned of her father in law, of her mother in law, and husband,
and especially by the inspiration of the holy Ghost: the God of Israel to be
the true God, and leaving BAAL P^OR and other Gods, and Goddesses of the
nations, she hasteneth her self to that land, where the true God is
worshipped, neither does she suffer her self to be hindered by any pleasures
of this life.

She might have lived more pleasantly amongst her friends, and as it seemed
have gotten her a husband more easily. Yet she had rather (as it is said of
MOSES in the Epistle to the Hebrews) to suffer trobles with the people of god,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of
Christ to be greater riches than the treasures of MOAB: If she had bin without
faith she would have returned home to the Idolaters, for every imagination of
a better marriage, of riches, and such other commodities. She did hear the
word of God with profit, and therefore she might be compared to the tree well
planted, and the house builded on a rock. MATT. 7. cap.

Here we have also an example of love toward our neighbor, he is our
neighbor who wants our help, or wealth or counsel. LVKE. 10. NAOMIE being
stricken in age and care, did lack the help of others. Therefore RVTH would
not go away from her, who had not received small gifts from her, and though
she also was destitute of necessary things yet she trusting in Gods goodness,
would not forsake her mother in law, whom she esteemed as her own mother. Good
Lord how few are there at this day, I say not daughters in-lawe which will show
such friendship to their mothers inlaw: but how few children are there which
will show such friendship to their mothers inlaw or affection to their
parents being old? Many cannot be persuaded by any reasons be they never so
great to be present, and to serve their parents when they are diseased.

But when their parents are in good estate they abhor their company, if they
be somewhat severe. They are very rare who think that they cannot bestow so
many benefits upon their Parents as they have received from them: yea they do
oftentimes forsake them in greatest dangers: and the cause of this matter is,
because they are destitute of faith and love. In that that RVTH denied her
country religion, and embraced the Israelites religion, the vocation of the
Gentiles is prefigured, who leaving their superstitions, turned to the God of
ISRAEL.

At last NAOMIE seeing her daughter in law fully purposed to go with her, she
would trouble her no more: but when she had sufficiently seen and tried her
constancy, she willingly took her as a companion of her journey, she did wish
also the other to be converted to true religion. Without doubt she rejoiced
and did thank God that he had provided her (being afflicted so many ways) so
faithful a daughter. For it should have been a troblesome and a hard iourny to
her, to travel so far without a trusty companion.

She does teach us by her example that we must not be troblesome to the^, who
do propound to themselves, to do good things, we ought rather withstand the^
who do devise wicked things, that we may keep them back from their purposes,
and although they be very stubborn, yet we must at no hand give place unto
them.

Let men that are poor and afflicted gather this comfort also, that God can
stir up men to help and feed them. And when they seem most forsaken, yet
let them not be driven to desperation by the enemy of mankind.

The 8. Sermon.
19. So they went both until they came to Bethlehem and when they were come to
Bethlehem, it was noysed of them through all the city, and they said, is not
this Naomie?

20 And she answered them, call me not Naomie, but call me Mara: for the
almighty has given me much bitterness.

21 I went out full, and the Lord caused me to return empty: why call ye me
Naomie seeing the Lord has humbled me, and the almighty has brough me unto
adversity.

22, So Naomie returned and Ruth the Moabitesse her daughter in law with her,
when she came out of the country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehe^ in the
beginning of barl^e harvest.


IT is described in these few words, how NAOMIE and RVTH came out of the land
of Moab to Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, and what befell to them and what
time of the year they went this journey, which does contain great doctrine
and comfort.

First, they say that both of them went together in their journey, until they
came to Bethlehem. RVTH which was the younger, and therefore more light, did not
go before her, being old but waited on her, neither is it to be doubted but
that she did lessen the grief of her mother in laws journey by pleasant
speches, and al other means that she could. It is the duty of young folks
when they travel with their elders to have a care of them, this phrase seems
to declare that they did not linger in their journey but went right to
Bethlehem. For it does not become women to linger in their way.

The whole City is moved at their coming. Him. in the conjugation Niphal
signifies to make a tumult or a noise or a sound. 1. SAM. 4. Verse. 5. when
the arc was brought into the tents, it is said that the Israelites cried as
though the earth had shook. The Septuagint do use this word Cai echesen and
it sounded, as it is in this place also: 1. KINGS. 1. verse. 45. When the king
was chosen the City was in a tumult or was moved with a noise. MATT. 21. when
Christ went into Jerusalem the EVANGELIST says that the City was moved. Also
in this place the City is moved that is:

They were astonished, they had diverse speeches of the coming of the poor
women: they did flock to see the^, as in many Cities, they do sometimes behave
themselves too too impudently, when strangers come: they wonder at this
change of things.

By this it appears that NAOMIE was a woman of great renown and ELIMELECH
her husband was a man of some account. For at the coming of poor men there is
no great concourse of people: They asked if this was NAOMIE? that name
signifies plentiful sweet and pleasant. The meaning is, is not this that
most notable woman which suffered so many trobles? or this bewtiful woman?
truly she answers not to her name. We have been Trojans. Good Lord how much
is she changed! For though some spoke this of a good mind, marueiling at so
great a change, yet it is probable that some laughed her to scorn, because
she had lost her beauty and her goods by seeking for a better condition,
according to the manner of the common people. But that does greatly troble us,
when others do mock us, in our afflictions, and do not rather sorrow with
us, we see with such scoffs even most valiant men much troubled. By the way we
do also learn that beauty is a frail thing which perishes by diseases, by
old age, by evil usage, and by many other means. Therefore we must not have
too much trust in beauty. There are excellent sentences concerning this matter
amongst the Ethnickes.

She does desire them to call her no more NAOMIE but rather MARA, that is they
should call her bitter, sad and afflicted because of the bitterness wherewith
God himself had touched her, and that which she had said in a word she
afterward expresses more fully: I went out full, and the Lord caused me to
return empty. I had a husband and children and wealth, and now I am
destitute of all these, and therefore I do not answer to my name. My
affairs are no more in that estate wherein they were when I was in flourishing
age and beauty: God has pressed and humbled me with diverse troubles: therefore
an other name does agree with my estate. We learn by this, that godly men
wheresoever they be, whether at home or abroad want not their crosses. When
NAOMIE returned into her country, she was entertained with scoffs, no doubt.
But in the land of MOAB also, she must needs see and hear many things which
greatly grieved her mind. God does grant a truce to his children for a time
but in the mean season he would they should gather their wits together, and
provide for the troubles to come. We must not desire of God to live without a
cross, who does chasten them whom he does love. HEBRV. 12. 2. TIM. 3. all that
will live godly must suffer persecutions. ACTS 14. we must go into the
kingdom of heaven through many troubles. Let us not think then that it is an
argument that God is angry with us, when he does afflict us with diverse
trobles. Secondly here is to be seen how NAOMIE governed her self, in that new
affliction and other trobles, wherewith she was greatly oppressed. She
overcame all troubles with patience. She did give place to them that skorned
her, so that if it pleased them they might for NAOMIE call her MARA. She spoke
nothing impiously against god, or reprochfully against man: the old woman might
easily have found some things, with the which she might have vpbraided those
which so entertained her, saying how impudent are you? what means this
concourse? did you never see poor and afflicted women? have ye nothing to do at
home? do you rejoice at other men's troubles? Truly you do show your great
foolishnes, or rather envy. But she uses no such words, she does deal
peaceably with them, and she does confess freely, that her estate was in a
hard case. But how could she bear the reproaches of the people, and lightly
bear so many troubles, when all of us by nature are impatient? first she does
confess that these things fell not our by chance but that GOD was the first
author of these troubles, who governing al things well according to his good
will, does injury to no man. God has brought me back (says she) he has
troubled me, he has afflicted me, she does not accuse the Moabites nor her
husband nor children nor fortune, but attributes al (...) to God. If we
believe that God who is a most just and merciful father does impose the cross
upon us. We shall be the more patient. We have an example of JOSEPH, who said he
was sent of God to Aegipt: also DAVID who said that GOD did command Shimei to
curse him. We must not think what they are who do hurt us, either in word or
deed: but what we are and with what sins we provoke Gods wrath against us,
what we have deserved, and let us submit our selves to him: if we rest upon
second causes, we shall never have quiet minds. Then she does acknowledge that
God did send her those troubles, for good and and not to overthrow her: for
she said he humbled her. This word signifies to humble, to afflict: for of
trouble humility does follow. Trouble does give understanding. This NAOMIE was
not without her faults. It may be she did not know before he was dead, how
notable a husband she had, and the same may be said of her children and wealth
^^d health. etc. or else she had too much delight in them, and trusted too much
in them.

God does take away those things wherein we put our hope and confidence that
our whole heart may depend on him alone. DAVID says in the Psalm: it is good O
Lord that thou have humbled me. This profit of the Cross is great which
ought to teach us patience: for god prepares a way to things greater by
troubling us. As if any man takes down an old house that he might build a new
house better the^ the other. Further she says twice that she is afflicted
with the almighty god, who can easily convert troubles into prosperity. In
all trobles think that god is almighty, and therefore it is not hard to him, if
he will and the good of his children do so require, to deliver the^ out of
their troubles. He does make the poor rich, he does heal the sick, he does
raise up from the dead he does deck the despised with great authority.
Furthermore he does sometime bring his children into great adversities for this
cause, that they may afterward acknowledge him their only deliverer, and give
him thanks.

In the last place it is noted what time of the year she returned into her
country, namely in the spring time when they began to reap barley. About the
feast of the passover they began to reap barley. The Chaldean interpreter
says that she came the first day of the passover when the Israelites began to
reap the sheafe or handful of the first fruits which was barely: LEVI. 23.
ca: It is written that the 15. day of the month of Nishan they offered a
handful of ears of the first fruits of their corn, this was barely as the
Hebrew interpreters do affirm: this matter is mentioned for the history of
the chap. following how RVTH went to gather cares and came acquainted with BOAZ.

NAOMIE does teach us by this example, that we do not neglect occasion, which
is (as CICERO says) atime which has in it self a dexterity to do somewhat,
or not to do: this in attempting and performing matters is of great importance.
Things have their time as SOLOMON says in his preacher. PAVL^ to the EPHE.
COLO. commands to redeem the time. The metaphor is borrowed of biers. He
that letretth it slip afterward cannot have it again. The old man in
PLAVTVS says, when thou art a young man, now that thy blood is sound, thou
ought to give diligence to thy affairs. Let youths when occasion is
offered learn their books and true religion: let them not defer it unto
others times which will less agree for the learning of these matters, As Soon
as NAOMIE hoped that she could get any living in the field, she returned into
her own country, she does not defer the matter until all corn was gathered.
SOLOMON. 10. PRO. Who does gather in the summer is a wise son. Cap. 20. The
slothful will not plowe because of winter, therefore shall he beg in
summer, but have nothing.

CAP. 2.
The 9. Sermon.
1 Then Naomies husband had a kinseman one of great power of the family of
Elimelech and his name was bohaz.

2 And Ruth the Moabitisse said unto Naomie, I pray thee let me go to the
field and gather ^ares of corn after him, in whose sight I find favor. And
she answered: Go my daughter.

3 And she went and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers, and it
came to pass, that she met with the portion of the field of Bohaz, who was of
the family of Elimelech.


IT is declared in the former chapter, how RVTH was converted to true religion,
and followed her mother in-law into the land of Judah: In this chapter is
showed how she came acquainted with BOHAZ. Besides a notable example of gods
providence: there are also in this chapter propounded by the holy ghost,
examples of many good duties or virtues in NAOMI and her daughter in-law, in
BOHAZ and his household.

First it shows how BOHAZ was kinsman to ELIMELECH, and a man thus titled
Chail which word signifies, forces, strength, and wealth. He was as it does
apeare, a wise man, strong and wealthy, the which is here recorded before, for
the historye following The Hebrew and Chalde interpreters think, that this BOAZ
was IBZAN the Judge. For that it is said in the 12. chap. of the IVDGES, that
IBZAN of Bethlahem reigned after IPHTAH. But as concerning this kindred
Bibliander in his books (gathered out of the HEBRVE Chronicles) de
demonstratione euangelica, (not yet come to light) does note that ELIMELECH and
NAAS^ON, but LIRA in his commentaries upon this book the 2. 3. chap. does note
that ELIMELECH, and SALMAN the father of this BOAZ were brethren, whereof it
shall be spoken afterward.

RVTH asked leave of her mother in law to go into the fields to gather ears.
The Grecians do call gleaning Calamon Sullogen to gather ears Calamasthi the
which is lawful by the law, LEVIT. 19. when ye reap the harvest of your
ground ye shall not reap every corner of your fields, neither shall thou
gather the gleaning of the harvest. Thou shall not gather the grapes of the
vineyard clean neither every grape of the vineyarde, but thou shall leave them
for the poor and strangers, for I am the Lord your god. Afterward 23. chap.
And when you reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not ridd clean the
corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shall thou make any after
gathering of thy harvest, but shall leave them unto the poor, and to the
stranger: I am the Lord thy god.

DEVTRO. 24. When thou do mow thy harvest in thy field, and have forgotten a
sheafe in the field, thou shall no^ go again to fet it, but it shall be for
the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow, that the Lord thy GOD
may bless the in all the works of thy hands. When thou beatest thine Olive
tree, thou shall not go over the boughs again: but it shall be for the
stranger fatherless, and widows. When thou gatherest thy vineyard, thou
shall not gather the grapes clean after the: but they shall be for the
stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widows. And remember that thou
wast a servant in the land of Aegipt, therefore I command thee to do this
thing. Furthermore LEVIT. 25. chap, he does command that the seventh year be
a sabbath to the Lord. They ought not to sow, nor plant vineyards, but those
which grew of themselves, should they leave to the strangers and poor.
Likewise in the year of Iubile. MATT. 12. The Pharisees accused not Christ's
Disciples, (which on the sabbath day did go through the corn, and gather
ears, and eat) of theft or spoil, but of breaking the Sabbath. Although it
was lawful for strangers, and widows to gather ears: yet RVTH would not
do it without the advice of her mother in law. Daughters in law may learn by
this example, how to esteem their mothers in law, and how to honor them. This
woman did not contemn her mother in law, though she had lost her husband and
had no children by him: moreover she is constrained to nourish her, she loves
her as well as if she had been her own mother. The commandment of the Lord.
Thou shall honor thy parents: does comprehend both mother in law and fathers
in law. Honor does also consist in this, that daughters in law do advise with
their mothers in law, when they go a journey, or do any other things which
are of any moment. There are now few daughters in law, or natural daughters
which deal so modestly with their parents. If they should nourish their
mothers in law as she did, and should consult with them of things to be done,
good Lord what brawles would they move? If their parents of natural
affection, or good will, which they bear to their children, do admonish them
what they should do, or not do, how grievously will they vpbraide them? how
many children are there which walk the streets in the night against their
fathers wills? how many daughters which run to all gasinges and daunsinges?
NAOMIE did answer her friendly, (go my daughter) Let not mothers in law being
consulted with of their daughters in law, mock them, nor vpbraide them with
bitter words: but answer them courteously, that they may think them selves
to be esteemed as natural daughters. Again she calls her daughter, she
reprocheth her not. It is profitable and comely for strange widows
(especially if they be young and bewtiful) to keep themselves at home, and not
to go alone, nor wander into the streets, least they be suspected for
dishonest, or be ravished as we may read of DINAH the daughter of JACOB.
Necessity which is the extreemest and greatest dart, constrained her to go out
of her house, that she might get her own living, and her mother in laws. Let
not parents be too rigorous, but grant those things which are convenient,
RVTH went into the fields to gather ears. She did not like an idle huswife,
look for food from heaven, she did not steal other men's goods, she did
not lay out her body to sin, to get her things necessary, but she applied
her self to honest labor, yea, and to hard labor: for to reap corn, to
gleane, and to seek ears through the fields in the greatest heat of the
sun is a hard and troublesome labor. Neither would she be troblesome to any
body: for she promises to go into his fields in whose fight she found
favor, that was to whom she was acceptable, with whose good will she might
gather ears. She does also observe the time and occasion of getting her
living. She was not urged to labor as many must, but of her own good will,
and diligently, she did that which she should do. Godly women ought to follow
this notable example of labor and humility. PAVLE says 4. chap. EPHE. who so
does steal let him steal no more: but let him labor and work with his
hands, the thing which is good, that he may bestow upon whom it is needful.
Not that necessity does drive all men to work with their hands, but rather
to endure any extremities then to use deceites, frauds, or other guiles, al
which are comprehended under this word steal. There is not one kind of
labor: there is a labor which does more require the mind than the body, as
to give judgment, to govern a Church or school, to minister physic etc.
For who so thinks that judges, Ministers, Shoolemaisters, and Physicians do
not labor, is no less foolish, then they which do think, that no body
laboreth in the ^hip, but the plumpers, and rowers, and not they which do hold
the stern. Again, there is a labor which does especially require the body,
and this is not of one kind: for there are many crafts and occupations. As every
member of the body have their function: so in the body of the common wealth,
every man has his peculiar labor, and it is not profitable that every man
should use one art. The apostle commands to work To agathon that which is
good and honest. For there are mataiotechniai as tumbling and iugling: there
are some deuelishe crafts, as engr^sers, usurers, baudes, which were better to
do nothing, then so to exercise their labors. There are some which do only
serve men's pleasures. But God does command us honest labors. God placed ADAM
before his fall in paradise, and would not suffer him to be idell, but to
dress the garden, the which he might have done without trouble: after his
fall his will was, that he should get his bread with the sweat of his brows,
and that he should till the earth with hard labor, which was curssed for his
sin. SOLOMON PROVE. 6. does stir us up to laour by the example of the
Antes, and he immitateth and remembers the words of the sluggardes that can
scarce be drawn out of their beds. Also the wise men of the gentiles do
commend labor, and disprayse I dlenesse. The Massilienses (as valerius
Maximus does testify) did shut out all them which would seek to live
sluggishly under the pretense of religion. If our ancestors had done so, in
some years past we should not have had so many orders of Monks: but every man
ought not only to do that which is good, in his calling, but in a lawful time,
and not upon days forbidden, and while strength does serve. Neither is there
any cause why any man should tire out himself with immoderate labors, and
those things which thou have gotten by thy labors are to be ascribed to the
blessings of God. The Appostle in the 1. THESE. 4. and the 2. THESE. 3. chapter,
does show the cause wherefore good men ought to labor: namely, that they may
help the needy, and that they may have things necessary, and not be burdensome
to others, as strangers, Annabaptistes, and other idle fellows are. It befell
that without any direction of man, she came into the field of BOHAZ, or it
came to pass or chanced: this word Mikraeh, signyfieth the success, the
issue, or chance. 1. SAM. 6. verse. 9. of the ark it is said, if it go to
Bethshemesh, it is he that did us all this evil: but if not, we shall know then
that it is not his hand which touched us: but it was a chance that happened
us, etc. If thou do consider RVTHES will, it was by chance that she went
into that field: if the purpose of God, he led her as it were by the hand:
those things which seem to us to be done by chance are not done without the
providence of God. We may have an example out of the law, where this matter is
proved: EXODUS 21. and DEVT. 19. If two men fell trees, and the axe slide out of
the hand of one of them and kill his neighbor: he did this unwillingly, and
therefore he was allowed a sanctuary: but as concerning God, he delivered him
over for certain causes. HIEROM on the 12. chapter of IEREMI says, that
nothing falls out either good or evil, by chance, but by Gods providence
and judgment: as it is said in the Proverbs of SOLOMON: Lots are governed of
God. If a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without Gods will? what can come by
fortune in man's affairs which does not fall out by Gods determinate council?
we see how God does direct and bless those men which take honest labors in
hand: of which we will speak more afterward: but she was well accepted of
BOHAZ and his family.

The 10. Sermon.
4 And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers. The Lord
be with you: and they answered him, the Lord bless thee.

5 Then said Boaz unto his servant that was appointed over the reapers, whose
maid is this?

6 And the servant that was appointed over the the reapers answered, and said,
it is the Moabitishe maid, that came with Naomi out of the country of Moab.

7 And she said unto us, I pray you let me gl^ane and gather after the reapers,
among the Sheues: so she came, and has continued from that time in the
morning until now, save she tarried a little in the house.


WE have declared before that RVTH having first gotten leave of her mother in
law to gather ears after the reapers, came by fortune, or (that I may speak
more truly) by the providence of God, into the field of BOAZ her kinsman: but
what befell to her there, the holy Ghost does diligently set down, in these
words following. In the first place here is showed, how BOAZ coming from
Bethlehem into the field, saluted his reapers, who answered, the Lord bless
thee. The word blessing is used in diverse places of the holy scriptures, and
has diverse significations. Sometime it signifies to praise and give thanks,
as when DAVID says to Abigall in the 1. Book of SAMVELL the 25. chap. praised
be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee to meet me this day. Sometime it
signifies to pray for good things: as in the 48. chap. of GENE. JACOB the
Patriarcke blessed his sons, that is, he did wish well unto them. GENESIS the 37.
chap. JACOB both at his coming to the king, and at his going away blessed him:
that is, he saluted him, and bid him farewell, he gave him thanks and wished
him well. When it is attributed to God, it signifies to do well, for God by
his word does work. It is said in the 10. chap. of the Proverbs: The
blessing of god does make me^ rich, that is, God does increase and preserve
riches. What the simple use of this word is, we must consider by reading the
holy scriptures: as when they say in this place. The Lord bless thee. The
meaning is, the Lord give thee a fruitful harvest, and and all good things,
as well for the body, as for the soul.

We have an example in this place of salutation. The manner of salutation is not
only old, but most profitable to reconcile and confirm love: which our
savior does diligently commend to all godly men. The Angel saluted GEDION as
he was threshing corn, with these words. The Lord be with thee thou strong
man. IVDGES 6. chap. It is reckoned up amongst the duty of the Priests, to
bless the children of Israe^l. There is a solemn blessing set down in the 6.
chap. of numbers. Some Anabaptists, will not have men saluted, citing that
which Christ in the 10. chap. of LVKE said to his seventy disciples: salute no
man by the way: but he does mean nothing else then under the color of
salutation, to suffer themselves to be called from their calling or if thou will understand it according to the letter, it was a personal and special
commandment, and not a general. The Angel saluting the blessed virgin used
this same form, which BOAZ does in this place. Also Christ saluted his
Disciples saying, peace be with you. The Apostle PAVLE does begin and end his
epistles with salutations. He puts down their names whom he saluteth: also
the names of them which do salute others. It is incredible to be spoken, how
much that will avail to the getting of good will, but we must take heed least
we do it with an hypocrites mind. It is a point both of courtesy and of
humanity to salute others, and to pray for them. If great and mighty men do
salute poor men, they are marueilously affected, seeing that they are not
despised of them. Neither was it to be doubted but that this salutation of BOAZ
was most acceptable to the reapers. There are some who do of envy and hatred
disdain to salute others, who shouide remember that commandment of Christ,
that we must pray for and wish well to our enemies. How often comes it to
pass that many who will not willingly salute one an other, after they have been
absent and asunder, would desire nothing more, then to live together, and to
use all duties of humanity to each other?

Here is an household example propounded unto us, of a good householder he goes
to his reapers, he looks what is done in the field, for the presence of the
master helps much in any work. PLINY in his 8. book 6. chap. the elders
have said that the eye of the master is most fruitful for the ground.
ARISTOTELL in his 1. book of governing a house does write of a certain man,
who being demanded what dung was the best: answered the steps of the
master. Although a man has good and trusty servants and bayliffes, yet the
master being absent, they do all things the more negligently and carelessly,
TITUS LIVIVS says elega^tly, those things do not prosper which are ouerseene
by strangers. Read the proverbs of ERASMUS concerning this matter, the
forhead is better than the hinder part: negligent householders do spoil both
themselves and their servants. These sayings may be applied to greater
estates, as to kings and Bishops, that they do not al things by other men's
hands, eyes, and ears, while they do cocker themselves with pleasures.

BOAZ asked his servant which he had set over the reapers (JOSEPHUS calls
him Agronomon) of RVTH, what she was, or whose wife, or daughter she was. This
he did not ask as some youths do, that they might offer them some villainy,
but because he saw that she was a stranger and painful: The Bayliffe answered,
she is that Moabitesse, which came of late with NAOMIE, and he gave her great
praise: he little thought that she should have been his wife, but see how
wonderfully GOD brings it to pass.

As touching that BOAZ appointed a servant over the reapers, who should
prescribe to every one of the^ their taskes, and see that they did every thing
in order, and without doubt an honest man, all householders ought to follow it.
For unless that in great families, every one know what to do, or have their
overseers and guides, they may have their things very negligently done: as
order is required in an army: even so in a household. That servant did mark
RVTH so diligently, that he could answer his master to that he did ask*
so ought all servants to mark diligently every thing that appertains to
them, that they may give an account of every thing to their masters.

This also must be noted diligently, that he praised RVTH. He does not, as the
envious, disprayse and lessen those things which are praise worthy in her:
Neither does he hate her, because she is a stranger, nor reproach her for it.
They are to be praised for their virtues, who are worthy of praise: virtue
must not be hated. Oftentimes the poor men being commended to the rich by
their servants, they receive great commodity by them. This kind of duty
is required of us, that if we cannot help the godly, by our own riches or
council: at least, let us entreat others to do for them, which we may do
without our hurt.

But he does show two things of RVTH which are worthy of praise, and are to
be followed of us. The one that she did ask leave of them to gather ears.
The law of MOSES does grant strangers and widows by name to gather ears:
yet she would not by that warant gather ears in the field without the owners
good will. There are many who against the mind and will of the owners, and
against the law of God and man, do go into other men's fields, and by theft and
rapine, take away their fruit and destroy their hedges and do them great
hurt.

The other thing for which she is commended, is, that she was painful and
diligent from the morning until this time, namely, she plied her labor to the
midday. By and by: as soon as she had eaten, she returned to her labor, saving
she tarried a little in the house. MVNSTERVS enterpreteth it, except she eased
her self in the house. The Tigurine translation says, that she sat a while in
the house. Some do understand it, that she tarried in the house not a moment.
The old interpreters and Septuagintes were of this mind: Others do think that
she stood still, and rested not, but when she went home, or tarried in the
tent, (which perhaps they had in the field to take the shadow, and to recreate
them in) Those Countries are very hot in the time of harvest, she was not of
the number of those women which walk idelly in the streets, and look the whole
day through the windows: but rather she was such a one as SOLOMON speaks of
in the Proverbs, of whom amongst other things he says, that she labors
day and night: this ought to be more accounted of in women then beauty. There
are this day few children, or hired servants, which will work so hard as she
did.

The 11. Sermon.
8 Then said Bohaz unto Ruth, hear thou my daughter? go to none other field
to gather, neither go from hence, but abide here with my maidens.

9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after the
Maidens. Have I not charged the servants that they touch thee not? moreover
when thou art a thirst, go unto the vessels and drinks of that which the
servants have drawn.

10 Then she fell on her face and bowed her self to the ground, and said unto
him, how have I found favor in thine eyes, that thou should know me seeing
I am a stranger?


HOW BOHAZ did talk with RVTH, and how she behaved herself toward him is
here declared. BOHAZ talks with her friendly, according to his age and
estate, he calls her daughter, for he was old and one of the elders and
gouerners. Where the scripture commands sons and daughters to reverence
their parents, it means amongst others, them that are young, whose duty it
is to reverence the elders and especyally the magistrates. Next he commands
her that she go not into an other field to gather ears. For peradventure
least she should be troublesome to him, she would not only gleane in his
field but in others also: but he understanding that she was a notable woman,
was willing to do her a good turn, he does not send her over to others, as
some use to do, which when they cold easilye and ought to help their poor
kinsmen, cast this care from them. He does command her that she go not out of
that place wherein she was to another, but accompanye his maidens and follow
them: partly least she should have any wro^ng being alone in any of his
grounds, from the which his servant might easily defend her: partly if she
were with those his servants: she might gather ears with less trouble,
which did without doubt pass the time by pleasant talk, sportes and songs.
For it is profitable that men, that are sad and troubled be conversant and talk
with others, and as much as they can, let them avoid solitarines. Hear
thou my daughter? to wit, that which I have commanded thee, do not gather in
any other man's field then mine. The Germans do also say, have du es ghort?
when as they do earnestly command or give any thing in charge to others.
Further he promises her defense against his servant, is not this (says he)
most certain, I have commanded my servant that they touch thee not? The
Hebrews do utter by an interrogation that which they would vehemently
affirm. Afterward, cap. 3. verse. 5. My daughter do not I seek thy rest that
it may be well with thee? 1. SAMVEL. 10. chap. Is not the matter so as I told
thee, that god has anointed thee to be governor over his inheritance? 1.
SAM. 23. The Ziphians, the traitors said unto SAVL, does not DAVID dwell with us
in the fortes and wood? So I understand that saying of the woman of JOHN. 4. is
not this the Christ? certainly it is Christ.

In harvest and vintage great liberty or rather license is given to workmen,
for the ease of their labors, but sometime they do abuse their liberty, they
do handle many shamefast and chaste virgins very filthily, and do many
things insolently: his servants might have done the same, therefore he does
promise her that he will admonish them that they do not hurt her. But it is the
duty of householders that they do not only preserve the chastity of their
own maids, but also of others, that no filthiness be spoken, whereby they might
be provoked to lewdnes, let him show them how filthy a thing whordome is, and
how harlots are defamed with public infamy. Let him call them back from all
things, which may provoke them to lewdnes, especially if he see the^ gamesome
or wa^ton, as from lewd talk, from keeping company with suspicious men, from
filthy shows and daunsings etc. There are some who say that it is but in vain
to keep them straightly, but youths do often amiss for want of understanding.
But how wicked are they who offer their maidens (whose chastity they ought to
preserve, and be to the^ in stead of parents) to others, or defile them
themselves? He ought also to beware, least the body, fame, or goods, of his
neighbors or any others be hurt by his servants.

He must not only keep in order his household servants, but also his beasts
that they be not hurtful to others, as dogs, horses, oxen etc. It is said in
the law. If an ox were wont to strike in time past, and it has been told his
master and he has not kept him in, and after he kills a man or a woman, the
ox shall be stoned and his owner shall dye also, etc. Also if the fire break
forth and burn corn, and take into the stackes standing in the fields, he
shall restore the loss, that did kindle the fire. If any man shall dig a
pit and shall not cover it, the owner shall restore the loss of the cattle:
The Lord commands that those houses which are flatt should be battelled
least any man should fall down.

He does add this, that if she were a thirst, she should go to the vessels
and drink of the water, which the servants have drawn. There is great
scarsitie of water in those places, PALESTINE has her floudes rivers and
springes, but yet in many places the springes are dried up with those great
heates, so that sometime they fetched water a great way. The which also befell
in our country of Heluetia (which abounds with ^^aters in many places) in the
year 1540. In the 26. chap. of GEN^: ISAACKS servants dug pits which for
quietness sake he yielded to others. In EXODUS the 2. chap. Moses did help the
daughters of IETHRO which drew water for their flocks, when the shepheardes
withstoode them, because there were no other wells in those places. Therefore
it is a great benefit, that he does bid her go to take drink out of the
vessels, that is flaggons or bottels.

As the latins do use very largely this word arma (that I may note this by
the way) namely for instruments, for every art, as armor for war, for
scholars and for cooks etc. So KELIM which is amongst the Hebrews vessels,
does signify instruments, weapons, ornaments, household stuff, and apparel.
This seems to have some force that he says, which my servants have
drawn: namely not without labor: Although they say they have drawn it by
their labor, and drive thee away: yet I will that thou drink, no man shall
resist thee: afterward he does command her to eat meat together with the
reapers.

Here is set forth to us a notable example of humanity and kindness toward
the poor, widows, strangers, and especially toward them that are newly
converted to the truth, and how they are to be handled, look in the Epistle to
the ROMANS the 14. and 15. chap. BOAZ first did talk with RVTH friendly, he
does not look that she should ask any thing of him, he does promise her
defense and drink, he does grant her more than she durst ask him, and that
with a good will. But what was the cause of this humanity and good will
toward RVTH, when he did not know that he should be coupled in marriage unto
her? Because she had the favor of God by faith, she also had the good will
of men. God does move the hearts of the enemies toward those whom he does
love, as SOLOMON says in his proverbs the 16. chap. Then he understood by
the speech of his Baylife, that she was endued with notable virtues, and
therefore that she was worthy of favor and good will. If he had spoken evil
of her, peradventure he would have conceived some evil against her.
Furthermore she was endued with faith which is the spring of good works, and
he saw with his eyes the diligence of the woman in gathering of ears.

This courtesy of BOHAZ is to be followed of us: the poor and strangers are
to be nourished and entreated friendly: Nouices in the faith are to be defended
against those injuries which they are in danger of. Next if we will have men
kind and friendly, we must especially seek to please God.

Secondly here is showed how RVTH behaved her self toward him. First she
fell on her face, and bowed her self to the ground. She shows her self as
one unworthy, that BOAZ a noble man should use so courteously, shicah to bow,
to submit or fall down in the form hithpaal hishtaueh to cast down her self
to bow the head or the rest of the body to fall down at any man's feet. The
Grecians do render it proscunein And the latins expound it by the word
adoration: EXODUS 20. in the second commandment which speaks against Images
and Idols, it is said thou shall not adore them. The idolaters say that they
do not worship them, and that they are iniuried if these things be reported
of them, but truly they know not or rather will not know what it is to
adore. The Hebrew word signifies to bow and lie down before them, but will
they deny that they do this? Therefore they cannot be excused from Idolatry.
Amongst the latins also to adore, does signify to bow the knees, and to
honor by falling down etc. it was the common manner that they would fall down
at the feet of them whom they would honor, but we do not bow our knees
unless we come before Princes, before whom we suppliently fall on our knees.

Next she does wonder and make great account of his courtesy, when she being
a stranger was so well accepted of him, for the most part bannished men and
poor men are despised of the rich and mighty.

We have a notable example in RVTH of humility thankefulnes and
shamefastness. She does show her humility, partly by her outward behauior,
namely by the gesture of the body, that is by bowing and submission, partly by
words, for she says, Wherefore have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou
should know me, or that thou do know me? For it signifies (as MARTINUS
BORRAVS the diligent and learned expounder of gods word) no light acquaintance
^ut to acknowledge lovingly and to have a regard of any. She does confess
that she is unworthy of his benefits. HVMILITIE is a notable virtue,
whereunto pride is opposite.

She does declare her thankfulness in this, that she does not despise nor
extenuate this benefit bestowed upon her, she does not say, what is this
that thou do bid me to gather ears? does not the law of God grant this to
the poor? what is this that thou do offer me drink when I am a thirst?
water is commonly to be used, wherefore do not thou give me some notable
gift since I am poor and thou rich? Truly the benefit was not so great of it
self, which he did give her, but because it came from a notable man and from a
good will, she made great account of it. The proverb says, gift of a friend
is best, She by her thankefulnes did provoke BOAZ to be more ready and prompt
to relieve her poverty. Let them diligently observe this which do want the
help of others: let them not be impatient if they have not all by and by which
they desire: let them not despise those things that are bestowed on them let
them, not threaten that they will wreast any thing by force. But let them
rather think that others have their burdens, and that they by their
importunity do hurt both themselves and others. For unthankfulness stops
up the welspring of benefits.

The shamefastness of this woman appears in this that she fell down to the
ground, and did not impudently look on BOAZ, shamefastnes is the greatest
praise of women, for shamfastnes (as CICERO says) is the keeper of al virtue,
auoydeth uncomeliness, and gets great praise. Therefore this caused her not
to look wantonly on BOAZ, nor to speak long with him: both these vices the
Gentiles do condemn in women as the Satyrric^all Poet says. She is so bold
that she can keep company with men. And she can talk with armed captains in
the presence of her husband without a blushing face and with stretched out
breasts. The proverb says scilence does adorn a woman, as it is in this
verse of Sophocles. gunaiza cosmon e sige pherei Women which are desirous to
talk with men whom they do not know, bring themselves into suspicion.

The 12. Sermon.
11 And Boaz answered, and said unto her, all told and showed me that thou
have done unto thy mother in law, since the death of thinehusband, and how thou
have felt thy father and thy mother, and the land where thou wast borne, and
art come to a people, which thou know not in times past.

12. The Lord recompense thy work, a full reward be given the^ of the Lord
God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

13. Then she said, let me find favor in the sight of my Lord: for thou have
comforted me and spoken comfortablie to thy maid, though I be not like to one
of thy maids.


RVTH marueleth how it should come to pass that she should be known and
accepted of BOAZ, and that he should entreat her so lovingly, she being a
strunger: for the most part we see it come to pass that strangers and the
poor are despised of the mighty and the rich: now therefore he shows the
cause wherefore he did favor her: namely for the trust she had in the God of
Israel, and love toward her mother in law.

That she was endued with true faith, of this it is gathered, that she forsook
her native country her parents her kinsfolks and her country Gods and embraced
the Israelitish religion. ABRAHAM'S faith is commended, who being called of God
into a strange land neglected all things, and followed him without delay, she
does show indeed that she was the daughter of ABRAHAM. For she had rather
live in other nations for the truth then to live in her own country. It
appears also by this that she had true says, that BOAZ said that she came
to hope under the wings of the Lord, that is, that she might live safelye
under his defense and patronage. As many as put their trust in God cannot
perish: Howsoever the devil does rage he cannot pull them out of his hands.
Here is a Metaphore borrowed from birds and hens which with their wings do
cover their young, nourish and defend them. DAVID does often use this Metaphore
in the Psalms, that he might show the care of God in preserving the godly. As
a hen the kyte besieging her does cloak her chickens and hide them under her
wings, so does God defend the godly and call them lovingly unto him. The
Prophet says in the 17. Psalm. keep me as the apple of thine eye, and hide me
under the shadow of thy wings. PSALM. 36. how excellent is thy mercy O God,
therefore the children of men trust under the shadow of thy wings. PSALM. 57.
have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me, for my soul trusts in thee, and in
the shadow of thy wings until my trobles be past, PSALM. 61. I will dwell in
thy tabernacle for ever and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings
63. and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips when I remember thee on my
bed, and when I think on thee in the night watches. Because thou have been my
helper therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice PSALM. 91. he
teaches that they are very happy which commit themselves to the tuition and
the providence of God, he will cover thee (says he) with his wings and under
his wings thou shall be safe, his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

ISAY 31. he shows that he will defend the City Jerusalem against the force
of the Assirians by a similitude borrowed from birds, or hens, saying as a
bird that flies, so shall the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem by defending and
delivering, by passing through and preserving it. This similitude Christ used
in the 23. chap. of MATT. saying, how often would I have gathered thy children
together O Jerusalem, as a hen does her chickens under her wings, but thou
would not? this word ornis as the Gramarians do note, generally does
signify a bird, and specially a hen. From whence had RV^H that faith? S.
PAVLC in the 10. chap. to the Romans says, faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. It is probable that she had heard of her husband,
of her mother in-law, and her father in law, of the creation, fall and
restitution of man, and of the promised MESSIAH etc. In the mean season god
opened her heart, that she did understand and yield consent to those things
which were told her.

Also we do note by the way that they which leave Idolatry and embrace the
true faith, do carrye themselves as it were into a haven and sanctuary: as
chickens wandering are as it were subject to be spoiled and prayed upon, by
hawks and other ravenous birds, but they are defended under the wings of
their dammes: so they which do leave the true religion, and seek for help of
salvation other where, do cast themselves into manifest danger of the soul.
Also God does exercise his faithful ^nes with diverse afflictions, but in the
mean season he does comfort them: Many think that they shall fall into
extreme danger both of life and of their estate if they should embrace the
gospel, therefore they do retain a false religion against their conscience,
and in the mean season being vexed with the stings of conscience, they do
lead an unpleasant and a miserable life.

The other thing that BOAZ did praise in her is this, that she did love her
mother in law, though her husband departed out of life, and left no child by
her, and her mother in law was a stranger: from whence it may be gathered
easily that she did love her husband: she does by her example teach them that
are married mutually to love together, and withal seek one to exceed the other
in all marriage duties. It is known by experience what great good does arise
of good marriages, and what great evils do befall by evil marriages.

It is after added, that he did pray for the prosperity of RVTH: he says
the Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of God, that
is, the Lord reward the, both in this life and in the life to come: whereof many
examples are every where in the holy scriptures. The papists do aleage this to
show that we deserve the kingdom of heaven by our good deeds. And they do
not only understand by those good works, those which are wrought by the
faithful by the spirit of God according to his word, but the devised and
chosen works, which the foolishnes and coutousnes of man has invented, and
they go so far that the works which are called supererogatory they do sell to
others for money. Of this it came to pass that they did put their hope and
trust in their deeds, and they atributed much to their own forces, and so
obscured the doctrine of the merit of Christ. Therefore it is profitable to
know, how these places are to be understood where mention is made of wages,
rewards and recompense etc. The scripture teaches us that God of his mere
mercy through faith for christ's sake: does forgive sins and gives eternal
life. There is a notable place to the Ephesians. 2. chap. It is the gift of God
etc. But he does promise rewards for good deeds: not for the worthynes of them,
but for the grace wherewith God does embrace believers. AUGUSTINE writes well,
God does crown in us his own gift, not our merits: for first he bestows
upon us his grace that we may do that which is good. Then of his mere
grace, he does adorn with rewards that good which he has wrought in us.
Eternal life is called a reward, but not properly, neither do the godly look
for eternal life as ^ reward for their own good deeds, but as the free gift
of God: we do not deny but that God rewards good deeds, but we do not by
them deserve his so great liberality. For this is the condition on of a
merit, first that we should give of our own, and what have we which we have
not received? the Lord does give us both will and ability to do well. Next it
is required in a desert that we be not bound to any thing, but to do it of our
one accord and good will. And we although we have done all things yet we be
unprofitable servant LVKE. 17. chapter. Also it is required that there be
some equality and proportion between that which is given, and that which is
received. But what equality can there be between our works and eternal
life? If thou say we deserve etern^ll damnation through sins, and that
therefore we deserve eternal life by good works, it is not a good conclusion.
For good things proceed from the spirit of God, evil things from us: evil
things are perfectly evil, but our good works are maimed and imperfect. It
does not so follow, this man can kill himself, therefore he can give himself
life. Then thou do object: what do good works avail? very much, for they
do serve to the glory of our heavenly father: he is glorified if they live
uprightly which are willing to be called his people: they do make us assured of
our election, and vocation, when we do find by their testimony the virtue of
Christ to increase more and more in us, they provoke others to live holylie.
Concerning also the outward duty, the hungry are fed, the naked are clothed,
the strangers are received into hospitality, etc. Furthermore they do testify
that we be thankful to God for the benefits received of him.

And we gather out of this place that good deeds are to be praised, to be
well spoken of, and to be garnished with rewards. The Poet does also say:
virtue being praised does increase. ANTISTINES being asked how the common
wealth should be preserved, he answered if rewards were appointed for well
doers, and punishments for evil doers: yet we must not set our delight in
virtue to thend that we may be praised but, for Gods commandment, though it
comes to pass that we are stirred up to virtue by rewards. How many are
there this day who if they should avoid their country after the example of RVTH
that they may publicly and freely hear and openly profess the pure religion,
would set themselves to be scorned at of others? If any man does love his
mother in-law as his own mother they would call him a fool. It comes to
pass so also in other matters, but we ought to be content in this
unthankfulness and corruption of this world, with the judgment of a few good
men. Principally this example does teach us to pray to God that he will render
to the godly for their good deeds, that they may receive a full reward for
their good deeds, as he has prayed.

Moreover we gather, what we must look for of God if we cast away Idolatry
and serve him. For the prayers of godly men are not in vain, but they are as
it were promises. This prayer does agree with the words of Christ in the 19.
chap. of MATTHEW verily I say unto you, whosoever shall forsake houses or
brothers or sisters, or father or mother or wife or Children or lands for my
names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more and shall inherit
everlasting life. MARK. 10. chap. it is added also in this life with trouble.
The meaning is that the godly should not be destituted of the help and aid
which they looked for of their dearest friends: Also the Lord does so bestow
his grace on them, that small goods are to them in stead of great riches, and
truly the matter is so amongst true Christians. IOVINIAN and VALENTINIAN
being created Emperors, they who under IVLIAN the Emperor held the profession
of Christ's religion were put out of their captainship: But God even in the
(...) does requite their faith and their godliness with a reward.

But the success does declare that this prayer of BOAZ was not in vain. For
when RVTH forsook all that she had for the God of Israel, she found an
hundredth fold more in this life. For she was the wife of a noble man, and her
posterity became kings amongst the people of God, and in the other world she
had eternal life through the MESSIAH in whom she trusted.

It follows after what manner RVTH behaved her self toward BOAZ, let me
find favor (says she) in the sight of my Lord, that is, let me be regarded
and acceptable to thee, let me be in estimation with thee. This phrase is in
the 33. 34. and 47. cap. of GENE. and else where very often, it signifies to
favor or to gratify some body. That thou have comforted me. This word me
has a force namely a widow, a woman, a poor woman, a stranger and afflicted,
for he did stir up a^^ recreate the sorrowful woman wit^ (...) speeches:
this verse of AESCHYLVS is here accounted as a proverb. Orges nosous^s eisin
iatroi logoi that is, pleasant speech is a physician for a heavy mind. And
thou have spoken comfortably to the heart of thy handmaide, that is thou have
spoken friendly with me, and have brought me in good hope. GENESIS 34. It is
written that SECHEM spoke to the heart of DINAH being ravished and des^oured of
him: where the latin translation has, and he did comfort the sorrowful woman
with his speeches, that is to say he promised her marriage, and comforted her.
GENESIS 40. cap. JOSEPH said unto his brethren, be not afraid I will nourish you
and your little ones, and he comforted them, he does comfort them with
pleasant talk. RVTH does not simply say, me, but thy hand may den. So in the
1. SAM. 1. cap. HANNAH says to HELY the high priest, do not thou think that
thy handmayd is the daughter of BELIALL. the 1. book of SAM. 25. ABIGALL said
to DAVID let me thy handmad speak in thy ears and hear the word of thy
handmayd etc. Also RVTH thinks her self unworthy: she does not think her
self a woman worthy who should be accounted with his maidens or numbered
amongst them, to wit because she came of the Gentiles.

Let us learn to think humbly and lowly of our selves: and not defraud
worthy men from their honor due unto them: she does call BOAZ her Lord and her
self his handmaid. There are some uncivil men as certain of the Anabaptists
who say that the title of honor is not to be given to any body, since all of us
are of the ofspringe of ADAM and have one and the same redeemer.

Furthermore we see since the poor take great comfort, of the friendly speech,
of the rich, that the rich shall do well if they deal friendly with the poor
and especially with them that are bent to labor: and let them see that they be
not despised of them. It is the duty of all men to stir up and confirm, them
who are troubled with diseases and other evils by comfortes gathered out of the
word of God.

The 13. Sermon.
14 And Boaz said unto her, at the meal time come thou hither, and eat of the
bread and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers and
he reached her parched corn: and she did eat and was sufficed and left
thereof.

15 And when she arose to gleane, Boaz commanded his servant, saying, let her
gather among the sheaues and do not rebuke her.

16 Also let fall some of the sheaues for her and let it lie, that she may
gather it up, and rebuke her not.


THe holy Apostle and Evangelist JOHN in the 1. Epist. the 3. cap. says my
little children let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed
and in truth. There have been always men and there are some yet, who do
promise their help very largely to others, but their deeds do not answer
to their words. BOAZ was not of their number. For when he had understood of
RVTH what she was, and what manner of woman he prays to God to bless her and
give her his grace: and he did not only promise to her his help in words,
but performed it indeed. For he does command her that she should gleane in
his fields, and should drink out of his vessels. And when he had perceived
her to be modest and thankeful, he commands her to eat meat with the
reapers and dip her morsel in the vinegar, The Grecians do call it, Embamma^a
when we do dip our bread or any other thing in a vessel full of moist
things: vinegar is given to the reapers because it is of great force in
cooling. I do hear that it is also at this day used in Italy, in the time of
harvest when it is very hott, and also they do use wine mixed with vinegar and
water, which the Grecians do call ^xucraton vinegar honnied, or they do call
it honny vinegar, some say it is a small household wine, delayed with water.
CHRISTOPHORVS a VEGA a Spanyard a most learned man, in his second book de
art med^ndi says, reapers do use in stead of wine, vinegar mixed with a
great deal of water, and that is it* which they call household wine delayed
with water, in that order that it may be drunk: to the which if thou do put
oil and bread thou shall make a cooling meat good for workmen and travelers
in the heat of the sun etc. Some coue^ous man might have said unto her, I
have not provided these things for thee but for mine own servant, in the 1.
book of SAM. the 25. chap. NABAL rejecting DAVID'S messengers says
reprochfully. Shall I take my bread and my water and my flesh that I have
killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they be?
Also BOAZ commanded his servants that they leave some corn in the field.

We ought to follow this example of sincere love, and though we fall amongst
many unthankful men, yet we must not forget our duty. Of that, that BOAZ gave
his reapers meat and drink meet for them, and in time convenient as bread,
vinegar, parched barley, water etc. Let householders and dames learn that they
give their servants and hirelings meat enough. And God does command in his
law that the mouth of the ox should not be nusled which does tread out the
corn. SOLOMON says (in the praise of good women the 31. cha. amongst other)
she does rise whilst it is yet night and prepares meat for her house etc.
They which do labor or much do need the more meat. There are some who will
urge their servants to labor, but they will not give them so much meat as
can stay their hungry stomachs. Some do not dress the meat well, neither
bring it forth to be eaten in good time, but they had rather it should be lost:
There are some which do indeed set meat before them, but they will take it
in evil part, if their servants eat enough. They may be numbered amongst
them of whom SOLOMON speaks in the 23. cap. of the prou. he says unto thee
eat and drink, but his mind is not with thee. But what profit comes of
this? If maids and servants see them to be so nigardly, they devour many
things privily. Also it falls out oftentimes that those things are devoured
of dogs and cats which they will not give to workmen.

But let servant be contented if they have necessary things given them, let
them not complain, nor wish for dainties. Workmen in the old time were
content with frugall and mean food: neither do thou hear that they did
accuse their master. The hire must be liberally paid to workmen, and
especially to harvest men JAMES the 5. cap. RVTH does not refuse the benefit
bestowed on her, but does take it with a thankful mind and modestly: and
sits down by the side of the harvest folks, not face to face, least she
should be gazed upon, she does not thrust her self into the middle of the
reapers, and her hand first in the dish as belly-gods do, which do not take
those things which are set before them, but where soever they se more
daintier, there their hands are. She waited until either BOAZ or so^e of his
servants would reach her some portion. We must use modestly a good turn
bestowed upon us by others, how liberally so ever it comes, contrary to that
which is commonly said, shamefastenes is unprofitable for the poor.

She did eat sufficient, yet some meat was left, the which as we shall
afterward hear she brought to her mother in law. She does teach us to use
meat and drink sufficient, but in the mean season we must not forget the
poor. PAVLE does also admonish the faithful that their plenty may supplye
other men's need. Let us take heed of the desire of gluttony and the filthy
wasting of gods gifts.

He does write that BOAZ gave her parched corn. Kalie^ with aleph cali of
kalah he parched or fried, it is barley meal fried, the common interpreters do
translate it parched corn: they do dry the barley one night being soked with
water the next day they do dry it, then they grind it in milles: Some men do
sprinkle that again with water which is overmuch dried, and dry it again
before they grind it. Some men do dress new barlye being beaten out of the
green ears, and they do make it whilst it is moist into balls and being
cleansed they do grind it. It being so dressed with twenty pound of barley,
three pound of linte seed, half a pound of coriander seed and of salt, all
these things being dried before are mingled in a mill. They who will keep it
any longer, do hide it in new earthen vessels with the meal and his branne.
Galenus de alimentorum facult: lib. 1. says: that the parched corn which is
most commendable is made of new barlye meanlye dried and parched etc. And he
says that of many it is the manner in health to drink the same (with new
wine, sweet wine, and honied wine mixed to gether, and oftimes also only
sprinkeled with water) in the summer two or three hours before they do go
into the bath, and they say, that they feel themselves by this drink to be
freed from thirst. Thou have an example in BOHAS of civil behavior at the
table: for he had not only a care of himself but he does also reach meat
to others, we have a like example of our savior: in the 24. chapter of LVKE.

After that RVTH had eaten her meat she presentlye returned to her work
again, and she remained at gleaning until the evening, she does not take the
shadow like an idle and a slothful huswife. She is far unlike them who when
they are full, do refuse labors. But this diligence and carefulnes is greatly
to be praised in this woman and all others.

BOHAZ being delighted with the modesty of this woman, does command his
servants, that they suffer her to gleane amongst the sheaues which other
wise is not granted, some they should leave of purpose, othersome they should
scatter, neither should they say that this was for others, and so make her
ashamed, or blame her, but for this cause that she should gather the more, and
go more chearefully to her mother in law.

Rich men do learn by this example, that it is their duty to help the
needy. God does give great increase, not so much for the rich as for the
poor. Christ accompteth that as given to him whatsoever thou shall bestow upon
the poor, MAT. 25. Furthermore he blesses thy riches, if thou have the poor
in estimation. There are many kinds of poor men, but those are especially to
be helped: who do willingly get by their labor things necessary for them
unless great hardness of dearth does hinder them. This example does teach us
how we must give. He gave RVTH things necessary, not being desired, nor
commanded, but willinglye and with pleasure. For the Lord requires a cherful
giver: he does give liberally, for she being sufficed, she reserved some for
her mother in-law: he might have given her some certain measure of corn. But
he thinks it should be more acceptable to her, if she might gather it by her
own labor, therefore he commands his harvest folks to leave her some part
as they reaped and gathered. By the example of this notable man, we also ought
sometime to give to poor laborers, more than is due to them by covenant: and
to do good to them that want although they know not of it, Arcesilaus that he
might help the want of his friend that was poor and sick, but yet dissembling
his want, he put a bag of money priuelye under his pillow. Read the first
epistle of TIMOTHY. 6. cap. of the duties of rich men. Now how wicked are
they, which do use the scarcetie of a dearth to this purpose, that they may
drive the poor altogether out of their possessions? The richer men at this
day are, so much almost the couetouser are they: They do devise many means,
by which they may excuse their covetousness. Also the poor may give alms,
wh^^h hey call spiritual, namely when they do comfort and teach other poor men.

The 14. Sermon.
17 So she gleaned in the field until evening, and she threshed that she had
gathered, and it was about an Ephah of barley.

18 And she took it up and went into the City, and her mother in law saw what
she had gathered: Also she took forth and gave to her, that which she had
reserved when she was sufficed.

19 Then her mother in law said unto her, where have thou gleaned to day? and
where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that knew thee. And she showed her
mother in-law, with whom she had wrought, and said: the man's name with whom
I wrought to day is Boaz.


RVTH is set before us as a clear glass of many virtues: and especially her
diligence, carefulnes, and paynefull labor is commended. She gleaned in the
field of BOHAZ, who commanded her to sit down with his reapers. After that
this woman had eaten meat, and was suff^^ed, she returned to her labor from
which she had ceased a while: now is added, that she applied her self to
work until it was evening, then she threshed that which she had gleaned,
namely with a staff, and winnowed it. There were two kinds of threshing in
times past, whereof mention is made in the holy scriptures, one was with oxen,
the other with staves, wherewith they did beat out the corn. PLINY says in
the 30. chap* of his 18. book. H^ruest is beaten forth somewhere with carts,
somewhere with the treading of mares, otherwhere with ^^ailes: cart (that I may
note this by the way) is a kind of carriage wherewith corn is beaten forth. It
is added, that she carried it, namely, on her head, which was a great burden.
It is said in the latter end of the chap. that she did also gleane in the
wheat harvest, and every day returned at night unto her mother in law. She
does teach us by her example, continuance in labor, and so in every good
work. It is not enough to begin well, but we must go forward chearefully.
We must labor whilst it is time, we must not neglect the opportunity of
time. There are some who yield themselves to be spoiled of slougthfulnes: or if
they do apply themselves for a time to virtue, they do afterward fall away.

It is to be noted, that the holy Ghost does say, that she carried the burden
her self, and laid it not on a beast or a cart: For it shows that God has a
care of these things, the which ought to comfort those laborious men, who by
reason of their poverty are driven to carry great burdens upon their heads or
shoulders. For if they do that of faith, they do a good and acceptable work
unto God. For God requires these common works of them, and not that they
should for religion sake appoint pilgrimages and put on coules, etc.

But what profit had she of so great labor? for there are many which say that
they labor in vain, She did gather almost an Ephah of barley. If it be
accounted after the measure of Tygurine it was as THEODORUS BIBLIANDER does
reckon, three times nine gallons. An Ephah is a measure for dry things, and
containing three bushels, a bushel contains, six cabs, a cab four logs, a
log is the least measure of dry things and moist things, containing six
eggs, If these be multiplied, and that thou beginnest at a log, a cab
contains 24. eggs a bushel 144. and an Ephah 432. eggs. And 10. Ephaphs do
make a homere containing. 4320. eggs, which is the greatest measure the
Hebrews have: as MUNSTER notes upon the chap. 29. of EXODUS And though RVTH
could not gather so much, unless the harvest folks had left her part at BOAZ
his commandment, yet it is certain that indifferent diligence does prevail
much in any business. A drop by often falling does break or make hollow most
hard stones. They who are diligent and careful in their work, do quickly heap
up a number of necessary things. But we must pray to God, that he will
bless our labors, for unless his blessing be with us, all our labors are in
vayn which we do. S. JAMES says in his 4. chap. ye fight and war (a
metaphore taken from wars) he speaks of contentions and brawles, wherewith
they do grieve one another) and get nothing, because ye ask not, ye ask and
receive not because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it on your lusts.
Some complain that they cannot nourish themselves by their arts, in the mean
season they do not diminishe their lusts: they despise God, not acknowledging
him to be the author of good things. SOLOMON in his proverbs says the
dilligent have sufficient, and the slougthful are famished. PROU. 14. verse.
23. In all labor there is abundance: but the talk of the lips brings
only want. 19. verse. 24. The slougthfull hides his hand in his bosom, and
will not put it to his mouth again, that is, he shall not have to eat. 20.
verse. 4. The slougthfull will not plow, because of winter, therefore shall he
beg in the summer, but have nothing. And the 13. verse, love not sleep,
least thou come unto poverty: open thy eyes and thou shall be satisfied with
bread. 21. verse. 25. The desire of the slougthfull slays him: for his hands
refuse to work. If God does sometime afflict great laboring men with famine,
he does it for certain causes, which we have in other places made mention of.

It is added, that RVTH showed her mother in law those things which she had
gleaned, also that she brought forth and gave her, that which she had left of
her fulness. It appears that RVTH was notably affected toward her mother
in-law, for that she might make her merry, she did not only show her mother
in-law part of it, and devour the other priuelie, but she shows her all which
she had gleaned that day, and brought her meat also out of her bag, scrippe or
bosom which was left. Thou shall easily find daughters in-law, which will
give nothing to their mothers in-law, yea who will rather cast meat to the
dogs, or else eat more then will do them good, then bring any thing to their
mothers in-law.

Let children learn to feed and to chearishe their aged parents. For the
word of honoring does comprehend this amongst others, as the Lord himself
interprets it MATH. 15. where he does reprove the PHARISEES and SCRIBES
because they do make void the law of God through their traditions. The
gentiles also do think it meet, that we norish the^ which have nourished us.
Ofttimes sons and daughters do complain, that poverty does hinder them that
they cannot perform that duty: but if they should spend much at the wine,
upon sumptuous apparel, and such other vayn things, they would make no mention
of their poverty. There are few which have regard of their parents stricken
in age, as becomes them. In the history of the gospel it is oftentimes read,
that parents entreated the Lord for their children, that they might be
delivered from diseases, but there is no such thing recorded of children. The
most part would wish them dead, whether they be poor or rich. If their
parents be poor they are to be nourished of them, and so they are a burden to
them, if they be rich they watch as ravenous birds do for carcases. There are
also some who do spoil their parents of whom (it is said) PROVE. 28. verse.
24. He that robs his father and his mother, is the companion of a man that
destroys.

JOSEPHUS writes that NAOMIE brought forth some pieces of meat, which her
neighbors had brought her, and the which she had kept for RVTH. For the words
in the text may be understood both manner of ways: We do therefore gather by
this, how dear the daughter in-law was unto her mother in-law, because she did
not spend all, but kept some for her that was abse^t and at labor. But it
rather seems to agree, to be understood of RVTH.

NAOMIE asked her daughter in-law, where she had gleaned, she answered
freely, and she showed the name of the man in whose field she was. She does
teach parents to have a care and regard of their children: peradventure she
thought that it could not be, that she should gleane so much by her own
labor in so short a time. If children do bring any thing home, which they
say was given them, or that they found it, let parents diligently examine
them, for they come by these degrees to theft. Let them take an account of
their chilchildren, where they have been, with whom, what they did, if any
thing be suspicious in them, let them examine them, if they be found in a lie,
let them chasten them: let them also praise them which do well, and so stir
them up to the desire of virtue. Let masters do the same, and others to whom
the care and charge of the younger sort is committed. Neither let them only take
an account of the younger sort, but also diligently of the elders. I do not
give counsel that ye shutt in youths at home: but in the mean season, let
them have a care that if they go abroad with leave, that they join themselves
with good company, by whose conversation they may be the better. RVTH does
willingly give an account to her mother in-law, she does not answer her
crookedly: she does tell orderly what befell to her in the field. Let children
do the like to their parents, and those that are set over them, and let them
govern themselves so, that they may without fear, make report of those things
which they have done.

Before her mother in law heard the name of BOAZ, she said, blessed be he
that has known thee. The old translation, has who has pitied thee. The
word of knowing is diversely understood in the holy scriptures. Pro. 12. ver.
10. the Just man does know the life of his beast (although Solomon does use
this word Iada and our wrirer does use Nakar) that is, he has a care and a
regard of his cattle, he does give them prouinder, he does grant them rest,
or he has mercy on his cattle: but the tender affections of the wicked are
cr^ell: that is, they have no care of them, they do handle the^ unmercifully.
So in this place who has known thee, that is, who has done thee a good turn?
She blessed him because he had pity on her. Truly God will bless them, who
do bestow benefits on widows and poor foolks.

The. 15. Sermon.
20 And Naomie said unto her daughter in-law, blessed be he of the Lord: for
he cease not to do good to the living and to the dead. Again Naomie said
unto her, the man is nere unto us, and of our affinite.

21 And Ruth the Moabitesse said, he said also certainly unto me, thou shall be
with my servants, until they have ended all mine harvest.

22 And Naomie answered unto Ruth her daughter in law, it is best my daughter,
that thou go out with his maids, that they meet thee not in another ^ielde.

23 Then she kept her by the maids of Bohaz, to gather unto the end of barley
harvest, and of wheat harvest, and dwelt with her mother in-lawe.


THe talk which NAOMIE had with RVTH, is partly pleasant, and partly
profitable: for it contains many things which make not a little, both for
our instruction and comfort. Before NAOMIE understood in whose field RVTH had
gleaned, she says, blessed be he who has known thee. And after she had
heard his name, she uttered this blessing in many words. Blessed be he of the
Lord: that is the Lord reward him both in this world, and in the world to
come, or he is blessed that is, he is accepted of the Lord, his grace is with
him. The blessing of the Lord does comprehend the goods as well temporal as
eternal: He that does bless another, prays that God would take him to his
defense (through the MESSIAH in whom we are blessed) that he would release his
sins, that he would defend him, and give him success in all his affairs,
and keep him from all evil. She does show the cause, for he cease not to do
good to the living and to the dead, that is he cease not to love them and to
be beneficial unto them. But how he was beneficial, to the dead, I will show
you by and by. She does add that BOAZ (which RVTH did not know) was their nigh
kinsman Goel signifies a revenger and a kinsman, who ought by law to defend
their blood, and seek the punishment of him who has hurt them.

We do gather out of these words, what is the duty of those that be of our
kindred and affinity, and of friends, namely, that they love mutually
together, and that they strive in giving benefits amongst themselves (which
are not of one kind) also that the rich do help the poor. BOAZ did
prosecute his friends (with love) both dead and a live, and was beneficial unto
them. How did he good to the dead? when as long as ELIMELECH and his sons
were alive he was beneficial unto them, and after their deaths for their
remembrance he did gratify their widows in as many matters as he could* and
he would have done the same to their children, if they had any, and this is
to show pity or mercy toward the dead. NAOMIE used this phrase before.
Truly if the dead should know what things are done upon the earth, they
would rejoice at these duties, not that thou should endeavor to place
them in the place of Gods, and appoint holy days for them, and make prayers
to them. etc. Many have little care of the widows and children of their dead
friends, or if they do any thing once or twice for their sakes, afterward
they do leave to be merciful, that is, they do cast away the care of them,
and send them to others: he was constant in friendship. For true friends do
not turn with fortune. PROVE. 17. 17. A friend loves at al times, we have some
examples of such friends in the scriptures. The 2. SAM. 9 chaprer. DAVID
having obtained the whole kingdom, did ask if any remained alive of the
family of SAVLE, with whom he might deal mercifully for Ionathans sake, that
is, that he might be beneficial unto him: and when MEPHIBOSHETH the son of
JONATHAN was brought unto him, he gave him the lands and the goods of his
father, and although he was lame and one cast away, yet he sets him at his
table. It is said commonly, that the dead do lack friends, but DAVID does
account him as his son, for the remembrance of his father. Therefore God
does also stir up to him faithful friends: for in the conspiracy of
ABSOLON, CHVSAI, ITHAI and others followed DAVID, and not his son, although
they did see him florishe. Those friends which forsake us in adversity, are
not true friends, but may be compared unto those birds which fly away in
the winter, coming and returning again in summer. A sure friend is tried in
doubtful matters. It is common at this day, that men which are great friends
do strive amongst themselves, and for light causes: friends are not to be
despised and cast away, how poor soever they be, for oftentimes they may help
much the rich and mighty with their help, as in conspiracies, wars,
burnings, shipwrackes, diseases, and other evils both public and private.
Furthermore it is not only required of kinsmen and friends, that they have a
regard of the fatherless and wyddowes, but of others whosoever they be.
Therefore how much do they offend, who for small causes do wrong to the
children and widows of them that are departed, and when they could not hurt
their parents and husbands, they seek to be revenged of these?

That which NAOMIE reports of BOAZ, we may say more rightly of God, that he
does not forsake them which trust in him, whether they be dead or alive: Then
breaking forth into heavenly praises, we must say, blessed be God etc.

The other is how we must behave our selves toward them, who have been
beneficial unto US. NAOMIE acknowledges the benefits bestowed upon her, and
shows her self thankful to BOAZ and RVTH, she does declare this benefit
both in words and deeds. See does bless BOHAZ, not with a magical blessing,
or with an inchauntment but with a heavenly blessing. This we must immitate to
pray for good things through Christ for our benefactoures. There are many
poor folks who have received a long time many and great benefits, either of
some of their kinsfolks or others, if they do once suffer the repulse, they
fret, they are angry, and they do curse them: if any man bestow upon them as
much as they can, they yet look for greater things of him, (if they be not
satisfied, they by and by wax angry. But we ought not only to give thanks in
words to them) who have been beneficial unto us, and pray to the Lord for
them, but to show our selves thankful in deed. That NAOMIE afterward
provided a husband for RVTH, we shall hear in his place. Thirdly, we gather
out of this place, that the benefits do not perish which we bestow on our
neighbors. For as NAOMIE prayed to God for a reward for BOHAZ her benefactor
he being ignorant of it: so there shall be some in all ages, who will praise and
take acceptably those things, which are bestowed on them, and will to God in
their prayers, commend the health of them whose liberality they have tried:
nay, if they do not their duty, yet the work it self if it proceed from
faith, does after a sort cry unto the Lord.

JOB. 31. chap. purginge him self from most heinous crimes, which were laid
against him by his friends, namelye hypocrisy and ungodliness, making a
narration of his whole life beforespent, says amongst other things: let
these or other things befall on me, unless their sides do bless me, that
are hott with the fleeces of my sheep. He does bring in by Prosopop^ia the
sides made whot by him that they did pray for him: that is, that such a
benefit should come into remembrance unto the Lord, although he was
unthankful who^ received it. This ought to stir us up to liberalytie toward
the poor. If thou do compare that which BOAZ gave to these widows with his
wealth, it is not so glorious and great: yet it was very profitable to them,
and God does greatly recompense it. Our savior says in the Gospel the 10
chap. of MATT. Who soever shall give to one of these little ones to drink a cup
of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he
shall not loose his reward.

Fourthly we have also a form of blessing: what things, of whom, and how we
ought to pray for the good of our benefactors, for the benefits which they have
bestowed on us and ours. The word blessing does comprehend the goods both
temporal and eternal, as we have said above. These good things NAOMIE prayed
for her kinseman, of the Lord, and she knows that he can show mercy to whom
he will, and that he marketh and governs our words and deeds, as well good
as evil. But those prayers and blessings are not in vain, otherwise the
saints would not have used them, neither the scriptures would teach us to
use them. As prayers are not unprofitable: so neither are those wishes which
are nothing else then certain kinds of prayers.

RVTH going forward to commend the courteousnes of BOAZ does say, that he
commanded her further, that she should accompany his servants, until they
had made an end of harvest. But he said that she should go forth with his
maids. There is no diversity in these words, for the servants and the
maids went into the field together. For the scriptures do oftentimes note
that afterward which should be set before, some say that he said, Join thy
self with my servants, in ieste to try her: Namely that she might get her a
husband. NAOMIE answered: It is good, it is an honest thing, it does please me
my daughter, that thou do go with his maidens. She does not persuade her to
go into another field the next day: and although she did understand that the
good wills of friends are not to be abused: yet she does bid her to return
into the ground of BOAZ: because he was their kinsman, she does think that
he will have more care of her honesty, then strangers and forrainers, for
she might easily come amongst some, who would not defend her, if she were in
danger. The old translation has, it is better to go with his maids. The
cause is added that they meet thee not* Munster translateth it, least they
enforce thee. This word Phaga signifies to withstand, to resist to meet,
hereof comes paegara an evil chance or success, so also to ask, to pray,
to enforce. If thou should gleane in another field, some body may withstand
thee, and say that other poor have license to glean there: and some wanton
young men may force thee, as it sometime comes to pass in the harvest: If
thou interpretest it to ask, per adventure this is the meaning, that some body
might provoke thee to whordom. It is said commonly she may be chaste to whom no
man moves the question. There are some which will take any payns to defile
matrons and virgins: but at length they are punished for their vnpuritie. For
their children and wives are oftentimes defiled of others, by the just
punishment of GOD, or they are so kindled with jealousy toward their wives, so
that they are miserably tormented both day and night. Or at least RVTH might
have been suspected of ungodliness.

Let old women, by the example of NAOMIE, rightly teach the younger, and stir
them up by praise to the study of virtue, and command them to tarry at home,
and shun all causes of oftending. It is commonly said that the flax must be
taken from the fire least it be burnt. NAOMIE had rather her daughter in-law
should stay at home: but because necessity drove her to run into the
fields, she commands her to join her self in company with mayds not
with men. Maidens cannot always stay at home, they are constrained sometimes
to go to markets, sometime to take long iournies, but they are to be exhorted,
that they do not this alone, but that they join themselves with honest
company in their way: let them shun talk with wanton young men, or
drunkardes or suspicious places: especially in the night, let them keep
themselves at home: And let them not only flee from evil, but also from the
outward appearance of evil. For if they fall into the suspicion of whoredom
or adultery, they cannot easily clear themselves. If they be accused of theft,
the thief being taken, their innocence is showed to all men: but this is far
otherwise. S. PAVLE in the 2. chap. to TITUS. The elder women likewise (as has
been spoken before of old men) that they be in such behavior, as becomes
holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, but teachers of honest
things: that they may instruct the young women to be sober minded that they
love their husbands, that they love their children: that they be discreet
chaste, keeping at home, good and subject unto their husbands, that the word
of God be not evil spoken of. He says it is not enough for old women to
live well, but he commands them to frame the youngers to upright life both by
words, and also by the example of their life. There are some which talk with
men, resort to daunces and banquettes, saying that by this means they may get
themselves husbands, but this is a dangerous way, and not allowed of honest and
godly men.

RVTH regarding her chastity does ioin her self to the maidens, teaching
daughters by her example, to obey the good counsels of their parents: which
many do not willingly, but because they are hott, and are carried away with
their affections, they had rather hearken to flatterers: afterward falling
into many troubles, they repent, and do bewail their lotte too late. But
those which suffer themselves to be governed of the elder, they do find
plentiful fruits of their obedience. She kept company with them, until
harvest was done. Continuance at one work is praise worthy, and that a man may
become constant, it avails much in young years to be accustomed to
labors. They which shift from one labor to another, do take pains for a
little profit.

She returned unto her mother in-law, or was in company with her every night:
for it becomes mayds to be at home at night, and no other where: she would
not that her mother in-law should be grieved for her. Let not children through
their night wandering, throw their parents into sorrow, whose sleep otherwise
they do often break: She remained with her seeking for noe other host. At this
day many will not willingly be with their mothers, much less with their
mothers in-law. What if they should nourishe them* poor maids which will not
remain with their kinsmen, but had rather live more at liberty out of their
sight, and to wander whether their mind carries them, are not well reported
of. But let maidens so behave themselves, that their kinsefolkes or they which
are of their affinity should have no just cause to forbid them, or cast them
out of their house.

CHAP. III.
The 16. Sermon.
1 Afterward Naomie her mother in-law said unto her, My daughter, shall not I
seek rest for thee, that thou may prosper?

2 Now also is not Bohaz our kinseman, with whose mayds thou wast? behold he
winnoweth barley to night in the floor.

3 Wash thy self therefore, and annoint thee, and put thy raiment upon thee,
and get thee down to the floor let not the man know of thee, until he has
left eating and drinking.

4 And when he shall sleep, mark the place where he lays him down, and go,
and uncover the place of his feet, amd lay thee down, and he shall tell thee
what thou shall do.


THIS chapter does consist of three especial parts. In the first the council
is contained, which NAOMIE gave unto RVTH, how she should procure BOHAZ to be
her husband: in the other is set down, how RVTH obeyed her mother in-law:
and what she obtained, how she was accepted of BOHAZ and sent away. in the
third, how she returning unto her mother in law, showed to her all things
orderly which befell unto her. Many things are contained in this chapter, which
pertayn to making of marriages, in which the greatest points of our happynes
or unhappiness in this life are contained.

As concerning the council of NAOMIE, first she did promise RVTH her help,
that she would provide for her a good marriage. I seek rest (says she) for
thee, for so she does call marriage. She does add, that it may be well with
thee: the meaning is: I will join thee with a good and a meet husband, that
thou may know where thou shall tarrye, and that thou may hereafter get
thy living without so great labor. She does not promise her an idle life
abounding with delights, she does not say that she shall be without all
troubles, of which this world is full, to the mitigating of the which the
Lord has appointed marryage. GENESIS 2. The Lord says it is not good for man to
be alone, let us make him a help. God will that it be well with them, and that
they have rest. Yet many through their own faults do procure themselves great
trobles, as when they do norish suspicious ielousies etc. Also marriage has
troubles belonging to it, especialy where there be many children: yet they have
mo trobles who dispising this institutution of God, do wallow in whoredoms
and addulteries. NAOMIE does not aduife her that she should live a sole life.
For it was better, that a strange widdowe should marry with some one of the
people of God. Here is an example of gratitude propounded to us in NAOMIE. In
the first chapter she does wish for a happy marriage for both her daughters
inlaw, now that occasion is offered, she omitteth nothing, that she might
provide a good husband for her, who had deserved so well of her. There are some
which will be marvelous liberal only in promises, but they do nothing
indeed: oftentimes when they may benefit their friends without troubling
themselves, they will not do it, but if others do it, they will envy them.

Next let parents learn, to provide husbands for their daughters, and wives
for their sons, for this care belongs to them. Children ought not in this
matter to follow their own wicked affections, but to use the counsel of their
parents. Let not parents tirannically constrain their children to many
against their will. NAOMIE does confer with RVTH her daughter in-law of
marriage. Marriages to which children are unwillingly driven, have seldom
happy ends.

The manner is after set down, how NAOMIE procured this marriage: she does
give her precepts, she does teach her, what she shall do, and what she should
avoid: first she bids her to wash away her sweat and spots least she should
smell ill. And those washinges were common amongst those nations, and of
themselves not unlawful. Next she does bid her to anoint her self: the which
was also used amongst the Estern people, as other histories, as well the
Euangelical history does witness. Thirdly she does bid her to put on her
apparel, to wit the best she had. Fourthly to go into the floor and not
suffer her self to be seen, before that BOAZ had eaten and drunken. The
laborers seem to have better cheer at the latter end of harvest as at
sheepshearing. We do make a feast in the latter end of harvest and vintage: so
we do give more meat and drink to threshers of corn in the barn and
winnowers. She does command her to mark his bed, or the place where he lays
him down, and removing the couerlit from his feet should lie down by stealth
at his feet, and signify unto him what must be done, according to the law of
raising up children to the brother or kinsman deceased. For he said after
that there was one of nearer kindred, with whom he would first confer about
this matter. The law which does command that the brother or kinsman should marry
the wife of the brother of kinseman departed without a child, does not express
by what way or means it should be done, nor drives any man unwillingly to
marriage. Therefore NAOMII did use these devises, that she might win BOAZ the
easier: and might obtain of him, that he should do, that which the law
commanded him to do of his own accord and free will. For cleanlines in women
does please men well: and husbands do oftentimes abhor their wives for
sluttishe apparel. Therefore women do comb and deck themselves. The night
also a man being alone with a woman alone, does make many marriages.
Furthermore being well drunk they do many things willingly, which if they had
bin sober they would not have done. LOT committed incest with his daughters 2.
SAM. 11. CAP. DAVID by drunkenness sought to overthrow the constancy of VRIAH
and to enforce him to lie with his wife. OVI^ says. Night love and wine do
nothing moderately, the night is without shame and love is without fear.

It was meet that RVTH should be married to BOHAZ, but there were other ways
and means, by the which she might have dealt with him about this marriage,
they might have brought BOHAZ in mind of the law by some honest but
peradventure they thought it to be no matter, when they were persuaded that it
was his duty according to the law, to raise up seed to the kinsman deceased.
But least any man should abuse this example and make marriages in degrees
forbidden, or defend baudry, and excuse their faults by other errors and
faults of the saints, it is to be known that there is mention made, of four
kinds of examples of holy men in the scripture.

First certain deeds are described and proposed to us to follow, as faith in
ABRAHAM, patience in IOBE, chastity in JOSEPH, etc. the ardent prayers of DAVID
and others: all the holy scriptures are full of examples of virtue worthy to be
had in remembrance. How many does the holy ghost propose unto us in this little
book in NAOMIE RVTH and BOHAZ. As gold smithes, paynters and others do set
artificial works, before their scholars which they should follow: so God does
put before us the examples of Godly men, that having them always in our sight,
we may immitate them in our life.

Next the deeds of the Saints are contained in the holy scriptures which are
wicked, as the incest of LOT, the addultery of DAVID, the disobedience of
JONAS, the pride of the apostles, the denial of PETER, the unbelieving of
THOMAS, and many other. These are not recited of the holy ghost to the end that
we should follow them, but we may see that though they be saints, to be yet
corrupted in their nature: and in that they did excel in so many rare virtues,
that was by the goodness of God. These things should make us beware, for if
such excellent men have fallen, what may befall us, when we are not to be
compared with them? Next according to the admonition of the Apostle: who so
does think he does stand, let him beware least he fall. And as they went not
forward in wickedness but repented: so let us also repent, that God may
forgive us our sins and punishments due for sins: also let us receive
sinners which do repent truly. But true repentance does acknowledge the
heynousnes of sin, embraces by faith the mercy of God proposed in his son,
and does afterward abstain from sin.

Thirdly the saints in the old testament did certain things well, which
at this day were most wicked to follow. They did circumcise their children at
the eight day, which is not at this day, lawful: because baptism is in the
place of circumcision. They did offer diverse sacrifices to God, which at this
day have no place. A brother ought to marry the widow of another brother, and
raise up seed to him, which at this day were a sin worthy of death. The same
may be said also of other ceremonial laws which are taken away by Christ,
the same also may be said of some part of the iudicialles. These therefore are
not to be drawn into example.

Fourthly, there are some singular deeds, as that ABRAHAM against that
general law: Thou shall not kill: would have slain and offered his son
ISAAKE: That the Israelites did not restore, the golden and silver pottes and
apparel which they had borrowed of the Egiptians: we must not follow these
things we have no warra^'t to do the same. Th^^ (1. SAM. 5.) JONATHAN and his
armor bearer, in an unfit place set on the power of the Philistines, was done
notably and heroycally, not proceeding from pride, or covetousness, but driven
unto it by the holy ghost: he looked unto the promise and glory of God, and the
preservation of his country. If any body be not led by the like spirit, and
yet would take in hand the like matter, they may be accounted rash. I omit
other examples: by these promises we may judge more rightly of the deeds of
NAOMIE and RVTH. Therefore let us say that this is a peculiar fact, and we must
not follow it: Or those women were holy and chaste, yet they did offend in the
manner: neither are those things recited in the scriptures that we should
follow them, but eschew the^. And although the success was happy, yet it was
not attributed to the carefulnes of NAOMIE, but rather to Gods mercy. Saint
PAVLE in the first epistle to the THESSAL. 5. does bid us to abstain from the
outward appearaunce of evil. But she is commanded to do that, which has the
outward appearaunce of evil. NAOMIE uses those arts whereby baudes do
entise young women to wickedness, for they do use baths, sweet ointments, and
fine apparel etc. Peradventure the success would have been bad enough, if she
had not met with a godly man. If she could not have been hid, but have been
spied of others, who would not have thought but that she came either for
whordome or theft? Furthermore who would have denied but that NAOMIE as much as
lay in her, cast her daughter in-law into the danger of whordome: she which did
before please BOAZ might now displease him by this deed: or if he had been
enflamed with wine might have dealtwith her, and that he might afterward have
put her away as a harlot. It is to be added to this, that by the law she was
not due to BOAZ, but to a nearer kinsman: who unless he had given over his
right, she had done him an injury. I will speak nothing of this, that men
ought to woe their wives, and not wives husbands. And although BOAZ did
afterward praise it, yet it is not to be supposed that he did allow of all the
circumstances. Therefore no man ought to abuse the example of these poor
women, and reason thus, if it were lawful for them, it is lawful for us. For
the falls of the saints ought to make us more wary, and not to allure us to
sin.

There are old women, who when they hope that by this means, they can make
marriages between young men and virgins, they call them to night banquettes,
talks, and daunces, and sometime exhort them, that they should go to bed
together. There are also virgins which do entise youths diverse ways to lie
with them, saying that they did it of a good purpose, namely, that they might
get a lawful marriage: but marriages are not to be made by this means, we
must hold on a right course, parents and kinsfolks are to be advised with,
before honest me^ must we contract marriages. How often have those private
marriages had a sorrowful and lamentable end?

And those youths are to be reproved, which, that they may get their pleasure
of some women, do promise them marriage, and being defiled they drive them
away reprochfully as wh^res, and deny that ever they did make mention of
marriage. Honest youths will not marry them which have been defiled by them,
yea they suspect that they have given their bodies to be abused before of
others, or will do it hereafter.

But what shall we judge of them, who being taken, do give as a cloak to their
whoredom the favorable name of marriage, when as they made no mentio^of it
before? or what shall we judge of those baudes men or women, who for gain do
match those persons together whom they ought not?

Thou shall also observe by the way, that she says that BOAZ winnowed the
floor of barley, that is the barley that was in the floor. The Septuagintes
have Licman that is to winnow, Licmos a fan or a vanne. It is added in the
night. The Chalde interpreter says, at the night wind: peradventure they
could not winnow it in the day for the heat. We read also of other holy
fathers as ABRAHAH, ISAAKE, JACOB and GEDION: so also of the Roman Senators
and Captains that they did apply themselves to husbandry, not to idleness,
drunkenness, or surfeiting. BOAZ had many which he might have committed this
labor unto, but he had rather do it himself, partly for that by the
exercising of his body, he might be the more healthy, partly least he yielding
to idleness, should give place to evil temptations, partly that he might
stir up his servants to work by his example, for examples avail much
every way.

The 17. Sermon.
5 And she answered, all that thou biddest me I will do.

6 So she went down, unto the floor, and did according to all that her mother
in-law bad her.

7 And when Bohaz, had eaten and drunken and cheared his heart, he went to lie
down at the end of the heap of the corn, and she came softly, and uncovered
the place of this feet, and lay down.

8 And at midnight the man was afraid, and cought hold: and lo a woman lay at
his fecte.

9 Then he said, who art thou? and she answered, I am Ruth thine handmayde:
spread^ therefore the winge of thy garment over thy handmayd: for thou art the
kinseman.


HOW RVTH obeyed her mother in law, and how she was accepted of BOAZ is in
this place declared. She does promise her to do all things, and she
performed it in deed. In the which thing she is not to be accused. For
peradventure, because she was newly converted to the Jewish religion, she
thought it to be the manner, that if she should demand the kinsman of the
former husband in marriage, this way she should attempt it: but if she offended,
she offended of ignorance, not that ignorance does altogether excuse her from
sin. It does only lessen the fault, it does not wholly take it away, as good
intent does also, as they call it. GENESIS 38. THAMAR also used a deceit that she
might get IVDAH to be her husband.

This is the duty of children, that they obey their parents, and them who are
contained under this name: except those things which they command them to
do, be repugnant to the word of God. As if they command their children not to
hear holy sermons, if they bid the^ to put on a Monks coule, or travel into
places where pure religion is bannished. If they bid them to kill or to hurt
some, or rob, or commit whordome etc. in these and others they must not obey
their parents. For the laws and commandments of God are to be preferred
before the commandementes of our nearest friends. Our Savior says whosoever
prefers his father and his mother before me, is not worthy of me. JONATHAN
SAVLES son would not slaye DAVID being commanded of his father. 1. SAM. 17.
chapter. Although it seemed that he was bound to it by two bonds. First
because that SAVLE was king, and next his father, who commanded it him.

Next it is written that BOHAZ did eat and drink and cheared his heart. It is
also read that other holy fathers sometime did refreshe themselves with a larger
portion of meat and drink. GENESIS 43. The scripture says of JOSEPH, and of his
brethren, that they did drink and were drunken with him. Where the scipture
does not speak of that luxurious drunkenesse, which it does so often condemn,
but of more drink wherewith they are made merry. Saint AUGUSTINE and also
HIEROME does witness, that drunkenes is not used for excessive drinking, but for
enough as PSALM. 35. they are made drunken with the plenty of thy house, that
is they are full etc. God does command to cast away heaviness in solemn
feasts, and celebrate his feasts with joy: Under the government of SOLOMON
the Israelites came together in great numbers, eating drinking, and rejoicing.
The which is to be noted for certain Anabaptists and hipocrites, which do
condemn pleasures and joys which are permitted. GOD does give us wine, bread,
flesh, fish, and other things which we are to use for meat and drink. PSALM.
104. God does make the wine to increase, which does make glad the heart of man:
and especially if they who labor hard do rejoice at their meat and drink,
they are not to be envied IERE. 31. God does promise his people that they which
should return into their country should abound with those things which
pertayne to honest pleasures. Yet we must beware least we abounding with
these gifts of God, should forget him, but we must give diligence to use his
gifts well.

That BOAZ lay all night in the floor and slept by the heap of corn: he did
so, either that he might betimes in the morning return to his labor, or that
he might watch the corn, least thieves should carry it away. It seems that
the floers or the barnes were in the fields and not so fully fensed, but that
every body might come in. VARRO. lib. 1. cap. 51. writes that the flooer
ought to be in the field, in a higher place so that the wind might blow
through, and especially round, and in the middle a little a slope that if it do
rayn, the water may not stay. etc.

He does teach householders, by his example to have a care to keep their
things, and to be present with their laboring people, for oftentimes through
their own negligence that is stolen from them which they have gotten with
great labor. In the deep of the night BOAZ turned himself from one side to
another, or bowed himself. laphath signifies to bow, to apprehend, to lie
shrunk up together: some expound it to turn from one side to an other. When he
did turn himself, and thrust his feet to the foot of the bed, he understood
that something lay there, and being afraid, he boweth himself and by feeling
(to wit by the apparel) he found it to be a woman, therefore he asked who
she was? It was no marvel that he was afraid, he might have suspected some
evil spirit which had taken on it a body, had lain at his feet. Alexander of
Alexandria in the 2. book chap. 9. writes of a certain spirit, that as it
seemed puttyng away the bed clothes, lay down in a bed where a good man lay,
and drawing near as if it would have embraced him: and the other when he was
now almost dead for fear, shranke to the side of the bed, and when it came
nearer he drove it away etc. Also look in the 19. chap, book. 4. I could also
bring you many other examples of this kind.

And it is not to be doubted but that BOAZ being amassed with a sodayn fear
commended himself unto the Lord: for godly men were wont to do so in those
soddaine terrors, when wicked shapes and illusions of shadows appeared to
them. The old fathers as it is read often times in their writings do cross
themselves and so they drive away devils. Lactantius writes of the virtue of
the cross in the 4. book. 27. ^^ap. but we must not think that this ce^^monie
of the cross, does drive away ^^^ils of it self, but because they belee^^^
that they were freed by the cross and benefit of Christ, from the power of
the devils.

RVTH answered modestly that she was his handmaid and desired him, that he
would cover her with the skirt of his garment: or throw his winge over her.
Chanaph signifies a wing, or a skirt of a garment, also an end and a corner.
Lira notes that the man contracting marriage in those days laid his winge, or
the nethermost skirte of his garment on the woman: So the meaning is betroth me
to thee: and marry me according to the law of a kinseman, or that which is
better, hide me under thy wings, take me into thy tuition and defend me. A
metaphor borrowed from birds, who do cover and defend their young ones with
their wings.

But in this similitude, is by the way set forth the duty of husbands
toward their wives: namely that they shield and defend them, feed and
pro^^uide necessary things for them. Good Lord, how many husbands are there
which do never think of these things?

She does show the cause, wherefore he ought to take her into his defense:
because thou art the kinsman. Least he should think, that she was a bold and
unshamefast woman to come into a man's bed in the night unknown: she called to
his mind, the law of God of marrying, the widow of the brother or co^in
departed. Let not women abuse this place in the defense of their filthiness,
neither let them come night nor day to any man's bed, if he be not married to
them, especialy if he be well drunken, or otherwise cast themselves rashely into
danger: for the condition of those times was far otherwise, then at this day
it is.

The. 18. Sermon.
10 Then said he, Blessed be thou of the Lord my daughter, thou have showed
more goodness in the latter end, then in the beginning, in as much as thou
followest not young men were they poor or rich.

11 And now my daughter, fear not: I will do to thee all thou requirest: for
all the City of my people does know, that thou art a virtuous woman.

12 And now it is true that I am they kinseman, howbeit, there is a kinseman
nearer then I.

13 Tarry to night and when morning is come, if he will do the duty of a
kinseman unto thee, well, let him do the kinsemans duty: but if he^ will not do
the kinsemans part, then will I do the duty of a kinseman, as the Lord
lives, sleep until the morning.


THE notable woman RVTH asked of BOHAZ here first husbands kinsman, that he
should marry her, as it is immediately before. Now he^ceforward does follow,
what BOAZ answered to her. Blessed (says he) thou art, or shall be of God, or
from god. my daughter. The septuagintes do translate it, eulogemene suto curio
theo. BOAZ calls her his daughter, who called her self his handmayd: and he
prays to god the only giver of al good things, to bless her both in body
and soul. Or he says this, that she had received great gifts of God, and was
acceptable unto him. That kind of salutation is other where extant. 1. SAM.
15. SAVLE meeting SAMVEL saluting him, said: Blessed be thou of the Lord. In
the new testament LVK. 1. chapter. The Angel GABRIEL saluting the holy
virgen, said: eulogement suen gunaixi that is, blessed be thou amongst women,
that is, thou art in favor with God: it is a great thing to be in favor with a
prince, much more with God. Thou art that happy and blessed woman, which God
chose out of all womenkinde, that the messiah might be borne of thee: for under
the name of blessing, the Hebrews do understand all kind of happiness. He
says that her last piety was greater then the first. The first piety or
bountifulness was, that she did reverence her husband, when he was alive,
and that she loved him, and also she did not forsake her mother in-law, her
husband being dead. Her latter piety was, that she, being at liberty from
her husband, did not follow lust, she did not seek for young men, were they rich
or poor, but she did keep her self safe unto her husbands kinsman, that she
might have seed according to the law, and raise up the name of the dead to
their posterity. She might have had a young husband, either in her own
country, or among the Israelites: but she had rather marry an old man, than
do against the law. Notable deeds are to be praised, both in men and women.
BOAZ did not allow the manner which she used in seeking a husband, or at the
least, he could not have praised it in any other, which had not the like cause.
For that which she did, had an outward apeara^ce of evil, but he does not
judge according to the outward appearaunce of this work, but according to
RVTHES intent and purpose. He thought that that which she did was not of
lightness and lust, but at the commandment of her mother in law, that there
might be seed raised up according to the law to the former husband. For he
does consider that she has lived hitherto well, and so behaved her self
toward her mother in-law, that she was worthy of a notable husband.

And because BOAZ did so indifferently judge of that deed which had an outward
appearance of evil, and does take it in good part, truly, we ought not to
interpret in the worst part those things, which have the appearaunce of
good, and are in their own nature good and right: There are some who take in
the worsepart, the words and deeds of others, through a certain corruption of
nature, being led by no probable reason. Saint PAVLE in the 1. to the COR. 13.
chap. says, love does not think evil, it believes al things, it hops for all things. Words and deeds which are doubtful are to be well interpreted,
but not the evil. Look how much the worse a man is, so much the more
suspicious is he. It is commonly said, he that is evil thinks evil, and in
this matter they do follow the nature of the devil. But who so will not be
suspected of evil, must keep themselves from these things, which make men to
be suspected of others. Numb: 32. chap. MOSES suspected the two tribes and an
half, begging the land beyond Iordaine, which was very fertile, that they
would forsake their brethren in dangers. But after they had declared their
purpose, they took away that evil suspicion out of his mind, and out of the
minds of the other Israelites: 2. SAM. 10. chap. DAVID sends Ambassadors to
the king of the Ammonites, to comfort him after the death of his father, but
the king harkening unto flatterers, suspected them of treason, whereof most
cruel war arose. Therefore we must not harken unto backbiters, and
flatterers, who do put evil suspicions into men's minds. Also in matters of
religion, all things are to be set forth openly and plainly, least grievous
suspicions arise in the minds of the simple. For there are some, who although
they understand the state of religion, yet they do speak doubtfully of many
points of religion, least great men should be offended with them. And the
example of RVTH does teach us, that we be not led by our own affections,
or do that which is pleasant to the flesh, neglecting the law of God. RVTH
could have had a young husband, but she married an old man, least she should
have violated the law of the Lord. There are widows which may easily have
rich husbands, but either they will not have Idolaters, or they will not
forsake their fatherless children. Also there are men with whom rich wives
would marry, if they would go out of those places wherein pure religion is
embraced, into such places where there is no mention made of it. Sometime they
do favor their children, least that if they marry wives such as they would,
it should be worse with them, the which, the children ought to be thankful
for.

BOAZ comfort RVTH whom again he calls lovingly daughter, least that she
should be afraid of him, but be of good comfort. Peradventure she feared least
she should be accounted unshamefast, or, that he, being not well in temper,
should force her to commit whoredom, or else be repulsed. He does add, that he
would do that which she required, that is, he is ready to mary her, for it is
known to all the City that she is a virtuous woman, word by word it is,
every gate knows, that is all the city, either because that judgment was
executed in the gate, (...) the gate by Sinedoche is put for the whole City.

First of al in contracting matrimony, thou must look that the modest
behavior and honesty of the woman, which thou art about to marry, be known to
all men. But in our times, the first question is of wealth, and the last of
manners, it is a good thing if a woman be not demed, if it be known to all the
citizens that she behaved her self well from her youth: it is very filthy on
the contrary part, if it be known to bleare-eyd-men and to barbers, that
she has been a woman desiled and unshamefast.

He adds a condition, upon which condition he will marry her. I do not
deny, says he, that I am thy kinsman (some do think that BOAZ was
ELIMELECHES brother son) but there is one of nearer affinity to thee. I will
confer with this man of this matter, if he will do according to the law of
consanguinitie, and marry thee, it is well, but if not, I will marry thee,
according to the law of kindred. He had rather marry her by and by, but he
would not take away the right of his kinsma^. If he would have married her,
BOAZ had done him an injury, if he had married her, before he had advised with
his kinsman. The same reason is also to be had in other matters. Justice is
that virtue, which does give so every man, his own. We ought to be so far
from withholding those things which are another man's, without his consent,
that we ought rather to defend his right from others. And in that he does not
by and by, bid her come to him, and promise her marriage, he does admonish
them which are about to marry, not to make too much have, or run headlong by
followyng their own affections. For we must beware least any impedimentes be
found. For there are some things which do either hinder marriages about to be
contracted, or do dissolve them which are contracted, those verses are known.

Error, conditio, votum, cognatio, crimen,
Cultus disparitas, vis, ordo, ligamen, honestas.
Si sis assinis, si forte coire nequibis:
Haec socianda vetant, connubia tuneta retraetant.
The vow of virginity, under the pope does hinder marriage: and also orders, as
if any man be a clearke, of which matters, there is no occasion that we
should use many words in this place. BOAZ first, concluded the matter with
his kinsman. We use in other contractes to consider of all things thoroughly,
there is more need of great care in marriage. Also we must beware in
contractes, that we do not any thing deceitfully. And it is good, after
marriage is contracted not to delai the matter over long, for many dangers which
may arise of the same, but to confirm it openly. He affirms by an oath, that
he will marry her, if the other refuse it. It is also read of other Saints,
that oftentimes being not required, they used oaths in weighty matters. This is
to be noted against them, which do altogether reject an oath. He swears,
that he might put her out of doubt. But unless there were a greater religion
of swearing in the old time, the^ is now, truly he could not have put her
out of doubt. For sometime even great Princes do deceive others through
swearing, and oppress them before they be aware. That which BOAZ promised he
thoroughly performed.

He commanded her to sleep until morning: he would not have her in the night
to wander in the streets: It is the part of women in the night time to stay at
home, for many dangers which may befall them. Also it is very profitable for
youths, to be kept at home in the night, for the night does yield many
occasions of great evils. Let them spend their time at home in reading, or
other honest exercises.

The. 19. Sermon.
14 And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she arose before one could
know another: for he said let no man know that a woman came into the floor.

15 Also he said, bring the sheet that thou have upon thee and hold it, and
when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid them on her,
and she went into the City.

16 And when she came to her mother in-law, she said, who art thou my daughter?
And she told her all that the man had done to her.

17 And said, these six measures of barley gave be me: for he said to me: Thou
shall not come empty unto thy mother in-law.

18 Then said she, my daughter, sit still, until thou know how the thing will
fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have finished the matter
this same day.


WE must diligently observe the course of this history, for the better
understanding of this book. We have heard in the former sermon, how BOAZ
taking RVTH in the floor behaved himself toward her: now we shall hear of
her dimission, and return to her mother in-law. Yet first it is said, that
she slept all night at his feet. After the talk had between themselves of
making marriage, they contained themselves in their places. If BOAZ had behaved
himself otherwise then he should, truly the holy Ghost, which did not pass
over with silence, the drunkenness of NOAH, the incest of LOT, the adultery
of DAVID, the denial of PETER, and the sin of MAGDELEN, would not have
passed over this. BOAZ does not abuse the occasion offered him, to fulfill his
lust.

He does teach us by his example continency and chastity. We read in
profane histories of great Emperors, when they had vanquished Cities, they
would not see most bewtifull matrons and virgins, or have them brought in
their sight, or being brought to them, though they looked upon them, yet they
did govern their lusts, and send them back again untouched, to their
parents or husbands, and so wanne great favor with the^. The great
Alexander, when he was bidde^ that he should see the daughters of Darius king of
the Persians, which were prisoners and of wonderful beauty, would not go,
saying, that it was not in him, that when he had overcome men, he should be
overcome of women. But they were rather shadows of virtues, then virtues
amongst the Gentiles: for that which they did came not of true faith, but
rather of ambition. JOSEPH is worthy to be praised, who oftentimes being
provoked by his mistress, who was in love with his beauty, would not do that
injury to his master, nor violate the commandment of God (which was not yet
set down in tables) GENE. 39. For as a man ought to shun other occasions of
evils, so also of adultery. And though thou be alone with a woman, yea in the
night, yet the bridles of unchastity are not to be let lose, we must think of
the commandment of God, thou shall not commit adultery: we must think of
the punishment of adultery, whoredom, and lust, we must not judge of sins
according to the corrupt judgment of the world. How unlike are those young
men, who either under the pretense of marriage or by force, do defile mayds, or
other men's wives: also some old men, which are decrepite do entise other men's
wives to adultery (as they did Susanna.) But what do I speak of them, when
Monks, which do vow chastity, do oftentimes defile matrones and virgins:
And it is evident that for this purpose they do use auriculare confessions,
and sometimes magical arts: In the mean season if a woman do come into
their monastery they do sweep their pauement with besomes. RVTH arose before
one could know another for darkness: that is, at the dawning of the day. For
BOHAZ said (as the old translation has) beware least any body do know that
thou came hither: or he commanded his servant (as some will have it) lest
they should tell, that she was at the flower in the night, which does not like
me. That is more alowable, that JOSEPHUS says, that he badd her to be gone,
before he raised up his servant: although he did know that he was not
guilty, neither that he had done any thing, whereof he might worthily be
ashamed; yet he would not offend others, nor lay a stumbling block before
them. It is known out of the Gospel; what they are worthy of, which do offend
their neighbors either in word or deed: he does teach us to beware, not only
of the evil it self, (as S. PAVLE warns us in the 1. THESE. 5. chap.) but
also he warns us to beware of the appearaunce of evil. There are many
things we may say or do, with a good conscience, but we must always have a
regard of our neighbor, and all our sayings and doings, must be applied to the
edyfiyng of others. If any woman will not be accounted for an harlot, let her
beware, least she show the appeara^ce of an harlot, either in speech,
behavior, apparel, and such other. We must have a care of our good name,
according to those common verses.

Omnia si perdas, famam seruare memento.
Qua semel amissa, postea nullus eris.
The loss of goods may easily be recovered, by labor and diligence, but if
any body be suspected of chastity, it is not so with it. Yet there are some
wicked men which take delight in wickedness. ISAY 3. chap. says of his
people, that they have boasted of their sins as the Sodomites: he adds, he
will bring evil on them. IEREM, 3. chap. does disallow his people, because they
had the foreheades of harlots, and would not repent. How many are there now at
this day, which do boast of whordomes, of adulteries, dronkennes, unlawful
vsuries unjust slaughters, and other wickednesses which should not be known that
they did it, if they themselves held their peace? although they which do hide
their wickedness, shall not escap their punishment. We ought also to have regard
of other men's good names and honesty. BOHAZ does diligently take heed, least
any should suspect that they had done evil. At her departure be bids her to
take her cloak or sheet wherewith she was covered, and hold it with both her
hands, and he measures out six measures of barley, that is, six small bushels
or measures of barley, Theodorus Bibliander (my most reverent master) does take
it to be an ^phah: and the garment being tied together (as it seemed) with a
knot, he laid it upon her head. mitpaach is interpreted a sheet, a cloak,
others, a veil or a linen cloth: how much barley there was, if it be counted
according to our measures, it is hard to tell. It seems there was so much as
she could carry on her head, he gave her barley that she might carry it to
her mother in-law which was poor, and that she might have also to eat, until
she should be married to one of them.

Let rich men learn, to use their riches well, and to bestow them liberallye
to the use of the poor. At this time thou have great occasion offered to thee
of exercising thy liberality, in so great perscutions of the godly, and in such
skarcetie of corn. God will not have them excused which do seek by this to
defend their covetousness, that they do not know, who are worthy or unworthy
of alms.

Rabbi SOLOMON writes (as Lira testifies) that those six measures were signs
of the six blessings of God, which were to come on the messiah which should be
born of RVTH by DAVID, according to that which is written in the 11. cap of
ESAIAS. There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Ishay etc. and the spirit
of wisdom, and understanding, the spirit ocouncell, and strength, the spirit
of knowledge, and of the fear of God was on him. He adds out of this saying
of RABBI SOLOMON, two things to be considered on, that the scripture of the old
testament, is not only to be expounded, historically, but also sometime
mistically: the other, that that saying of ISAIAH is alleged, and understood
of Christ, even of the Hebrews themselves.

BOAZ went into the City, without doubt he accompanied RVTH for her defense,
and for her honesty sake. For, honest virgins and matrones, ought to beware,
that they do not wander in the night times in the streets, without light, and
honest company.

RVTH came to her mother in-law, who asked, what has befallen to thee my
daughter? or who art thou? that is, how go thy matters? how does thy business
go forward? has thy kinsman married thee? Parents ought to take an account
of their children, yea, if they be well grown in years, and they shall do
much good, if their neighbors and kinsfolks do not dissemble, the faults
of the children to them. RVTH is not become the prouder for the hope of
marriage, but answered modestly to her mother in-law, she does not answer
frowardly, but she does rehearse in order what was done. Also children which
are well aged ought to give an account to their parents: And if their parents
be poor, they ought to provide for the^ and to nourish them: and they ought
not to take away those things privily, which they have gotten by great labor:
PROVE. 28. verse. 24. he that robs his father or mother, and says it is no
transgression, is the companion of a man that destroys.

Let rich men learn, that they send not away them which be poor in deed
empty. BOAZ would not send away the daughter in law to her mother in law,
whom he knew to be oppressed with poverty, empty: Who so does give to the
poor, does lend to the Lord. Let us rather give many gifts to them, then to
dumme images.

The mother in-lawe does bid her daughter in law, to keep her self at home
until she did know now the ^atret went: she will not that she should publishe
it, as certain talking women would. She does add that BOAZ will not be in
rest, before he has ended this business: good matters are not to be deferred,
but that which is meet is to be done by and by.

Let mothers learn out of these words, to instruct their daughters well; to
teach them good things, and to reclaim them from evil. NAOMIE, bids RVTH
sit down, that is, be in rest and to look for the success, and in the mean
season not to doubt of BOAZ his faith. They are to be instructed in religion
and good manners, not only in words but in example of life. Next we see how
credit is gotten. NAOMIE trusts this man, that he will keep promise with
RVTH, because she saw him endued with some virtues, otherwise she would have
doubred of his fidelity: neither would she have believed him by and by after
he had promised her. That is true credit, when the sayings or deeds of any
man be of force with others. As if he should speak or promise any thing,
men would not doubt of his troth, if he does any thing, men would account it
for right. If he command any thing others will obey, if he do give counsel,
others do receive it, and do make great account of his judgment. But how is
this estimation gotten? Not by flattering, nor by dissembling, but by virtue
often showed, with a happy success. For men's minds are kindled with the
admiration of virtue, and opinion of Gods help. Many think that dignity is
gotten, with an outward show of sumptuous apparel, by great titles and by
flattery. These truly are of great force amongst fools, but not amongst men
of knowledge. But this is a singular gift of God, necessary for magistrates,
doctors, fathers of housholdes, also for artificers and merchants. JOB. 29.
declares how much he was esteemed amongst all men, because he did his duty
faithfully: and did not leave of to deserve well. Estimation is lost, if we do
not perform those things which we do promise, or that those things which we
do speak are false, or those things which we do are worthy of reproof.
Therefore many undeservedly do complain, that they have no credit, when they
themselves do not that which they ought.

CAP. IIII.
The. 20. Sermon.
1 Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat there, and behold, the kinsman of
whom Boaz bad spoken came by, and he said, Ho, such one come sit down here.
And he turned and sat down.

2 Then he took ten men of the Elders, of the City, and said, sit ye down
here, and they sat down.

3 And he said unto the kinsman, Naomie that is, come agarne out of the
country of Moab will sell a parcel of land, which was our brother Elimelechs.

4 And I thought to advertise thee, saying, buy it before the assistauntes, and
elders of my people. If thou will redeem it, redeem it, but if thou will not
redeem it tell me, for I know there is none besides thee to redeem it, and I
am after thee, Then he answered I will redeem it.


WE have hitherto heard, of diverse troubles and afflictions wherewith. NAOMIE
and RVTH were afflicted: now next we shall hear, how their condition was
changed into better. For after that. BOAZ a wealthy man, married RVTH, both of
them abounded in things necessary for the sustenance of life. But the holy
Ghost does keep this order in this chap. First BOAZ does try before the
Judges, the god will of the kinsman, whether he would buy the little field of
NAOMIE, and whether he would mary RVTH according to the law. Next he refusing
it, BOAZ married RVTH, therefore all the people and the elders reioiced at
the^. Thridly, when he had begotten his, first borne son, the women blessed
NAOMIE his graund-mother. Fourthly the genealogy of BOAZ is described.

This chapter is replenished with much doctrine, as we shall hear (God
willing) in their places. And first we see that godly men may be raised by the
grace of God out of great poverty, and lifted up unto great honors. BOAZ said
unto. RVTH asking marriage, that he would marry her, if the nearer kinsman
would not marry her. The next day he sat in the gate as a chief Judge,
according to the opinion of the Hebrews, who said that he was IBSAN the Judge,
and when the kinsman came by (of who^ he had spoken to RVTH) by chance or
rather by the providence of God, he commanded him to come to him, and sit
down and by and by he called ten elders, and he commanded them to sit down,
and he said open his cause.

As concerning the phrase, He said no, such one, come hither and sit here? The
Hebrew words, Almoni Peloni signify nothing, but are only put in stead of
some proper name, which we leave out either because it is known, or do not,
remember it, or because we will not name it, the Gretians do call o dei^as*
Some men do think that his name was not conceald without the providence of
God, for that he was not worthy to be remembered of good men, for that he
despised to raise up the name and seed to his brother.

The old Hebrews did ^it in judgment in the gates, or about the gates of the
City, all men beholding and hearing those things which were done: as this
day also in many places public judgments, especially of lyse and death,
are exercised openly. They do allege this reason wherefore the Senate is
holden in the gate: that every man might quickly find the place, that the
country men needed not to go into the City, and spend much there, and that
every one might go to their houses, their business being ended. Furhtermore,
that many witnesses may be easily gathered of them, that go out and in. Or the
gate is simply taken for the court. The Chaldeans do translate at the gate:
that is to say, the house of public judgment, at the court: peradu^ ture
because those houses had great gates. The Romans gathered their counsels for
the most part in the temples.

He called together the Elders. The Hebrews do call Zacan, Judges, of their
age, as the latins do also call them Senators and fathers, amongst the
Gretians, also the senate is called Gerousi^ from a word that signifies age.
They choose for the most part the Senate, by whose council the common wealth
is governed of the elders, which seem most fit for this matter. For they know
many things, and have learned many things by their own hurt. Next they are
not so carried by their affections as youths, but they do administer things
with mature counsel. Furthermore, when they are near to death, they think, or
at least ought to think, that they should do nothing against public justice
and religion, for shortly God will take an account of their deeds and sayings.
When PISISTRATVS the tira^t, asked SOLON what encoragement he had, that he did
withstand him so sharply: he answered old age. Valerius maximus writes of
Cesselius, that when he did not obey the Triumuerie, and did speak many things
freely against CAIUS CAESAR, his friends warned him that he should take heed
to himself: he said there are two things which do make me verio bold,
namely old age and want of children.

It is said that those elders sat down. By sitting down is signified, that
Judges ought to be of a mind quiet, peaceable, and calm, not to be troubled
with affections, and that attentively they should hear them which plead in the
court, and not with a wavering mind. SERVIV^ notes lib. 9. Anei: In ancient
time men used this phrase to sit, for to advise, to care for, and to consider
of.

After propounding the cause he said NAOMIE does appoint to sell the field of
ELIMELECH our brother, (the Hebrews do call cousins brethren) therefore I
would bring it to thy care, that is, show it to thee, that if thou will redeem
it according to the law of kindred, in the presence of the dwellers hereabout,
and of the elders of my people, thou may redeem it, because there is none
nearer, and if it does not please thee to redeem (...) I would thou should
tell me, he by and by, answered, I will redeem. BOAZ adds presently that he
must also marry RVTH, if he will have the land.

The Jews had their peculiar laws of Inheritances and successions. NVM. 27.
and 36. chap. the land of Israel was divided into 12. Tribes: of which every
one of them had their possessions, which God would not have mingled; and the
inheritances of one to be transported to another, The fathers being dead, the
children succeeded in the inheritance. The sons ought not to marry wives out
of their own Tribes: the daughters also ought not to marry others out of their
own tribes: If any man dyed without Children, the brothers did succeed, but if
they had no brothers, the kinsma^. LEVI. 25. chap. no man ought to sell the
inheritance of his possession: but if any man be poor and be constrained to
sell his grounds, he ought to offer it to his kinsman, if they will not, then
to some of that tribe: but in the mean season the seller has gotten money, he
may always redeem it from the buyer: ^length the possessions return to their
old masters in the year of Iubily. Ly^^no^eth upon this place that women d^^
not inherit, but if a wife remain after her husband be dead without children,
she was to have part of the inheritance to maintain her self.

And she might sell as much as was hers, and so it is said, that NAOMIE would
sell after the same manner, that part of the ground and of the field, which was
left her by her husband and children, which by the law she had the use of
whilst she lived. But it was not lawful to sell the ground out of her
husbands familye, but to his kinsemen. As concerning the phrase to reveal
any man his ears (which is oftentimes used in the holy scriptures)
signifies to admonish or to show any thing, or to reveal some secret thing
to any man. The latins use this phrase to pull one by the care, for to admonish
one. VIR. ECLO. 6.

Cum cauerem regem et pralia Cynthius aure^ ve^^ For that was the manner (as
Mancinellus says) of those, that put me^ in remembrance, and warn the^ to do
or to remember something: look in the Pro^erbes of ERASMUS, to pull the ear.
If no body will redeem, the third person is put for the second, if thou will
redeem it, let me know it. First in this place we have a notable example of
performing promise: He said he would marry RVTH unless she was that day
married to another. Now he does perform without any let, those things which
he promised to do, and although it was privily and without witnesses, yet he
does without delay perform it, and he does free himself from his promise.
Furthermore if any man does promise marriage to another, or any other things
let him perform the same faithfully, as if thou do promise a certain sum
of money to any body etc. But before he does promise, let him diligently
consider, whether he can perform or no, that which he has taken upon him,
And that thou may perform it, thy pleasures is to be lesned, and thou must
labor night and day. PROVERRS. cap. ^. SA^OMON does command him who does give
his word for another, not to rest before he be freed, he does not bid him to
break his promise. If bands be made or an oath taken, the greater care does
lie upon us. There is so great lightness in men at this day, especially in
marriages? that many do openly deny those things, which they privily
promised to the poor, the needy, and the strangers: nay, they do not
perform those things, which they have bound themselves unto by oath.

Next here is an example of righteousness set before us, he did not defile
RVTH, that he might put another from his right, and get both the wife and
ground to himself: for at this day the course of the world is bent this way,
that many do defile virgins, that they may be that means keep them without
the consent of their parents and kinsmen: Justice commands to give every
man his own: They are m^^st which do challenge those things, which by right of
inheritance belong to others or do fell or defile their folks children: Gods
law does condemn children stealers to death. But how many are there this day
which trusting to their riches and power, endeavor to spoil others under the
title of justice.

Furthermore, let us learn to deal wearelie with covetous, crafty, and
contentious men, such as that kinsman seemed to be, BOAZ as it is to be
supposed knew the manners of this man, he does not deal directly with him, as
if he should say, by and by thou must raise up seed, of the wife or widow of
thy kinsman, which is left behind, he deals with him ouerthwartly. First he
tells him of the field, next of a wife to be married together with it, that
there might be no matters of contention, and he might by a fit means attain
to his purpose. We ought not always to utter all things by and by, but we
must keep every thing for a fit time. God commanded SAMVEL. 1. book. 16.
chap. who should annoint DAVID to be king, to take a calfe, and to say, he will
offer ^^^erifice to the Lord, least he should fall in danger of his life.

Furthermore we learn by the example of BOAZ, that matters of controversy are
to be propounded in the judgment place, in few fit and plain words ^e him
self does propose the matter: In some common wealths proctors do it, to whom
also it should not be granted, that they should hurt the good name of others,
and should babble out many words, nothing appertayning to the matter, and so
should weary the judges, and draw away their minds from the matter
propounded, as some are wont to do.

Moreover we learn, that it is lawful for a godly man, to sell, to buy, to
bestow, to change, to redeem his goods, for this is not accounted as a fault
for good and godly men in the scriptures. But it is red, IE. 32. cap. IERE. the
prophet by the commandment of God, bought the field of Hanameell, by the same
law whereby this man is bidden to buy this ground. We must see that contractes
be made according to the law of equity, and so that we be not ashamed, how
many witnesses can testify, after what manner we have dealt with our neighbors.

Also this is to be noted in the last place, that those Judges and that
kinseman sat down, they hold their peace, they do not interrupt BOAZ his
speech, they do not raise any tumult: so let Judges and them which appear
before Judges hearken, let these men being bidden or commanded answer, let
the others give just judgment according to the laws.

The. 21. Sermon.
^ Then said Boaz, what day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomie, thou
must also buy it of Ruth the Moabitesse, the wife of the dead, to stir up the
name of the dead, upon his inheritance.


ALthough BOAZ would willingly have married RVTH, for her honest behauiours, as
soon as it was demanded of him, yet he would not do this without the
knowledge of that kinsma^, who was nearer in the degree of blood: therefore he
called together the elders, and declared the matter in their presence. And that
he might avoid brabling, he first asks the kinsman whether he would buy
the field of ELIMELECH according to the law, but when that did please him he
commands him by the same law to marry RVTH, which he refused to do.

But that we may the better understand this and the former chapter, and also
other places of the holy scriptures, I will repeat the words themselves of the
law, of raising up of seed to the brother. It is thus read in the 25. chapter
of DEVTER: If brethren dwell together (in the same City or village, that is to
say at the same time, and both their possessions in one place) and one of them
dye and have no son, the wife of the dead shall not marry without, that is
unto a stranger, but his kinsman shall go in unto her, and take her to wife,
and do the kinsmans office to her. (Targu^ translateth that he should marry
with her Santes does translate it, that he should contracte affinity with
her) And the first borne which she bears shall succeed in the name of his
brother which is dead, that his name be not put out in Israel, (or let him
succeed or he shall succeed in the name of his brother, some men think
the meaning is, he shall be called the son of the dead, and the inheritance
of the dead shall pertain to him) And if the man will not marry his
kinswoman, the^ let his kinswoman go up to the gate unto the elders, and say my
kinsman refuses to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel: he will not
do the office of a kinsman unto me. Then the Elders of his City shall call
him, and commune with him: if he stand and say I will not take her. Then shall
his kinswoman come unto him in the presence of the Elders, and loose his shoe
from his foot, and spit in his face: R. SOLOM: does interpret it, before him,
and so bring shame to the unthankful man, and answer and say, So shall it be
done unto that man, that will not build up his brothers house. And his name
shall be called in Israel, the house of him whose shoe is put off. This law
has many points. First, If a brother does dye without children, his widow
ought not to marry a stranger, that is, a man of another family: but to a
brother or to another kinsman of their former husband: and one refusing, let
another succeed who is most nigh, as it appears by this book: Secondly the
first son which was borne of her ought to be called according to the name of
the dead brother and succeed in his inheritance. 3. If the brother of him that
is departed shall refuse to marry his widow, she ought to show that to the
Judges, that they should admonish him of this law, and persuade him by diverse
means, whereby he may be persuaded to marry her. 4. If he cannot be persuaded
to these things, that widow shall openly come and unloose openly his shoe,
and spit in his face, and as if it were to note him by this public ignominy.
Some men do think that these ceremonies do signify, that she was at her
own liberty after this, and had power to marry whom she would. Also there
was an old custom before the law as it appears by the history of ONAN in
the 38. of GENESIS that the brother should raise up seed to his brother, without
this cause it was not lawful for a brother, to mary the wife of the brother
that is dead. For there was a law against this kind of incest. LEVI. 18. and
20. chap. Where the degrees forbidden by God are noted. If she had Children of
the former husband, it was also incest, if a brother should marry that widow.
Also in the new testament, S. John Baptist does grievously rebuke HEROD,
because he defiled himself, by keeping company with his brothers wife, he
being yet alive.

God shows the cause wherefore he made this law: yet he is not bound to
give us an account of his laws and judgments, but such is his mercy that he
does oftentimes show to us the causes, wherefore he does or command us
something. Which of us does show his servant the reasons wherefore he bids
him to do this or that? but what cause does he render of this law? least his
name be blotted out of Israel, least his family do perisne, and his
inheritance be translated unto other families. If widows should marry
strangers, and part of their goods should be translated into other families;
their inheritaunces should be scattered and brought to nothing, and their
families should perish-thorough poverty. For oftentimes we see it come to
pass, that good families are dispersed through poverty, but GOD would have a
distinction of tribes and families in Israel for the promises of the Messiah,
who according to the flesh, should come of the (...). And it is very
profitable to common wealths if they have old and noble families amongst
them: for they can take in hand great matters, which come of them, and
especially for the government of the common wealth. For we willingly submit
our selves to them to whom the dignity, and the noblenes of their family does
bring authority. Also they who have noble ancestors, will do nothing
unworthy their virtue to bring themselves into infamy. For new start up men
do either use their government wantonly, or are hindered by the envy of other
men, the which both the old histories of the Romans and the Greeks and
other nations, and also experience do witness. Therefore God would after this
manner do good to the common wealth of Israel, that they might always have
fit men, who might profitably govern the common wealth. But it oftentimes
comes to pass, that the sons of noble men are faulty, yet if a spark of
their parents virtues shine in some of them, the honesty of their ancestors
and credit they had in common wealth, does get them great authority.
Furthermore this law does provide for widows, for unless this law did
defend them, many should by and by be cast out of their houses, which they
have governed well before: but by that law it is lawful for the^ to keep
their husbands possessions, if they marry the brother or the kinsman of him
that is departed. Also Gods will was to prevent the disorders of Brethren. Some
do oftentimes wish the death of their brother, that they might possess their
inheritances, but this cannot come to pass, except the brother does dye
without children. Also this law does admonish others of their duties toward
the dead, least they suffer their names to be abolished. Aphricanus notes an
other cause of this law, who as Eusebius witnesses, writing of the
genealogies diversely reported by MATT. and LVKE, amongst other things says,
those are accounted natural successions, which descend from a true seed or
blood: and those are legal when a son, being begotten, by another does
possess. For when they had not yet the hope of the resurrection, they did
hereby immitate as it were a certain image of the resurrection, least the name
should be blotted out through barrennes. Augustine against Faustus the Manich.
lib. 32. cap. 10. Tom. 6. does expound this law spiritually. In that a brother
is commanded to marry his brothers wife, that he might raise up seed to him,
and not to himself, and should call that child which is borne to him by his
name: what other thing does he show in a figure, then that every preacher of
the Gospel ought so to labor in the Church, that he might raise up seed to
Christ for the brother that is dead, who dyed for us all: and the seed which
shall be raised up, shall be called by his name, etc. some men do also think
that it signifies that they who are once numbered as Citizens of the spiritual
Israel, shall not perish. Christ in the Gospel says, Rejoice because your
names are written in the kingdom of heaven. And if any should object whether
could not their families be preserved by other means and those dangers avoided
etc. I answer we must simply obey gods law, who does best know why and wherefore
he does do all things.

This law continued long, whether it be ceremonial or judicial, their
possessions were confused by the Assirians and Babilonians, that there could
no distinction be seen, and so for a time this law had no use, but after that
the Jews returned into their country, they began to distinguishe their
possessions and kept them again as it may be gathered by that case which the
Saducies proposed to our Lord of that widow which married seven brethren, one
after, another whereby they would corruptly gather that there should be no
resurre^tion of the dead. MATT. 22. cap. MA^c 12. LVC. 20.

But after that Christ had suffered the death of the cross for us, as other
ceremonial and political laws were abolished, so were these also: and since all the policies of the Jews are blotted out, and they are dispersed through the
whole world: although they would gladlye keep this law, yet they cannot:
therefore let no man take this law as a color of his wicked lust and
incestious marriages, for the cause being taken away, it has now no more
place. And although the laws ceremonial and judicial be abrogated, yet their
marrowe and kernils are to be observed, as in this law that we have a regard
of the dead: that we do not change inheritances (the which both others and
especially adulterers do, which oftentimes do privily thrust in a strange
heir) also that brothers should be careful to preserve the children of their
brothers and kinsfolks.

Now it may be understood by all these; wherefore BOAZ would not marry RVTH
before the other kinsman had yielded up his right. And because that kinsman
would redeem the ground, BOAZ added that he could not buy the ground, except
he did marry RVTH, and preserve the seed and name of his kinsman.

But before I leave this, it seems not to be omitted, that some men do
reconcile that law which is written in the 18. cap. of LEVI. of the shame of
thy brothers wife, which is not to be uncovered, with the other law which is
written in the 25. chapter of Deuteronomie of raising up the seed of thy
brother, as they say, that is to be understood of the wife of thy brother
remaining yet aline, which does not yet agree, for the same might be said of
other persons, with who^ it is not lawful to marry. Furthermore they which are
not of so near of kin are forbidden. S. Augustine writes thus of this
sentence in the 6 quest, upon LEVIT. Thou shall not uncover the filthiness of
thy brothers wife for it is the filthiness of thy brother and of thy father.
The question is asked whether this is forbidden to the brother alive or dead
and it is not a small question. For if we say the scripture speaks of the
wife of the brother living, for both of these are contained in one general
commandment, whereby a man is forbidden to come to another man's wife,
therefore what is the matter that he does so diligently distinguish these
persons, which he calls of the same stock by proper prohibitions? Also
whether is that commandment of the wife of thy father, to be understood of
thy mother in law, thy father being alive or rather dead? For thy father being
alive, who does not see it much more to be forbidden, sith a man is
forbidden to defile the wife of any other man by adultery? Therefore it
seems to be spoken of those persons, which not having husbands may marry,
unless they be forbidden by law: as it is reported to be a custom amongst
the Persians. But again if we understand that he is forbidden to mary his
brothers wife, he being dead, it is contrary to that the scripture bids of
raising up seed, if he die without children, and by this that prohibition being
gathered with this commau^deme^t, the exception is to be understood least they
be contrary one against another, that is, it is not lawful for any man to
marry the wife of the brother deceased, if the brother deceased does leave
children: or else that was forbidden as a thing not lawful to marry a brothers
wife if she had been put away from him by a byll of diuorcement: for then as
the Lord commanded, that MOSES should give forth a bill of deuorcement for
the hardness of the hearts of the Jews, and by this dimission he might think
that any might lawfully marry with his brothers wife, where he did not fear
adultery, because she was put away by a bill of deuorcement.

And others do take this law in LEVITICUS, that thou shall not marry thy
brothers wife simply without any exception, as the law against manslaughter,
adultery, theft, etc. least incest should seem to be commanded and all the
other laws seem to be contrary among themselves: neither say they must we
think that God granted this marriage for an outward profit, which he called
before incestuous. For by the name Brethren, in that former law is not to be
understood natural brethren but kinsmen, after the manner of the Hebrews, and
truly even those whose marriages were not forbidden. For brothers children and
sisters children are called brothers. But that I may note this by the way,
brothers sons are called Patruelis, Brothers and sisters sons amitini,
Sisters sons consobrini. In this self same chapter, ELIMELECH is called the
brother both of BOAZ and of his kinsman. S. Augustine writes thus against
Faustus, Manich. the scriptures declare that kinsme^ and kinswomen were wont to
be called generally brothers or sisters. LOT is called ABRAHAM'S brother when
that ABRAHAM was his uncle, by the use of the which word, they are called the
brothr of our Lord in the Gospel not only those which the virgin Mary bore,
but all his kinsemen which were of his kindred.

ABENEZER testifies upon LEVITICUS that the old Hebrueswere of this mind. But
the Cabalistes, having wayed the matter better, were not of this mind. Also in
our time there was a certain learned godly man deserving well of the Church of
God, and he was of this mind. And so he expounds the 22. chap. of MATT. of
the 7. brothers which married one widow, because they were kinsmen amongst
themselves: but in those degrees, wherein it was lawful for them to marry one
and the same woman. It may be proved by two arguments that this law of
raising up seed to the brother is to be understood of natural brethren, out
of this little book of RVTH. First NAOMIE who could not be ignorant of this
law, does persuade her daughters in law that they should go home, for if
she should have a husband, and should have hope of children yet it was not
needful for them, that they should stay until they were men. Next BOAZ
says, that the other kinseman should buy the ground by right, and marry RVTH
because there was none nearer then he. Next the second kinseman was not
admitted of him unless the former refused. ONAN was punished for this cause
because he would not raise up seed to his brother. GENESIS 38. Furthermore we
must not by and by depart from the propriety of the words in the laws,
especially if they be not set down other where. And the Hebrew word Iabam,
signifies no otherwise than a husbands brothers Iafamah a woman, which is to
be married in this case by the law of affinity or kindred. Therefore this law
is first to be understood of natural brethren, next it is to be applied to
other kinsfolks. Therefore that other judicial or municipiall law in DEVTER,
is an exception against that general and moral law in LEVIT. which as we have
said God has left out for certain peculiar causes. Neither is there any
cause wherefore we should have it this day in use.

The xxii. Sermon.
6 And the kinsman answered, I cannot redeem it, least I destroy mine own
inheritance: redeem my right to thee, for I cannot redeem it.

7 Now this was the manner before time in Israel, concerning redeeming and
changing, for to stablishe all things, a man did pluck off his shoe, and
gave it his neighbor, and this was a sure witness in Israel.

8 Therefore the kinsman said to Boaz, buy it for thee: and he drew off his
shoe.


THat kinsman, when he heard say that NAOMIE would sell her field, said by and
by I will buy it according to the law: and afterward when he heard that he must
also marry RVTH by the same law, he renounced his right. He shows the cause,
least he should destroy his own inheritance. But how should he destroy it?
peradventure RVTH was young and he feared least he should beget many children
of her. Whether he had wife and children before, it is not set down. Also the
law of marriyng thy sister in-law, does not express whether a sister in law
ought to marry a brother having a wife and children before. Truly if he had a
wife and children before it would have been very unprofitable to have married a
new wife, and begat more children. For children begotten of diverse mothers,
do very seldom agree amongst themselves. Furthermore he saw that RVTH was not
only poor, but also that he should nourishe NAOMIE, who was old. He did not
fear that if he should have more grounds, he could not till them (as it
oftentimes comes to pass, and therefore it is better to till few well then
many evil) for he would have the field, but not the wife. LIRA notes, that
some of the Hebrews do expound it of the children that should come of RVTH, if
he had married her: because that it is written in the 23. chap. of DEVTER. The
Ammonites and Moabites shall not enter into the church of God for ever. But if
he had said and alleged this, he had said untruly, for that punishment does
not fall on women, or by consequent on their children begotten of a man of
Israel. Therefore it is to be understood of the Children, he had already by
another woman: For if he had married RVTH he must have taken pains, for the
bringing up and provision of his children, now had by others, that he called
blotting out, according to the common manner of speaking, which is spoken of
any man when he has taken notable loss, it is said he is destroyed or
blotted out.

He did not offend in this that he had a care of his household, and that he had
rather increase his inheritance, then spoil it. For as long as we may
increase our riches without the shippewracke of conscience, we ought to do
it. 1. TIMO. 5. If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for
them of his household, he denies the faith and is worse then an Infidel. But
the care of their household ought not to draw them, by vsuries and other
unlawful ways to get riches. And in this that kinsman offended, whosoever he
was, because he was inco^stant, one while he said that he would buy the
field, now he refuses it saying, that he cannot take the ground together
with the widow: he speaks contrary of one and the same thing. Next the
lawdoth please him as far as it is profitable to him, where it was not, there
he reicted it.

And what impudency or boldness was this that he says, that he shall
destroy his own inheritance, if he do that which God commanded his people for
the preservation of inheritance: will he seem to be wiser then God? Does not
God preserve families, and promise and bestow his blessings on them that obey
his commandments? Can any family be safe or without danger, whether God
will or no? If he were in danger of his riches, could not GOD increase the same
again? should he not have thought that this should be for his brothers honor?

This man has many fellows in these days. How many are there which speak
very largely of the doctrine of the Gospel, and do extol the same with
wonderful praises, because they hope, they shall get credit and wealth by
it: but after they cannot obtayn that which they sought for, or having obtained
it, fearing dangers, least they should leese their riches, they hate it, and
speak reprochefully of it? Truly many do only allow some points of the
doctrine of the Gospel, as that it offers to us all good in Christ, and they
reject that which it delivers of taming the flesh. They do hate auricular
confession, excommunication and the popish fastes: But they do keep drunken
feasts and may-games, and other such kind of feasts straightly. The
subjects do willingly hear the duties of their Lords: but they refuse to
do their own. To be short when it is for their profit they do allow of the
laws and commandments, but when it is unprofitable, they are displeased
with them and do wholly despise them. Some of the contrary part, do dispraise
and despise false worshippes, and superstitions, by and by being smothed with
the dayntie dishes and gifts of false teachers, they turn their fails, and
praise and defend them. The author fascicul^ temporu^ a writer not to be
despised, writes of a certain master, who disputed much against plurality of
benefices, as they are called, and against the riches and pride of the
prelates, which when it was told to the Pope, he said, let us give him a good
preferment, and these and those benefices, and he will be pleased, which when
it was done, he by and by changed his mind, saying he never understood this
matter before now, because he was suddenly of a poor man made rich. And how
many are there now, and have bin in all times, who were no otherwise persuaded
then this kinsman, which think they should perish, if they did lead their life
after the law of God? As if they should rest on the Saboth days, and grant
their servants also rest, and yield meat sufficient to their servants and
hirelinges: or give great alms to the poor, when as in other things belonging
to their housholdes, they should rather have a regard to save etc. This is
common, that by the transgression of Gods law, men would avoid dangers and
increase their riches.

And after this kinsman denied to marry RVTH, and to take her ground, he does
exhort BOAZ to use his privilege: he does renounce his right, by words, and
by an outward sign and token. The law does command a sister in law, if her
kinsman will not marry her, to pull of his shoe, and spit in his face, adding;
so let it be done to the man, who would not raise up seed to his kinsman: and
this man's house shall be called the house of him, whose shoes were put off. The
Jews had many superstitious opinions of this shoe, of what leather it was and
how it should be made, and many other such foolish things: whereby it may
be perceived how the fall away in the expounding of holy scriptures, which cast
away Christ the true light. In this place the man himself pulled off his shoe,
and not the kinsewoman to note him with ignomie: nor spitte in his face:
peradventure because BOAZ did willingly take his place, accepting of the ground
together with the widow. It is not said that RVTH was in the gate, namely
because that the kinsman was callenged to do his duty by BOAZ (as BORRAV^
writes) not by RVTH.

And I think that this law must not be expounded, as it is commonly by that
law in the 25. chap. of Deuter. of pulling off the shoe by the sister in-law
etc. But I do think that it does simply declare, that this was a solemn
custom amongst the Jews of buying and selling of fields, as if any body
will deliver over his right, and give his possession to another, his shoe
being drawn off he gives it to another, and he draws it off himself. And
therefore I think that by the shoe is signified, that the buyer has hereafter
power to walk and go through it, or over that field which was delivered him
of the seller. Some men do think that in the conspiracy of ABSOLON, DAVID
went barefooted, because the putting off of the shoe was a token of giving
place. 2. SAMVEL. 15. Our country men profess that they give over their right
by giving the hand, globend an die hand. Some do think that the Prophet does
allude to this when he says in the 60. Psalm. 10. verse: I will cast my shoe
over Edom Naeli: some do expound it my fetter. In the 108. these same words
are repeated. Santes Sagninus does cite R. Himanuel, who does expound it both a
fetter and also a glove. Now the word Naal signifies to go and to shut or to
lock. The same RABBINE adds that it was the manner of kings when they
besieged fortified towns, to cast into it their gloves, declaring that they
would not depart from it before it were taken. Santes does apply that hither,
that Cicero writes in 11. Philippica of Antoni. For he was wont to take
manicles, those are gloves, least they should fear any longer besieging. Yet
this place of Cicero may otherwise be expounded. For Manicles are such
wherewith the hands are bound, gives those things wherewith the feet are
bound: It is read in Virgilles Aenei 2.

Ipse viro primus manicas atque arcta leuari,
Vincla iubet Priamus etc.
Priamus having pity upon Sinon, losed his manicles, which by epexegesis are
called straight bonds. PLAVTVS in ASINARIA, the manicles could scarce
compass his hand etc. therefore the meaning is, he was wont to give him self
by and by into the hands of his enemy. There are also gloves of iron to
defend the hand. Iuuenalis

Quale decus rerum, si coniugis auctio fiat,
Baltheus and manicae, Cristae, crurisque sinistri.
Dimidium tegmen. If thou understand it this, then this is the meaning: they
were wont by and by to take away their armor, and deliver themselves to their
enemies, they will fight noe more etc. If thou do understand it of the
sleeue of the garment, it is the same meaning, because that by and by their
weapons being put away, they put on their apparel. In Virgill the 9. book
Numanus vpbrayding the Troyanes being besieged, says: And their coats have
long sleaues, and their heads are attired with miters. But these things by the
way. Hitherto belongs that also the Chalde paraphrase does expound this place
by the interpreter Quinquarborus. And this was an old and usual custom
amongst the Israelites, when they did take, or give, or redeem or change one
with another, that they might make sure, he drew off (who granted his right)
the glove of his right hand, and by that he did give his possession to another:
so truly the Israelites were wont to give over their possessions, to their
neighbors before witnesses: furthermore the redeemer said unto BOAZ, buy it for
thee: Then BOAZ took the shoo of his right foot, and came into possessie^ etc.
Here I do remember the history of Conradinus the last Duke of Sueuias, nephew to
Frederick the Emperor: who as Auentinus writes in the 7. book of Chronicles
of the BOIARS complains much of the injuries of the bishops of Rome, now
yielding up his neck to the hangman to be cut off, he throwing up his
gauntlets or gloves into the air said, that he yielded up by his right his
kingdoms of Arragon, to the king his kinsman, etc. and these things fell out,
anno. 1258.

It appears that the Elders in many things did use the same rites and
customs. As in betrothinges amongst the Romans, the Bridegroom gave to the
Bride an iron ring, Plinius in the three and thirtieth book the first chapter:
afterward they began to give gold. Also they did use water and wine in
contracting of marriages, as a sign of marriage, in the house of the married
wife, the keys are given her, and when she is deuorced, they are taken away
from her again. Amongst us the bridegroom and the bride do join hands
together, which is a sign of making marriage. At this day the keys are given
to the conquerors, the right of governing the city is delivered to them. Also
in the ha^dling of servants to give them a box, and drive them about house.
Also it was almost common in all nations, that they used some custom in the
manner of choosing. These were the ensigns of Emperors in old time, Iuory
chayres, Laurel Crowns, Iuory septers, purpell, sergeantes with rods and
faggots and fire carried before them. The Germayne emperors, as TRITEMIVS
witnesses, first the sword was girded to him, next armor for his shoulders
were put on, after the scepter was given them, after the crown was put on
their heads. In other kingdoms the spear is only given them, sometime the
sword, sometime both. If any body will know more of these matters, in the 22.
23. chapt. of the most noble embassad our of the common wealth, and the most
studious searche^ out of all arts of antiquity FRANCISCVS HOTOMANVS
FEVDISTICVS, of the which many things of this kind are diligently observed and
marked of him out of diverse authors. That kinseman does yield up all the right
that was his, he does not ask the field for him, and give RVTH to BOHAZ, as
they who leaving others in commodities do bend themselves to their own
commodities: and although they have no right to others or their goods: yet
against law and right they challenge those things to the which they are driven
to cruelly by the wantonness of princes.

The. 23. Sermon.
9 And Bohaz said unto the Elders, and unto all the people, ye are witnesses
this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelechs, and all that was
Chilions, and Mahlons of the hand of Naomie

10 And morouer Ruth the Moabitesse the wife of Mahlon have I bought to be my
wife, to stir up the name of the dead upon his inheritance and that the name
of the dead be not put out from amongst his brethren, and from the gate of his
place: ye are witnesses this day.


HERE is declared what BOHAZ did, after that the kinseman (whose name the holy
ghost of purpose concealed) had yielded up his right. First he says plainly,
that he has gotten the possessions of ELIMELECH and his sons; then that he
will take RVTH the Moabite to wife, and that not for lust, but lest the name of
MAHLON, who was departed, should be blotted out from amongst his brethren,
that is, his kinsmen, and from the gate of his place: that is, from Bethlehem.
By which words, he shows the excellency of his stock, that many of his
kindred have sat in the gate; that is, have been Judges. And it had been a
thing to be lamented, that so noble a family should perish, which might in times
to come yield governors for the people

Here it is demanded, whether BOHAZ did not against the laws, for biddinge to
marry strangers, within the which, though the Lord comprehends those
nations which he had appointed to destruction, yet we have showed before, 1.
chap. 3. Sermon, that they also do extend to other infidels, by reason of the
dangers of idolatry. But where there was no danger of falling away, it was
not altogether unlawful to marry. RVTH was now converted to the faith, and to
the worship of God alone, and had given testimonye of her faith by her
especial good works. So the father of BOHAZ, SALMON DAVID'S great gandfather,
married RAHAB a cananite, who had preserved the spies and had made a notable
show of her faith. There must always be more regard had of the true worship
of God, then of riches and kindreds. ABRAHAM. GENESIS 24. bound his servant by an
oath, that he should not go to the cananites, but to his own kinsfolks to
seek a wife for ISAACKE his masters son. ISAAC or rather REDECCA sends
her son IAACOB to LABAN, least he should marry with Idolaters. GENESIS 28. It
behooves parents to follow this example, when idolaters go about to make
marriages, they promise many things which they do not afterward perform. He
that loves danger (as it is said) shall perish in it. The daughters which
are bestowed upon superstitious men, are subject to more danger, then young
men which are married with superstitious Idolatrous women. Let children also
remember their duties, and not seek for such matches against the good will of
their parents. It is accounted as a fault in ESAV, that he offended his
parents by marrying idolatrous wives, GENESIS 27. That matrimony which is
lawfully contracted, with the godly has many troubles, what good then will thou look for of that unequal marriage? Otherwise to be conversant with the
Idolaters, it is dangerous and troublesome, what if thou were wholly bound to
them? Deceive not thy self with a vain hope, that thou can win thy wife, or
the wife the husband, for we see the contrary come to pass, for the most
part. And it is commonly known what befell to SOLOMON the wisest man that ever
was, when he married idolatrous women. BOAZ dealt publickely in the place of
judgment, of both these points, first of the possessions: then of the
marriage with RVTH, and he did nothing secretly admonishing us by this his
fact, that we should so bargain, in buying, in selling, in changing, and
redeeming, as if we did the same, publickely in the judgment place before many
witnesses, or in the sight of all men. How many are there, which do so
bargain with their neighbors, that they dare not for shame tell, how they
made it, and what were the conditions of their bargains? They name a sum of
money, which they should have given to their neighbor, they say they dealt
lawfully with him without deceit, when they know they lie: Furthermore they
will have, their lying books witnessed with good men's seals. It should have
been considered, that there is an account to be given, and that we shall have
two witnesses against us, namely, our own conscience, and God the beholder and
revenger of our sins. But marriages must not be contracted secretly, but
before witnesses, no man must be deceived in marriages, but all things must be
done with good faith. Secret marriages which are commonly made by baudes, vain
promises, dronkennes and such other means have seldom a good and happy end.
Let not maidens hearken to young men which promise the^ marriage, if they would
first deliver them their bodies to be abused. For if they were honest, they had
rather begin their marriages with thee with prayers made in the holy assembly,
then by lying with thee. It was also both well, and wisely appointed by the old
fathers, that they which should be married, should be joined together by the
minister of the Church publicly in the holy assemblies. For hereby we do
declare that marriage is a holy thing, and not a work of darkness, whereof
we should be ashamed. They which do evil do fear the light, and do seek
for corners and darkness. Herein are also other commodities. For we see which
are lawful matches, which not. This also provoke the^ which are married to
perform the marriage faith, each with others, because that they promised the
same by words and by giving of the hand in the holy assembly, the minister of
the Church going before. If any man, in the presence of three or four,
promises that, he will do any thing, he will thoroughly perform the same, if
he be a good man, and may do it with a good conscience, how much more, ought
married people to perform those things, which they have promised one to an
other, in the sight of God, and his angels, and the whole Church? Furthermore,
the whole Church, prays that the marriage may be happy and prosperous,
whereof more shall be said hereafter.

BOAZ said to the Elders and all the people, ye are witnesses (afterward he
rehearsed it) that these and these things I have done. They answered, we are
witnesses, as if they should have said, if it be necessary, we will testify,
how this matter was brought to pass. Let witnesses speak those things which
they have heard, seen, or know, upon some certain ground, let them not be
light persons, or liers. They do offend greatly, which will say nothing, least
they should offend any man, or do not speak those things rightly which they
do speak, they do utter another man's words in another sense, some things
they add, some things they omit, which do appertain to the matter.

These are false witnesses, whom SOLOMON. 6. PRO. nombreth amongst those six
or seven things, which the Lord abhors, and in the 19. chap. he says
twice a false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies
shall perish. A false witness offends grievously, for he deceives the
Judge, who believes the witnes^es that were sworn according to that saying, in
the mouth of two or three witnesses every cause shall stand or fall. The^ he
hurts his neighbor greatly in goods, credit, body, and life. Furthermore
he does great injury to God, whom the false witness makes the patro^ of
his falsehood. For these causes, there are sharp laws, both divine and civil
against them. Wherefore let every man deal faithfully in witness bearing. And
let us not only use witnesses in matters of great importance, which it may be
was sufficient at that time, but also let us provide that those things which
we buy and our bargains and such other things, be written in books or
otherwise noted diligently, and without ambiguitie, least contention should
afterward arise. In times past it appears that there were small notes of
sales and bargains, but now men can scarcely be kept in order, with large and
great books.

The. 24. Sermon.
11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the Elders said, we are
witnesses: the Lord make the wife that comes into thine house, like Rahel
and like Leach, which twain did build the house of Israel: and thou may
do worthily in Ephrathah, and be famous in Bethlehem.

12 And that thy house be like the house of Pharez (whom Thamar bare to Judah)
of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman.


AFter BOAZ had declared openly, that he would not only take his kinsmans
fields, but also take the widow to his wife, the Elders and all the people,
which were come together in the gate, do say first that they are witnesses,
that BOAZ took RVTH to him in marriage. Then they prayed that God would
vouchsafe to bless their marriage: and especially they wish them many
children: the which they declare by two examples. God make (say they) RVTH like
RAHEL and LEACH. JACOB the Patriarch, who otherwise is called ISRAEL had four
wives, whereof these two were chief. LEAH whom he married first, was the
elder, and is here mentioned last, and RAHEL, is set before her, it may be,
because he loved her best for bewty, and other excellent gifts. For her sake
he served LABAN, and should have married her first, if he had not been
deceived by his father in law: GENESIS 29. It may be, that for this cause she is
principally called IACOBES wife: GENESIS 46. and not because that LEACH was not
also his wife. Of these two he begat eight sons, of whom there came and
were named so many tribes of Israel. And this is it which they say that they
builded the house of Israel, for by them his family and posterity was
increased and preserved, yea and continued unto Christ. Afterward they do say,
let thy house be as the house of PHAREZ, whom THAMAR bare to IVDAH. IVDAH the
son of JACOB, almost by the like case took THAMAR to wife, a stranger, his
daughter in law, of whom he begat twins, PHAREZ and ZARAH, and so the stock
and kindred of IVDAH, was increased: for from them descended many noble
families. From PHAREZ, camethis BOAZ by whom descended the line of our Lord
Jesus Christ, for of him was he borne, into this world, according to the
flesh. If thou would read this whole history, in the book of GENESIS thou
shall the better understand this prayer.

In the old testament it was accounted; as a great blessing, if any had many
children: barrennes was holden as a reproach: the which is manifest by the
example of RAHEL, of whom mention is made in this place, who at the first was
barren, and of other matrones, as we will show afterward. REBECKAES parents
GENESIS 24. blessed her at her departure, saying, grow into thousand thousands,
and thy seed possess the gate of his enemies. The prophet sings, PSALM. 128.
thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine, on the sides of thine house, and thy
children, like the Olive plants, round about thy table. The fruitfulnes of
married folks, is also mentioned amongst the blessings of the Lord in the
law. But that which is spoken of the multitude of children, must be understood
of them which are obedient, godly, and of good disposition: for degenerate
children, are rather a curse: holy children, are the seminary of the church
and common wealth. And as the multitude of children, so the multitude of men,
ought generally to be reckoned amongst Gods blessings. But many nations are so
straight (thou say) that men, cannot well live in them: I answer, that is
rather through the fault of the men, then the straightness of the land, when
as they have no regard of frugalitie amongst them. Thus much o^ the first
blessing or petition.

Secondly they wish unto them, plenty of riches and substance: saying, and
that thou may obtayn, get, or increase riches, in Ephrathah: that God would
bless their labor whereby they might honestly get necessary riches, that
they should not be compeld to beg they meat, or suffer penury. Riches are
needful for the preservation of the family. Neither is it unlawful for men
to be diligent in gathering the^, whereby they may maintain themselves and
their families. Concerning the which matter, there are many sentences, and
precepts written in the Proverbs of SOLOMON. But we must take heed taht we do
not attribute, the increase of riches, to our wisdom and diligence, but rather
to the blessing of the Lord. For his blessing or favor makes rich, Prou. 10.
All our labors are in vain, unless the Lord give success. Luke 5. The
Apostles laboring all the night, took nothing, but letting down the net when
Christ commanded, they enclosed so great a multitude of fishes, that the net
brake. Riches must not be sought afterwith an insatiable de sire. psa. 62. If
riches increase, set not your heart thereon, etc. Some do gather riches by
right and wrong, but they are cursed riches, which profit not their house,
but rather overthrow the same. But if thou have no riches, or at lest very
small, remember that which SOLOMON says, Prou. 15. Better is a little with the
fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith, 17. better is a
dry morsel if peace be with it, then a house full of sacrifices, with strife,
16. Better is a little, with righteousness, then great revenues without equity.

Others do translate these words, that thou may become mighty: do worthily,
for Chail, has many significations in the Scriptures: as strength of body, of
the mind, riches, and wealth, also an army and multitude of people: before in
the third chap. he calls our RVTH, a woman ( Chail) of virtue, that is,
endued with notable virtues. BOHAZ in the second chap. is called a man, Chail,
that is, a man of power, and in Exodus 18. chap. IETHRO for the government of
the commonwealth, councelleth to choose men Chail, that is of courage, others
do translate it, wise men, strong and valiant, and also dealing truly, who in
judgment can be drawn from doing their duty neither by threatenings, neither
by gifts, nor by promises. There are many places every where to be found,
where Chail signifies riches. Job. 20. 18. ver. It is said of the wicked: he
shall restore the labor, and shall devour no more: even according Chail, to
his power and substance, shall be his exchange, and he shall enjoy it no more:
the meaning is, he shall not rejoice in the riches which he shall restore in
place of them, which he had gotten by rapine, chap. 31. 25. If I rejoiced
because my substance was great, or because my hand had gotten much:
understand, let me perish, or some like word.

Or they do wish, that they might have many children, like unto a great army:
but of children there is already spoken, or do worthily or valiantly, out of
which a third thing arises to be co^fidered, of the which it now follows to
be spoken.

For the third thing which they pray for is, that he may become famous and
noble in Bethlehe^, which is called by another name Euphrata, or the city of
DAVID, of which there is spoken above in the first chapter. Word for word,
Call name, that is, thou shall be of great renown: They do pray, that they
may so behave themselves, that they might get, an notable name, and praise.
But credit and authority is gotten by the study of virtue. AGESILAVS being
demanded, how one might get himself, a good report (the Grecians call it
eudoxian) amongst men? He answers if he speak those things, which are
very good, and do those things which are very honest. ISOCRATES said, we
must endeavor more, to leave a good name, to our children, then great heaps of
riches: For by a good report, riches may be gotten, but a good name can never
be recovered by money. PROVE. 10. The memorial of the just remains, but the
name of the wicked shall rotte. PROVE. 22 A good name is to be chosen above
great riches, and loving favor is above go^d, and silver, In ECCLE. 6. It is
accounted as precious ointments: by wickedness and leudnes of life, a good name
is lost.

It appears, that this prayer was not (...) vain, and without profit, for
BOAZ and RVTH, had children and nephues, ^hey increased in riches, and
obtained, (...) name of great renown: for they are numbered amongst the
graundfathers and grandmothers of IESV the savior: From them many and mighty
kings descended. We learn, to pray for gods ^lessinges, both upon new married
people, and our selves and others, and that ^oth privately and publicly. But
here by this prayer is to be gathered, what those good things are, which
must especially be prayed for. The Phi^osophers, do divide the goods, into
the goods of the mind, the body, and fortune, all which things are con^ayned
in this short prayer. For they pray, that they might have a holy offspring,
riches, or study of virtue, and a ^enowned name. And these things must be
sought for, in that fountain of all good, which can never be drawn dry that
is from God. There are many afflictions and dangers, wherewith God does
exercise us, therefore we have ne^^ of his grace and blessing that we may
patiently bear all troubles, therefore we must pray to God publickely, and
privately, that he would mittigate both those troubles which fall out through
the fault of the married people, and also other troubles, or that he would take
them away.

Many in our time, when they do^ hear of new marriages, are not exercised in
prayer, they are all in the rehearsing of the vices of bridegromes or brides, or
parents or some of their kindred. Many do think in the Church of banquettes
and daunces and such other things rather then pray for Gods blessings on the
new married folks: yea the married folks themselves, are seldom exercised in
prayer, when they are led to the church to receive the blessing, nor when they
go home. The last care is of Gods word, and prayers: therefore let no man
marvel that so many vnhappinesses be (...) marriages. Our prayers shall not
be without effects, if we do begin our marri^ges with them, and continue still
in them. For we have many and notable promises, that God vouchsafes
mercifully to hear our prayers proceeding from ^ lively faith.

The 25. Sermon.
13 So Boaz ^ooke Ruth, and she was his wife, and when he went in unto her, the
Lord gave, that she conceived and bare a son.


THe holy Ghost at length, comes to that point, wherefore this book is
especially written: namely that BOAZ took RVTH to wife, and begat of her a
son called OBED, DAVID'S grandfather* For the scope of this book is to show
what Patriarcks there were which came from IVDAH, to whom the Schilo was
promised even until DAVID, to whom the promise was renewed: But the holy ghost
does comprehend many things in these few words, according to his custom. He
says BOAZ married RVTH; and she was his wife. When the other kinsman had
given him leave to marry RVTH, he did not defer their marriages. For after
they are betrothed, it is not good to diferre it long. For Satan in the mean
season can sow tares, and turn agreementes into disagreementes. This also is
to be praised in him, that he does not use the marriage act before, but after
a lawful contract and approved marriage.

But out of this, that the holy Ghost was not ashamed in this place to report
of BOAZ, and other where of other holy men which married wives: of RVTH and
otherwhere of other matrons: likewise of conceiving, bearing, midwifes, nurses
and bringing of children, we do gather the married life does not displease
god. And therare other things which do commend unto us marriages as not
invented by men, but first instituted by God himself in paradise, before the
fall of ADAM and EVE our first parents. And that God joined them together, and
blessed them, and there are many places in the holy scriptures which declare
that God does allow of marriages which are diligently to be noted and observed of
Gods people. Marriages are defended by the law of God, thou shall not commit
adultery. Christ our savior would be borne of a married woman in Cana of
Galilie, he adorned matrimony by his own presence, and by the miracle of
turning water into wine, he also prescribed by his Apostles, the proper duties
of married folks, and by the love between him and his spouse, he does
propound and set forth to us an image to be followed in Matrimony. These and
such other of the like kind are to be opposed against the judgment of those
men which do condemn, or forbid marriage. For Satan settes himself against
marriage in all ages. Before the Apostles departed out of this life, he
stirred up the Nicolaitans who used women as in common, of whom mention is
made in the revelation. Afterward the Tatians and the Eucratians arose,
affirming, that whoredom does nothing differ from marriage, and they take no
man that is married to their sect. At length the Monks, and Nuns and
Priests, arose up, which vowed a perpetual sole life, and feigned that
thereby they deserved remission of sins. They extolled virginity with
wonderful praises, as if these praises belong to those filthy men. They did
so speak of marriage that many forsaking their calling and marriage in their
old age, took upon them the habit of Monks and Nuns. How many haters are
there at this day of marriage, which follow their wandering lusts? Therefore
those things are diligently to be observed, which the scriptures do note of
the dignity of marriage, and in all the troubles of marriages our minds are
to be comforted, with the consideration of this, that God does allow and
approve of marriages.

Next it is to be observed, that the Scripture says, he went in unto her, for
he had to do with her: he does note with modesty, and shamefaste words,
that which is done honestly in lawful marriage. So it is said Genesis 16. ABRAHAM
went in unto AGAR. 29. JACOB went in unto his wives: MUNSTER notes upon the
23. chap. DEVT. out of the Hebrew commentaries, that the Hebrew tongue is
therefore called holy, because there are no proper names found in it, which
signify the secrets of man or woman, of generation, or excrements, and such
others, but those things that are loathsome or filthy are spoken by some honest
or comely periphrases for the word lying together, is used the word of knowing
or sleeping, etc. SAMVEL 24* It is said SAVLE went in to cover his feet, that
is to empty his belly.

These phrases teach us that Aischrologian or filthiness in words is to be
avoided, if thou speak of wanton matters or of other things. PAVL^ teaches
us the very same. Ephesians. 4. 6. cap. Colo. 3. Those men were wont commonly,
which had incestious mouths to be called merry companions. But eue^ the
Cinikes were evil spoken of amongst the Gentiles because they spoke
lothesomely and filthily. Stobeus does report these words amongst others of
Charondus Cataneus in the promise of the laws: let no man speak filthily
least he defile his soul with filthy deeds and fill his mind with impudency
and wickedness. For we call those things which are honest and dear unto
us, with fit names written in the law, and those things which we hate, we
abho^re even the naming of them for filthiness sake. Therefore it is also
filthy to speak a filthy thing: Also there is a warning 23. SIRAC that we
should not accustom our selves to fi^thie and loathsome talk, for from thence
evil thoughts may arise. Tender minds are often offended grievously by such
kind of talk, as the Apostle witnesses who says. Cor. 25. cap. Evil talk
does corrupt good manners. S. Chrisostomus does call filthy talk, the chariot
of whoredom, which does carry men unto it. Those things that are spoken of
speech, are to be referred to filthy rimes and songs: we must always
remember that we must yield an account to God for every idle word, and then
much rather for lothesome and fill thie talk, the scriptures does oftentimes
use loathsome and filthy words, as 23. Ezech. where by the similitude of two
women he does describe the unfaithfulness of both the kingdo^es, namely of
Israel^ and Judah, but to a good end, according to the manner of the
Physicians, who do sometimes prescribe remedies, in filthy words against
filthy diseases.

It is not simply said, that RVTH conceived and bare a son, but the Lord
gave this son to him, for children are the gift of God, and therefore they
are to be religiously brought up, that they may be aproued of him, Genesis 33.
JACOB answered his brother ESAV, as king of his children, they are the
children which the Lord has given to thy servant. JOSEPH answered JACOB his
father, asking what two young men those were which stood by the bed, my sons
which the Lord has given me, in this place, he says not which I have
begotten, or which my wife had borne me. etc. The Bethlehemites prayed before,
that the Lord would make BOHAZ^^ wife fruitful, for amongst other^ Gods (...)
works this is also commended ^13. Psalm. that God does make the (...)
fruitful, 1. Sam. 2. cap. HANNA in her hym^e says, that the Lord has made
that the barren, has born (...) sons, which is not to be understood; of those
only which were altogether barren, as SARAH when she conceived IZHAK of
ABRAM. Genesis 17. ELIZABETH also was aged and barren, Luke 1. As (...) ISAAKS
wife was in the beginning, Genesis 25. And RAHEL the wife of IABOB. 30. chap.
HANNA the mother of SAMVEL the Prophet. Also the hosts of ELISHA the Prophet
obtained a son by his prayer, who being dead he raised up unto life. 2.
KING. 4. but of those also, which are fruitful by nature: for God is the
Author of all things, who has his reasons wherefore he does make some
fruitful, some barren.

It is said she bare a son, if she had borne a daughter it would have been
great joy to their parents, but their joy is the great^^ because they have a
son to be the (...) of their family. And because the Messiah was promised to
be of the tribe of IVD^^, it is not to be doubted but that those parents
thought that that he should in time be borne of that son as indeeds it came
to pass.

She bare but not by and by, but as it is said other where, when the ^^ne was
accomplished. ARISTOTLE in historia animalium, lib. 7. cap. 4. does write that
woman only has diverse times, wherein she does bring forth, for she may be
delivered in the 7. month or 8. 9. but most commonly in the tenth.

It is said before that the Bethlemites prayed for the prosperity of those new
married folks, now it appears that those prayers were not in vain, for
BOAZ and RVTH obtained those things which they prayed for. Also God does hear
our vows and prayers. If thou would say that it should have been, although
they had not prayed: we answer although all things are done by the order of
Gods providence, and most things fall out by the course of nature: yet prayers
are not in vain: neither are prayers disanulled by the order of gods
providence: for by them often times the order and course of things is altered.
The women of whom we speak a little before, desirous of a child, by their
prayers, obtained of God that they became fruitful.

The. 26. Sermon.
14. And the women said unto Naomie, Blessed be the Lord which has not left
thee this day without a kinsman, and his name shall be c^n^inued in Israel.

15 And this shall bring thy life again, and cherishe thine old age: for thy
daughter in law, which loves thee, has borne unto him, and she is better to
thee then seven sons.


BOHAZ begat a son of RVTH, the which amongst the Hebrews was accounted as
a great benefit, especially in the tribe of Judah, out of the which the
Messiah should be borne, according to his humane nature: he is begotten
according to his divine nature, of the substance of the father from al
eternity, by an unspeakable mean. It follows that the Bethlehemitishe women,
rejoiced at the graundmother of this child, They say, God is to be blessed or
praised, who would not, that thou should lack a revenger, or a kinseman.
Unless a son should be borne unto her of RVTH, she had been destituted, of
all kinsemen. For although that other kinseman remained yet she could look for
no help of him. For there is no man so welthy, or mighty: who has not
sometime need, of the help of his friends. It is said in the PROVERB, a
friend is more necessary then fire and water: for which cause the Latins do
call friends by another name more fit, as necessary men. Poor men which have
the help of rich kinsemen, and aliaunces, are not so soon iniuried by others,
as they which want them. But though we be without friends yet we must not
despair, for we have God not only as a friend, but also for a father, if we
trust in him, and lead our life aright. Then they show, what manner of child,
that newborn babe shall be, and what he shall do.

First they say, his name shall be continued in Israel, that is, he shall be
famous and of great renown. Which they do gather of this* that his parents
were godly and notable: they do likewise hope, that he shall be well brought
up, and he shall become famous for his own virtues, and famousnes of his
parents. Those children which have famous parents, may easilye become
famous, if they behave themselves well.

Secondly they say, this child shall bring thy life again. In the first
chapter she said, she was bitter, for the Lord had afflicted her: now they
say, this child shall comfort thee: while he was little, with his sportes and
plays, he might re^reshe his sorrowful graundmother: and afterward when he
should grow elder, she might by his studies gather that he should become some
notable man. Pro. 20. chap. A child also is known by his doings, whether his
work, be pure and right, and so she may be of greater comfort. SOLOMON has
many sentences, which importe that children of good hope, and towardnes and
endued with virtue, shall make the parents merry. Pro. 10. and 15. A wise
son makes a glad father, but a foolish son is a heaviness to his
mother. And chap. 23. The father of the righteous, shall greatly rejoice, and
he that begets a wise child, shall have joy of him. Thy father and thy
mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice.

Thirdly they say, he shall cherishe thine old age, that is, he shall not
suffer thee to want things necessary, for the sustentation of thy life. There
is a reason added: for thy daughter in-law, has borne him or unto him: and she
is better unto thee, then if thou should have seven, that is, many children.

The number of ^euen, in the scripture is a number of multitude. 1. SAM.
ELKANAH says to HANNA: am not I better to thee then ten sons? They hoped
that RVTH, would not change her mind with her estate, so that, she having
gotten a rich husband, should despise her poor mother in-law, as it comes
often to pass. Furthermore they hoped, that RVTH would teach her son to love
her mother in-law, that he might norish her in her age, for it greatly
beh^ueth mothers to inform their children rightly of their kinsfolks and
others. And they do greatly offend, which do provoke the children, sometime
against parents, graundmothers and their kinsfolks. There is a like example
of congratulation in the new testament. LVK. 1 When ELIZABETH had brought
forth her son John, and her neighbors, and cousins had heard tell how the
Lord had showed his great mercy upon her, they reioysed with her. Out of this
rejoicing of these women, some things are to be gathered, for our instruction.

First we learn, to give thanks to God, and to rejoice with them, which
have the blessing of the increase of children, riches or other good things.
PAVL commands us to rejoice with them which do rejoice, and to weep with
them which do weep, not to be malicious, and envious, nor that we should
rejoice at the miseries of others. For this is a preposterous joy, which God
suffers not to be unrevenged. If we ought to rejoice with others, and to give
thanks to God for these good things, which he bestows upon them, how much
more if he employ his benefits upon us, and especially for that general
benefit worthy to be had in remembrance, that he would that his son our
Lord Jesus Christ, should become man of the Virgin Mary, that he might deliver
us from eternal death? Now in our times if any man have a child, an office of
dignity, or any other good thing, they do feast and banquet, but God is
seldom remembered.

Next, in that they do praise God, and give him thanks, that NAOMIE has
another kinsman, they do confess, that this is a singular gift of God: we
do not thank any man for any thing, which we have not received of him. Al
good things do come from God, the only fountain of all good things he does
as yet preserve families, and raises up friends for us. Oftentimes we have
such near unto us, which do abhor us, but God can easily bring it to pass,
that they shall love, embrace and use all good duties toward us. Strangers
do sometimes l^ue us, and further our commodities, the which we must also
acknowledge as the work of God. But when, the ways of men, that is there
studies, do please the Lord, he will make also their enemies at peace with
them, as it is in SALOMONS proverbs the 16. chapter. Think not that it is
without cause, that men do hate, or love thee, be enemies, or friends unto
thee.

Furthermore we perceive by the words of these women, what is the duty of
children toward their parents, namely to comfort their minds and to
cherishe their age. They which do not make glad their parents, but by their
wicked life do cast them into grievous heaviness and sorrows, are not only
murderers of parents. Nature it self teaches that parents are to be
nourished in their old age. For it is meet that should nourishe them, of
whom we we have been nourished, and which have bestowed innumerable
benefits upon us. How often behooves it the mothers, to abstain from certain
kinds of meats wherein they delight, least they should hurt the children in
the womb: How often do both the fathers and the mothers abstain from meat,
least the children should be famished with hunger? How often do children with
their crying break their parents sleep? How often are the parents made afraid
through sundry, and sudden falls of their children?

Say not therefore, that they are froward and complaining, think rather what
thou have been, and what thou shall be, through the weakness of age, if the
Lord grant thee to live many years. The Ethnickes have many notable examples
of the piety of children toward parents. What an example is it of that
daughter, which with her own milk norished her mother in prison, of whom
Valerius Maximus makes mention. Pausanias lib. 10. writing of them which were
called the godly Cataneans, says when the fire, burnt hotly out of Aetna into
Catana, (a City of Scicilea, which was at the foot of this mountain) they
made no account of gold and silver, but flying away, this man took his mother
on his shoulders, that other bare his father. But because they went not away
with speed, the flame hasting the fire ouertooke them: but they cast not away
their parents so. Therefore they say that the flames parted in two, and passed
over both the young men, and also the parents, not hurting them at all. He
says that these men in his time were greatly honored of the Cataneans. The
Storkes also do show kindness unto their dammes, when they are old: here of
Antipelargein is taken, for to make a recompense. Amongst Christians thou
shall find children, which having abundance of wealth, do yet reiecte their
parents, and yield them not wherewith to slake their hunger. Often times the
daughters would willingly do their due^e, but the sons in-law will not
suffer it: in like manner the sons would do, but the daughters in-lawe show
themselves very straight: of whom that cannot be said which these women do
speak of RVTH, that she is to her mother in-law better then many sons. The
sons do often excuse themselves, by their poverty, but yet they do follow
the cups, and do most sump^uously against all order apparel themselves, and
are at many vain expenses. If the parents have many children, they are sent
up and down, from one to another, especially if they have milked their money
from them before: therefore they do wisely, which keep their goods to
themselves, and give them not to their children: SIRAC. 33. chap.

Of this, that it is said, that RVTH is better unto her then seven children, we
do gather this comfort, that we wanting the help of children, God can easily
raise up other men who may do us more good then our own, who ought
especially to provide for us.

Daughters in-lawe do also learn again by this example, how they ought to
behave themselves toward their mother in-law.

Lastly, women do learn, what and how they ought to speak, if they do carry
children to baptism, ^and do visit women lying in childebed, namely they
should give God thanks for his benefits which he bestows upon them, and
pray unto him that the children may be religiously brought up, and serve God:
and not talk of matters, that are light or scurrilous.

The. 27. Sermon.
16 And Naomie took the child, and laid it ^ her lap, and became a nursse
unto it.

17. And the women her neighbors gave it a name, saying: There is a child
borne unto Naomie, and called the name thereof Obed* the same was the father of
Ishai, the father of David.


THERE are three things contained in these words, first NAOMIE was the boys
nursse, next the women called the boy OBED: thirdly, that he was graundfather
to DAVID the king. It is written, that NAOMIE took the infant, and laid it in
her lap, and embraced him with great joy, for so we see it comes to pass,
that graundfathers and grandmothers do oftentimes love their nephues and
neeses, better then their own children. She became the boys nursse, not that
she gave him suck but she gave him meat, drink, and washed him etc. As
concerning the word, meiaenk^th a nursse, that is derived of i^nak to suck in
Hishil to give milk, as she which gives the infant milk. GENESIS 22. We read
of REBECKAES nursse: GENESIS 35. of DE^ORA a nursse. 2. REG. 11. Omaeneth for a
nursse, 2. SAM. 3. His nursse took him is derived aman, to nursse, to bring
up, meialaedeth a midwife, of ^alad to bring forth, because she helps her
that is in travel.

And though that she had now an aged body, and therefore not fit for labors:
yet she would not lead an idle life, but did what she could. Let old women
follow this example, let them take care of children, teaching them godliness,
and withdrawing them from vices. 1. Tim. 5. If any wido we have children or
nephews let them learn (or rather as Calvin translateth it) let them teach,
(for Manthan^in signifies both to teach and to learn) their children or
nephews to show godliness toward their own house, and to make a mutual
recompense to their elders, for this is acceptable before God.

Out of this, that God gave RVTH so great joy, partly by matching her with so
notable a husband, partly by giving her a man-child: we are taught that God
does sometime even in this life bless those children which do honor their
parents. RVTH was faithful toward her mother in-lawe, therefore God has
granted her a blessed and a quiet marriage, much riches and great renown.
Therefore O ye children deal well with your parents, geeue them those things
which are necessary for them: and provoke them not to wrath.

Next we do gather, that God can easily restore to perfect estate, men, be
they never so much afflicted. He does not only for a time use to ouerwhelme
his children with the cross, but afterward he does suffer them again to
come out of it. These widows were a long time in a poor estate, but now God
does exalt them both: he gives to NAOMIE a son in-law, and of him a nephew
to nourish her. As after great tempests, there comes a calm, after a sharp
winter in a pleasant course there follows a delectable spring, so joy
follows sorrow. But God tempereth it with some trobles, least we should wander
out of the way of salvation. The sacred history is full of public and private
examples: therefore in adversities let us not be impatient, but let us comfort
our selves with the consideration of such like examples.

The neighbors said that there was a son born to NAOMIE: but NAOMIE was not
his mother, but RVTH her daughter in law: but they speak in this manner,
because the graundmothers are as mothers to the nephews.

Those sons are also accounted their children, which have adopted the^. Or it
is such a phrase of speech, as that in ISA. 9. a child is given to us. And
also in LVKE 2. This day a savior is born to you in the City of DAVID, which
is Christ the Lord and this is for your good.

They called his name OBED, OBED signifies a husbandman, a servant, a
tiller: There is noe cause expressed why they called him by this name. It may
be because that RVTH who had this child by a man of renown, had before served
NAOMIE faithfully: or because that RVTH laboring diligently amongst the
servants of BOAZ was, known of him and planted into his family: Or which
rather likes me that he might serve God. All true worshippers of God are
called the servant of God. The ancient fathers gave not unadvisedly names
unto their children: but of some especial occasion, that both they and their
children being always put in mind of the benefits of God, and of their
duty, might be stirred up to faith and thanks giving. Sometimes they
continued the memory of things past, by giving of a name. Israel gave names
almost to all his children, according to the success. MOSES EXODUS 18. called
his son GERSHOM because he was a soiourner in a strange land: and he named
the other ELIEZAR, because the Lord had help him. SAMVEL was so called because
HANNA had prayed to God, that she might have him. Furthermore some being
willing to continue or renew the memory of their parents or kinsmen, they
named their sons by their names. LVK. 1. The neighbors and kinsfolks
contending about a name for John, would have called him Zacharias but his
mother said, he shall be called John. And when they said there was none of
thy kindred that is named with this name, they referred the matter to his
father, he wrott in writing tables, his name is John: For the Angel had
commanded that it should be so: And this name is derived of grace, partly
because he had obtained much grace of God, partly because he should preach to
the world, the grace of G^d performed in giving of his son. For GOD himself
gave sometimes names unto men, to signify things either past, or to come:
sometimes also before they were borne. He gave ADAM his name of the earth out
of the which he was made, and HEVAH because she should be the mother of all
living creatures: ISMAEL because God had heard HAGAR, Genesis 16. SOLOMON because
there should be a long peace in his reign. Jesus because he should save his
people. Sometime he changed names, as ABRAM, he called ABRAHAM, because he
should be a father of many nations, GENESIS 17. SARAA because many princes should
come out of her. Christ our Savior named SIMON PETER, because he had need of
great faith and constancy. The Roman bishops immitated this when they were
created, they called themselves by other names: the which custom began as they
writ in the time of SERGIVS the second, who was before called, Osporci Swines
face, and for the filthiness of his name, he called himself SERGIVS: and so it
continues unto our times. And though it avails nothing to salvation by what
name any man be called, yet it becomes christians in giving of names to keep
themselves from superstition. In some years past they consecrated their
children to the worship of that Saint, by whose name they were called.

And there are some which of a kind of vain ostentation, called their children
by heathenish names, as Hannieball, Scipio, Catyline, etc. There are many
notable names, which do admonish children of their duty amongst the Hebrews,
as ABRAHAM, IAACOB, ISAIAH: Greek as Chrisostom, Christopher, Theophilus:
latin, as Benedictus Fortunatus, etc. The Germans have also many notable
names which have excellent significations. It is meet for godly parents to
give their children such names, as the remembrance of the^ may provoke them to
virtues. As often as we hear our name, so often ought we to think, that in our
holy baptism we are received into the household of Christ. If we be named by
the names of holy me^, let us endeuore our selves by faith and holiness of
life, to follow their steps. There are other names also, which are given
according to their offices, whereof it were in vain to write in this place.

But why OBED was called the son, not of Mahlon, but of BOHAZ his natural
father, S. Augustine shows in the question upon Deuteronomy. 46. The law (says he)
of marrying the wife of a brother, that seed might be raised up to the brother
who is dead without children* says he, shall be called after the name of him
that is dead, and his name shall not be blotted out of Israel, that is, the
name of the dead seems hereby to be continued, that he which is borne, be
called by this name, whereby the dead was called, to whom after a sort he
succeeds, etc. Unless it may be understood this, not that he shall have this
name, but that he shall be accounted as the son, not of him that begat him,
but of that dead man to whom the seed is raised, and whose heir he is made.
For that which is added: And his name shall not be blotted out of Israel, may
so be understood, not that the child should consequently be called by his
name, but that he should not seem to dye without posterity, and therefore his
name, that is, his memory, remains. For if he had gotten a son himself,
and had not called him by his own name, yet his name is not blotted out of
Israel, because he departed not out of this life without children: and the
brother is commanded to perform this toward his wife which he could not do:
for though he had no brother, but the kinseman married his wife, that died
without children to raise up seed to his brother: as BOHAZ did by marrying
RVTH, that he might raise up seed to his kinsman, whose wife she was, and had
no child by him: yet that child which should be borne of her should continue
the name of the party deceased, because he is called his son: and so it comes
to pass that the name of the deceased should not be blotted out of Israel,
and yet not be called by his name, etc. Thus far Augustine. Others say that
the children begotten in such a marriage, should be called by the name of the
brother which is dead: but it seems that this was sometimes neglected, because
there wanted some brethren, or because many had rather to beget children for
themselves, then for their brother.

The last thing to be considered in these words is, who this OBED was,
namely, the father of ISHAI, the grandfather of DAVID the King, of whose
genealogy it follows next to be spoken.

The 28. Sermon.
18 Those now are the generations of Pharez, Pharez begat Hesron,

19 And Hesron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab.

20 And Amminadab begat Nas^on, and Nashon begat Salmah.

21 Salmon begat Bohaz, and Bohaz begat Obed.

22 And Obed begat Ishai, and Ishai begat Da^id.


THERE are some places in the sacred scriptures, which seem to have but little
in the^ for edification: but be it known, that there is nothing set down in
them rashly or in vain. For if a wiseman will speak nothing without a cause,
and much less write that which shall come into the hands of many: who would
think that God who is wisdom it self, would appoint his secretaries to write
any thing, which shall bring no profit, to them that read it? It is true that
one place is more profitable then another as one field is more fruitfuller
then another, and one river has more (...) in it then another: but there is
nothing i^ the scriptures that is without use, thog^ it may seem at the first
sight to be alto^g^ather unfruitful. Mettalls lie hid ^ hard stones, wholesome
herbs are foun^ in sluttishe places, small pieces of gold are sometimes seen,
and precious stone lie hid amongst the barren sand. Aristo^tle lib. 1. cap. 5.
De partibus animali^^^ w^^teth that of al natural things there is no^thing so
vile and abject, that brings no some profit unto men. For the works o^ nature
are not wrought in vain, but a^ things are made for some end. In thi^ place I
remember Heraclitus Taren^ous, who when he lodged in a certain^ shepheardes
cottage, cried out as it ^ said: come in hither, for here also a^ gods. The
same may and ought to be spoken of those places of the holy scripture which
seem to be altogether barren ^ for they have sometime an euiden^ an^
profitable^vse. This catalogue of the (...) may peradventure seem to many ^o
be unpleasant and unprofitable, as that which only contains an idle
^a^ologue of names. But for this cause ^as this whole book written, name^y
that we might know the gene^^gie of DAVID, and so consequently ^f Christ, who
was peculiarly promised unto him. And truly this catologue is of so great
moment, that MAT. and Lvc. translated the same word for word into the
genealogy of Christ. For the scope ^f the Evangelists, and Apostles is this,
that Jesus is the Christ, that is, the king and high priest of all true
believers: therefore it behooved them to show, that ^ee was come of them, to
whom he ^as promised. For the holy Ghost pre^^ntly from the beginning of the
world, ^ligently declared, of what parents christ should come. God promised
our (...) parents ADAM and HEVAH when ^ey should be cast out of Paradise that
^e seed of the woman, that is the ^ESSIAH or Christ should break the ^^d of
the serpent. And the line of Christ descended not by Caine but by Seth to Noah.
He had three sons but the line is drawn from Shem to Abraham, from him it
descended not by Ismaell but by Isaac the promised sonn^ afterward not by
Esau his first born son, but by Jacob, who otherwis^ was called Israel. He
having twelu^ sons at his death by the inspiration of the holy Ghost he
foretold unto Judah that he should have the kingdom, and the scepter or
rod, that is the kingly power, should not depart from his trib^ nor a scribe
or a lawgiuer (the Chald^ interpreter translateth it a prince, the Septuaginte
a captain, all one sense) that is inferior Judges shall not depart from his
feet, namely of the tribe of Judah, that is, they shall not be taken away
until Shiloh come, that is the savior, and Messiah, the old Hebrews do thus
expound this word, but the newer o^ latter of them do woonderfully wre^ this
place, and do devise most absurd senses, least they should be compelle^ to
confess that the Messiah is come in to the world. The Patriarcke adds, and
the people shall be gathered unto him, that is the Gentiles shall also come unto
the MESSIAH and believe in him. Though this prophe^ie seems to speak only
of the continuance of the kingdom of IVDAH, and not evidently and plainly to
say, that SHALOH should come, of the tribe of IVDAH, yet other prophets did
afterward expressly foretell the same. For when as in the tribe of IVDAH there
were many notable houses, as CALEBS and others, the Prophets prophe^ied that
the MESSIAH should come of the house of IESEE, and of DAVID. But of DAVID,
there came most mighty kings, after his family, being as it seemed almost
extinguished and overwhelmed, yet God preserved him a light, and foretold that
the Messiah should come of IECONIAS DAVID'S nephew of his son IEHOIAKIM. He
begat SALATHIEL, from whom the two Evangelists do draw the line of Christ
unto JOSEPH, unto whom was espoused the holy virgin, who ba^e Jesus Christ
the king of kings. And in this place is the genealogy of the fathers cr^wne
from IVDAH the son of JACOB unto DAVID.

PHAREZ and ZARAH being twins were the sons of IVDAH, of THAMAR his
daughter in law, and his wife. Genesis 38. By them are praefigured two sorts of
people, the Jews, and the Gentiles: they went down into Aegipt with their
father and there PHAREZ begat ESROM.

2 ESROM was the son of PHAREZ Genesis 46. He went down into Egypt with his
father and his grandfather as also HAMVL his brother did, Ge, 46. of whose
posterity there is nothing recorded, unless that the family of the HAMVELITS
took their names from him. Number. 26.

3 RAM who in the book of the Chronicles, and by the Evangelists is called
ARAM, was the son of ESROM borne in Egypt after the death of JACOB.

4 AMINADAE the son of RAM, great graund-father to DAVID'S great graund-father
was borne in Aegipt.

5 NAASSON the son of AMINADA^ graund-father unto DAVID'S great graund-father,
he went out of Egypt with his father, and after him he was captain of the
tribe of IVDAH in the wilderness, where he begat SALMON. Number. 1. 2. 7. 1.
Chro^i. 2. It is doubted whether he was hanged together wit^ the other princes
in the fields of MOAB, for whoredom and the worshipping of Ball Peor. ELISAH
ARONS wife was his sister: Exo. 16. Some do write, that ELIMELECH the
Bethlehemite, the husband of NAOMIE, RVTHES mother inlaw and NAASSON were
brethren, but LIRA says that ELIMELECH and the father of BOAZ that is SALMON
were brethren and so the other went before him in one degree, as he notes
upon 3. cap. of this book.

According unto this opinion, BOAZ and MAHALON, should be brothers children,
which seems not to be true, for then should there have been none nearer of
kin then BOAZ, except his brother, if he had any: for these two sons
dyed without any Children.

6 SALMON who in this book and 1. Chroni. 2. is otherwise called SALMACH the
son of Naasson graund-father to DAVID'S grandfather, was prince in the tribe
of IVDAH when IOSHVA entered the land of promise this man took RAHAB the
Cananite to be his wife etc.

7 BOAZ DAVID'S great graundfather having SALMON to his father and RAHA^ to his
mother, took RVTH to his wife. The Hebrews do say that he was IESHAN the
Judge. The Chaldei interpreter calls him a righteous man, and he writes
that for his equity the land of Israel was preserved, from the invasions of
the enemies, and delivered, from the famine, by his prayers. But from whence he
has this I know not.

8 O^ED the son of BOAZ and of RVTH the Moabite was DAVID'S graund-father.

9 ISAI who by the Evangelists is called IESSE, was the son of OBED: mention
is made of him in the 11. chap. of the Prophet ISAIAH. Of this man the
Christians are sometimes called Iesseits. He was also called by another name
NAACHAS that is a serpent. 2. SAM. 17. The Chaldei interpreter upon this
chapter says, that he was therefore caled a Serpent because he was endued with
great wisdom, whereby he avoided the subtleties of the devil. Reinerus
Rineccius a man very learned and diligent, in book of the noble families of
the kings and priests of Israel notes, that in his opinion Nahaz was another
man and not Iesse. For it might be that Abigail was DAVID'S sister of one and
the same mother but not of the same father. It is read that ISAI had eight
sons. 1. Sa. 16. verse. 10. ISAI. caused his seven sons to come before
SAMVEL, he afterward asked are there no more children but these? In the
Chronicles David is called Isais seventh son, whose names are these, ELIAB
the eldest, ABINADA^, SIMEAH, who was also called SAMAH, NATHANIEL, RADDAI,
HOSEM, DAVID. The name of the eight son is not reckoned, some think that he
dyed in his youth, and left no children behind him, others do think that
IONADAB the son of Shimeiah, or some other nephew was nombred amongst his
sons. He had two daughters; Zeruia and Abigail, Zeruia had three sons: Ioab,
Abishai, Asahel, which are mentioned in the sacred history. David names them
after their mother, the sons of Zeruia, peradventure because that their
father was but a mean man, Abigall had a son called Amasa: of David
descended nineteen Kings, Solomon, Rehoboam, etc.

The question is moved in this place, how Salm^n Rahabs husband, and Bohaz the
husband of Ruth, may be joined together in two generations, when as the
course of the history, euinceth it, from the first year of Iosuah, (wherein
they think that Ierico was taken, and Rabab preserved) unto the time of Ibsan,
(whom they will have to be Bohaz the son of Rahab) so likewise unto the times
of Eli (wherein Josephus writes, that this RVTH came with NAOMI to Bethlehem)
many years were past between. I do simply answer that it does* not
evidently appear by the holy scriptures, how many years after the taking of
Ierico were past, before Salmon married Rahab, and when he begat Bohaz of her,
or when Bohaz married Ruth: so likewise, whither this Bohaz was one and the
same with Ibsan the Judge, and therefore it is not necessary that with some of
the Hebrews and Lyra, we should imagine three Bohazes, which should successively
follow one another, as the grandfather the son and the nephew, which three
should be comprehended under one name. Furthermore, it is no absurdity if we
should say, that God prolonged the life of Salmon and Bohaz for many years, as
he did also many others of the fathers after the stood.

But it is to be observed, that in the catalog of the genealogy of Christ,
many heinous sinners are rehearsed. Judah the father of Pharez, committed many
grievous offenses. Naasson was defiled as some think, with whoredom and with
the abominable worshipp of Baal Peor. Rahab the mother of Bohaz, is expressly
called a ha^lot, both by Paul and James. But this came to pass by the
providence and will of God, that Christ should come of such parents, lest
any man should think that this was* wrought through the merits of the
Patriarks: and also for the comfort of sinners, lest they should fall into
despair: but might know that he came for sinners, according to that saying. 1.
Tim. 1. This is a true saying Jesus Christ came to save sinners, etc. God will
be merciful unto the^ through his son if they repent.

The mother of Phares, and also the mother and wife of Bohaz, were heathnishe
women, which were converted to the worship of God. And it pleased the son
of God to come of them, that not only the Jews, but also the Gentiles might
have hope, to obtain salvation through Christ, who came also of the Gentiles,
and that for their salvation: the Jews are joined together with the Gentiles,
in Christ the corner stone. The which the Jews would hard ^y be persuaded
unto at the first, Yea even the believers of the Jews, and the Apostles
themselves abhorred, to have fellowship and company with ^he Gentiles.
Therefore God sending Peter to Cornelius the Centurion, he taught him first
from a vision from heaven that he should not abhor his company.

And in that God exalted David to so great majesty, being born, of parents of
so mean estate, (for though he came of so noble a family, yet his father was
a husbandman) he did it to make his mercy and his power known. DAVID himself
in the 113. psalm. says that God lifts up the poor out of the donge, that
he may sit him in the seat even with the princes of his people. IOS^PHVS
concluding this history says in taking in hand to expound the history of
RVTH, it is necessary to set forth the power of God, for this is very apparent
that God lifts up of the basest of the people unto great dignity even as
he did with DAVID himself who came of such parents: We do also see by the
words, that the Anabaptists are far^ out of the way, which deny Christian the
reading of the old testament, when as those things which appertain unto our
salvation, are thoroughly set down in the new, for who can understand these
words in MATTHEW, BOAZ begat OB^D of RVTH, except he have read this book?
and in that he says of RVTH, which was a Moabite, there is no small mystery
contained: for the Evangelist declares that Christ would be borne of the
Gentiles and that for their sakes. But here is a bad error which we should
confute in many words. Some do make BOAZ a figure of the Messiah and RVTH of
the Church the spouse of the Messiah. I do not deny but that he with his
spouse is diue^sly figured in the scriptures, but I had rather follow the
simple and literal mea^ing of the place etc. They which do delight in
allegories let them seek them elsewhere.

Thus hitherto I have expounded unto you the book of RVT^, out of the (...)
many lessons. ^ut it is no^^fficient to hear and to ^ad these and other such
like, except we endeavor to hear with profit: and to ^rame our lives according
to the rule of the word of God. For the servant which knows the will of his
master, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Therefore let us
earnestly pray unto God most merciful and mighty, that he would vouchsafe to
open our minds, that we may not only understand his oracles aright, but also
that we may use them to the confirmation of our faith, and amendment of our
life.

FINIS.

