A TREATISE TOUCHING THE WORD OF GOD WRITTEN, against the Traditions of men.
Handled both Schoolelike, and Diuinelike. Where also is set down a true Method
to dispute Divinely and Schoolelike. Made by A. SADEELE. And translated into
English, by John Coxe, Minister of the word of God.

Ephe. 5. Awake thou that sleep, stand up from death, and Christ shall give
thee life. Imprinted at London for John Harison, and are to be sold at the
white Greihound in Paul's churchyard. 1583.

TO THE FAITHFVLL SERVANTS OF JESUS CHRIT, THE GODLY AND learned Pastors and
Doctors in the Churches of France, professing the true doctrine of the
Gospel, his dear brethren and faithful fellow Ministers: ANTHONY SADEELE
wishes all grace and peace from GOD.
CHRISOSTOM writing on the 34. In Psa. 43. Ios. 6.
Psalm, compares the Pastors of Christ's Church, unto those Trumpets, by whose
sound the walls of Jericho were quite overthrown. The which saying (my dear
brethren) the great diligence you use in your function and office whereunto you
are called, and your extreme labors which you have sustained of late, (yea,
and that not without great fruit) makes me apply the same unto you, For
although the the Romish doctrine (i^ in any place it prevailed) most chiefly
flourished it (...), because there it was difended by the forces of men and as
it were compassed about with most high and strong wall^ yet notwithstanding by
your voice and preaching the Gospel it is at the last brought to pass that
the whole foundation of the Popish doctrine thrown down, and the Walls thereof
being ^ased, the horrible corruption, abuses and, errors there of is made
manifest to the eyes of all men. Wherefore when I compare this our time with the
time of the Israelites, I cannot sufficiently accuse and condemn the sluggish
slothful (...) This our age, in respect of the great (...) and watchfulness
of the old (...) they so soon as they saw (...) ^ho overthrown, straight
ways (...) and (...) the whole For City but (...) age although they have
seen, yea, and that now along time the heresies of the P^pish (...) to be made
manifest and brought into (...) notwithstanding so far from (...) and raze them
(...) of their minds, that rather they help them with all their force. But to
you my brethren which have suffered many and so great storms, troubles, and
griefs even to you (I say) behold new labors daily arise, which must be
overcome with great co^sta^cie and invincible fortitude of mind. For that I may
omit diverse and almost infinite other discommodities, I perceive that you are
exercised chiefly in two kinds of battles. The one is for that daily wicked
slaunderers (to wit) the ministers of lies, oppone themselves against the
ministers of the truth, which by their lying Libels go about to vex and deface
the innocence of the godly Pastors of the Church, with most horrible untruths
and impudent slanders. Of this sort are some whom the heat of persecution
has devoured, who by force, and as it were, with a storm and vehement
tempest, carried unto the Popish heresies, do now, with most obstinate minds
cleave unto the same, as it were unto a most firm rock. Yea, and that which
is to be lamented, they begging as it were thereby the popish prelates good
will and favor make no end of their malicious slaundering and wicked writings.
This kind of conflict in my opinion) you shall right well sustain not by
striving against it, but by calling to mind the faying of David in his 54.
Psa. 54.
Psalm, to wit, that it will at last come to pass that the slanderous tongue
of these wicked slanderets, will rebound and fall upon themselves. For so it
always happene^^, that the wicked wound themselves with their own weapons,
and the innocence of the godly remains unspotted, being delivered from
their unjust reports. The other kind of conflict rests, in the which you must
think to labor both earnestly and diligently, as I know right well ye do. For
about a few years past, there has risen up certain men, who abusing liberal
arts and sciences, and chiefly that science which is ordained to the searching
out of the truth, to wit, Logic: whereby they might confirm and establish the
Popish heresiesei and that they may the better carry away the matter with
crafty conueiaunce they turn the habit and form of good learning, into a
certain sophysticall and contentious manner of disputing, and such are
chiefly those false named Jesuits, for so I term those Monks which wickedly
take upon them that most holy name of Jesus, attributing it to their devilish
sect, and that not without great blasphemy: And these now of late have
stuffed Universities, which in times past were of great fame: and do even as
it were possess them alone, bearing an outward show of great learning, and
chiefly challenging unto themselves the exact and right knowledge of disputing.
Whose enterprises since I perceive you go about most chiefly and valiauntly
to resist: I thought it meet and convenient to publish some thing according to
the ability which is (...) me. And I whom no force, no tempest; no distaunce
of place could separate from you, thought it good (I say) to ^ee joined a
fellow companion with you in this conflict and most happy labor. And
furthermore, I have determined with my self to follow that method of
disputation, which seems to be most fit for their purpose, as Theological,
and therefore that kind which most truly gives resolutions to arguments: And
this shall not only be void of all subtle Arguments, and sophysticall
falacies, but also of all Rethorical exercise.

And I have chosen rather to draw this same method of disputing as much as in
me (...)) from the pure fountains of the (...) Fathers, then follow the
filthy (...) of those which (...) of late (...) kind and order of disgu^^ing:
and touching this thing, I expect both (...), and the judgment of rather the
best learned Divines: to (...) I willingly submit both this my opini^^^^^, and
also my self, and although I (...) short kind of disputing, (...) my purpose
hereby (...) the (...) of other men's large and copious are (...)* For as a
certain man was ^ont to say, that the hand may be spread abroad^ and again
(...) him together the ^ingers, be bro^ght (...) likewise one matter may by
copious eloquen^^ behand that (...), and being drawn together by short (...),
may as effe^^^llie be (...), more brief. Let therefore each treatise whit^ is
written at large with copious and slowing style have his (...) honor, so that
it he ^at (...) to confirm the truth. Plut. in Cic.
For (as Plutarke says) truth (...) inuineible if it be truly declared and
rightly applied. And to Augustine (not without good cause,) eloquence seems
so much the more to terrify, De doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 14
in how much the more it is plaintie pronounced. Nevertheless, when need
requires, let us also embrace this short kind of disputing, which is very
profitable so often a^ we be occupied in the searching out of the truth,
inasmuch as it draws us back, that we follow not the similitude of truth,
for truth it self, and so should be deceived with a counterfaite
probability of truth: which things; since they are so, some man may dema^nd,
wherefore that great Orator Tullie, comparing Oratorie with this sharp and
school like Disputation, De not. deor, l^, 2.
and peradventure ouer-well liking his own Art, says thus: As a flowing
River can scarce or not at all be corrupted or putrified, but a standing water
may very soon: so likewise by the flood of eloquence, the faults of the
reprehender are soon wiped away, when as niggishnes of speech, and want of
eloquence, scarce can defend it self: thus much Cicero. The which as I
confess that it may happen both in the sophistical and probable kind of
disputing, so do I deny that it can chance or agree with true and
demonstratiueie Silogismes. For as the River (that we may not swerve from the
similitude which we have propo^ed) while it runs afloate (...) above his
banks, does gather most foul and filthy things of (...) sort, which (...)
and are covered while as the floods are aloft: so oftentimes great errors (with
copiousnesse of speech did) are by true and brief disputations declared and
laid open for the copy of eloquence taken away, things do appear both naked
and manifest as they are. But hereof we will speak more in the Preface. And
now I set down first a disputation touching the word of god written, which as
it is chief, so ought it to be the very foundation of all disputations. The
other disputations as of the true humane nature of Christ, of the presence of
Christ in the sacrament, of the true and lawful making of Ministers, (touching
which things I wrote some thing about two years past against Turrianus that
false named Jesuit, and will handle it more at large, whenever he shall give
any new occasion to write) also free will, Purgatory, and such like, may
be grounded on this said Disputation. And this my brethren I hope you will
do, either according to this method which I have followed, or according to
that which you shall better like of. Wherefore I beseech the defenders of the
Romish Church, and chiefelye those which challenge unto them such skill in
disputing, that they will bring the same from the dark shaddowe of the
Schools, into the open and clear light, yea, to the true point of disputing
in deed, and that all malice put a part, all nipping tauntes set aside, let
them modestlye and with quiet minds pursue this my treatise, and when they
have entered into disputation with me, let them first note what is worthy of
reprehention, and then let them give solutions unto my arguments: and on the
other side, let them confirm their opinions with plain and evident Sylogismes
and Arguments, and so I hope it shall at the last come to pass (if GOD
permit) that when both our opinions are conferred together, the truth will
show it self, and be manifestly seen even of those which be almost blind.

Let therefore those books which are repleat with nothing else but with bitter
choler, spotted and stained with the sores of their masters^ yea, and those
seditious Sermons which blow forth nothing else but fire and sword, let them
(I say) cease and be quite banished, and in steed hereof let there be meeknes
and tranquillity: yea, let the love and inward affection of the truth bear
swaie: and let those which so greatly affect that excellent name of Catholics
(which so often with open mouths repeat and pronounce the same) remember what
S. Augustine has written, to wit, that the Catholic Church does teach that we
owe love unto all, and injury to none. But if there be any such, which go
forward with shameless faces and obstinate minds still to write and spread
abroad their sichophanticall and infamous Libells, or if there be any such
which so far degenerateth from men, that they had rather obstinately to bark
against the truth, then to embrace the same, the which amongst others I hear
there is one especially, upon whom the fearful example of Gods most just
judgment is manifest, not only for other his ungodliness, but chiefly for his
wicked Apostacy and back sliding from the Gospel, which sometime he
professed. If I say there be any such, I vvish unto them better minds, and
oppose this my vow and wish against their shameless wickedness and malicious
railing, professing that I will not vouchsafe to answer such their pamphlets,
knowing right well that such their doings may be utterly wiped away even with
one little spark of patience. Again, touching my self, I profess that I will
not read those their vvritings in the which they spue forth their foul
poisoned choler, because I have determined to dispute, and not to braule, to
contend with arguments, and not with impious railings. And you my reverend
brethren, fight (...) of faith (for I may lavvfully use the Apostles
exhortation unto you fight (...) vvorthie battle of faith, and apprehend
everlasting life, for which cause you are called, and have professed a good
profession before many vvitnesses. And therefore regarding nothing at all this
wicked rabble, run your course with stout courage, unremoved constancy, and
invincible patience, in the truth of the Gospel of God, as you have begun:
that is that you go forvvard with exact diligence and integrity, to fight
against man's ^rrors, that the course of your labors most manfully being
finished, ye may leave unto the posterities to come, the purity of (...), and
the true use of ecclesiastical discipline.

From my study the 23, of Februarie^ An Domini. 1580.
FINIS.
A COMMON PLACE TOUCHING THE WORD OF GOD WRITTEN, AGAINST THE TRAditions of
Men. Handled both School like, and Divinely. Wherein is entreated of the true
method of Disputing.
THE PREFACE.
THE Apostle Paul writing to Timothy, 2. Epist. 3.
affirms that the holy Scripture is profitable both to teach, as also to
reprove: thereby showing that men are not only to be taught, but also often
times to be reproved. The preacher ought to teach and reprove.
For truly it is manifest, that men are so corrupt, that they do not only
remain in ignorance of the truth, even as it were in a palpable and thick
darkness, but also for the most part, they hate and fly the light of the
same. And although both are greatly to be lamented, yet it is better to have to
do with those which are ignorant and willing to learn, then with them which
are delighted with their blindness and ignorance: because it is a great deal
more tolerable to be ignorant, then not to be willing to learn. Whereby it
comes to pass, that because the ministers and the instructors of the
congregations, Tit, ^,
must have to do with both these kind of men, they are therefore willed by the
Apostle to be such, as should hold fast the word of truth: so that they should
be able to instruct by wholesome doctrine, and also to confute the gaine-saiers
thereof. And as touching these two points in ye true Preacher, Aug, Enc. ad
Laure,
when Augustine had disputed and compared the one with the other: It is an
easy matter (says he) to declare what we ought to believe, what we ought to
hope for, and what we ought to love: but to defend the truth, and refell the
wicked opinions of others which think to the contrary, is the greater and
better part of learning. These are Augustines words: The which (...) they are,
experience it self long time since has taught us: for what great troubles the
godly fathers of the Church had in times past with the old heretics, and
chiefly with those which did excel in the sophistical and litigious kind of
disputation, we may easilye see by the writings of the catholic Doctors, and
those which on our part did enter into yt sharp conflict of disputation, To
reprove false doctrine the right use of disputation is no small help In laud.
Basil
better furnished, to wit, armed with weapons of good lerning, dispersed
without any great adoo, the thick mystes of sophistical disputation, by the
manifest light of ye truth. Amongst which ancient Fathers, Nazianzenus seems
to give the chiefest commendation to Basil, for that he above all others,
excelled in the true science of disputation and reasoning, the which praise we
may attribute also to Gregorius Nissenus. And Augustine (that I may use his
own words, Epist. 151
who was wont to rejoice of his disputations, and therein delighted himself)
did freely confess, Contra Aca. li. 3 ca 13.
that the Art of Logic was a very great and ready help unto him in the
understanding and undoing of the Heretics Sophistical and subtle Arguments.

And Tertulian, (...)
who was long time before Augustine, does not deny in these his Books, in
which most happelye he contended with the heretics, that he was often times
driven to dispute with them in Philosophy: which things I here bring in, They
are refuted which would not have divines me dle with the true art of
disputing. Col. 2.
because I see all (for ye most part) somewhat to mislike this Art of Logic,
otherwise most profitable: as though Paul had utterly excluded the same from
divinity, where he warns, that we must take heed least any man spoil us
through Philosophy: and here they gather much out of ye writings of the old
Fathers, which they suppose makes for them against Logic, and against the
exact knowledge of disputation. Aduer. 159. Epis. in cap. 2. Esa.
And therefore they willingly harken to Nazianzene, in that place where he
compares the Logitians, unto the Moabites and Ammonites: and now they snatch
after that place of Basil, where he terms Logic to be the mother of
contention: and sometimes they cry out with Tertulian, saying. De praescri.
haer.
O miserable Aristotle, which first armed the heretics with Logic, whereby like
crafty artificers, they might (as they listed) set up and destroy. To whom in
few words I do thus answer: The Apostle Paul did not reject the good and
right knowledge of disputing, which by certain necessary principles produces
and brings forth the knowledge of the truth: but rather that vain art of
deceiving with those sophistical and deceitful snares, the which the heretics
are wont full subtly to fold together, whereby they may deceive the godly
and faithful. And that this was the mind of the Apostle, it is manifest not
only by the order of the Apostles speech, but also by that he uses this word
[ Apates] which is (...) craft or circumuention by subtlety. Since then the
good use of Logic chiefly tends unto this end, to dispearse abroad the
fallaces and subtle crafts of sophistry, to expel errors, to reprove lies,
and to set before our eyes most manifestly the light of the truth: Who can with
good conscience think that the Apostle at any time did reject this so worthy
and necessary science? For how can it be possible, that he which does
profess himself an enemy to false sophistications, should not love ye
science of right disputing, which is Logic, being altogether contrary to
false and subtle reasoning: and ordained to this end, that by the help and
aid thereof, we may more easily avoid the snares of those which are captious?
For as he which hates darkness, A similitude.
must of necessity greatly rejoice in ye beutie of the light: so he that will
shut out of the church the false de^eits of arguments, he I say, must of
necessity, leave a place in the Church for sound and true reasoning, by the
which ye vain deceits of those men may be the easier reproved, and the better
avoided: Except peradventure we think the science and art of physic is
altogether to be rejected, because it teaches men to know those things which
are hurtful; whereby to take he^d of them, and to use only those things which
appertain to y^ preservation of health and life. Wherefore Nazianzene says
(yea, truly right excellent is his saying) for somewhat the must answer to the
former objection) y^ the Sophisters are like unto the Moabites and Ammonits
which were prohibited the temple of God: so y^ also we acknowledge this, yt the
true art of Logic is not compared to the Morbites and Ammonits, but rather to
them of Tyrc and Sidon, by whose help Solomon was greatly furthered in
building of the (...) also is worthy of great praises, in y^ he says, y^
Sophistre is the mother of contentions, so y^ thereby we lou^ the more ye
armor, by which y^ form of good learning makes us able to fight for the
truth (...)

Finally we may hearken to Tertulian crying out against the same, calling it
the crafty art of setting up and plucking down again, to wit, even indeed
that part of Logic which is always occupied in contentions, and never
makes end. But let us reverence the other part, which gives resolutions to
false arguments, and seuereth things necessary from those which are not, and
does so maintain the truth and beat down falsehood, that it remains always
one, because it is joined to the firm foundation of the truth. And that this
was the mind of the old Fathers touching the right order of disputing,
whosoever shall diligently mark the ancient doctors, will easily agree unto
us. For what says Nazianzenus whom those men so often cast in our teeth; Ad
150. Epi, in S, ca. Esai.
The truth (says he) by Logical disputations is filed and brought to light.
And furthermore what says Basil? That the true force of Logic is distinctly
to divide the nature of things, The ancient Fathers commended ^ right use of
Logic
whereby we may know those things which are of affinity, and distinguish
those which are contrary. And Augustine seuering the true use of Logic from
the abuse of Sophistry, says: Con. Acali. 3
If Logic be the knowledge of the truth, so then it behooves the wise to
have knowledge thereof, that thereby he may utterly race out the malicious
falsehod of the crafty disputers, and contemn the same. But there cannot be a
more excellent witness for this, then the testimony of S. Augustine, where he
says, that Logic is the only Science of all other, De ord, li. 2. ca. 12
which teaches both how to teach, and how to learn: and does show a man how
to perceive, and to make other to understand: Thus much Augustine. Wherefore,
since the case so stands, let this so worthy art and science, have her
condign and due praise, and let us be bold to say, that they reason nothing
wisely, which in these our days start up, and foolishly speak against Logic.

But here peradventure some man may demand of me, Touching the writings and
disputations of y^ school Doctors.
whether this my commendation does extend it self to the Schoolmen, and
chiefly unto those which have taken their original from the Master of
sentences, and whether their writings do appertain to that good and true
part of Logic, which resolves doubtful arguments? Truly, as I am not
willing at this time to set down my absolute opinion (touching so many me^)
herein: for, for my own part let each one of them have his due reverence for
his travail and labor, so am I not afeard to speak both boldly and freely my
mind, what I think, always (not withstanding) keeping my self within my
compass: In. 3. sent. did. 24. quest. 1.
John Duns Scotus (commonly called the subtle Doctor) says that the Divines
have in some places mixed Philosophy with Divinity, and that with great
profit: I truly confess that they have mingled it with divinity, yea I add
they have therewith confused Divinity, but if he think it was done with any
fruit, I beseech master Doctor pardon me if I cannot herein agree with him:
for sithen the Schoolmen have not followed that good part of disputing, which
gives true resolutions to arguments (as we shall hereafter declare) but have
as it were dallied and sported themselves in probabilities, and being for the
most part vain and frivolous arguments, me thinks they have not brought into
the Church of God the true use, but rather the abuse of Philosophy: and truly,
I say it seems to me, that into ye midst of ye Church, the Schoolmen have
brought sophistication and shameless falsehood, decked and adorned with the
color and name of Philosophy, as of an honest matrone, to the great detriment
and hurt of the Church. But you will say, they have not gotten this sharp
knowledge of disputing without great labor and pains: I grant it to be so:
for oftentimes when I see these school men laboring, sweating, and as it were
out of breath in these their, subtle disputations, they make me to remember
the Troyans, which with great labor and care brought into their City, the
counterfaite Grecian Horse, whereby ensued the ruin of the whole Kingdom of
Troy. Great, but unprofitable is the labor of the school Doctors.
So these schoolmen with great industry and labor, have brought into the
church false Philosophy: that therehence, as from the Troyan horse might
spring infinite errors: by which, while these who should have been the watchmen
over the Church, were even over whelmed in school ignorance, those errors
have crept in, corrupted and wasted the Church of God (so as I may use the
saying of Esayas) Except the Lord had left us a small remnant, we had had no
church at all. A proof hereof is the Church of Rome, so depraved and
corrupted, that while we seek the Church in the Church, we are constrained,
not without great sorrow and tears, only to behold the ashes of the true
Church. But because I may not seem here more willing to lament, then to
dispute: mark what I say, to wit, that the schoolmen and questionarie Doctors,
have neither followed the true manner of divine disputations, Certain Errors
which are to be found in the disputations of the school Doctors The first
error to make their ground Logic See Scotus and others, who have written
upon the master of sentences, and in their disputations called Quodlibets, etc.
neither lawful use of Logic: and that this may the more evidently appear,
out of diverse and sundry their errors, I will gather certain, by the which we
may plainly see, that they have ^rred not a little in their disputations, from
the true manner of divine Disputing.

The first error that the schoolmen admit in their disputations is this: yt
they are wont to dispute by the principles of Logic, and from thence to fetch
their conclusions. So questions being proposed, they make the ground thereof
Logic, and not Divinity, so that the Scriptures in these their Disputations,
are dumme and speachlesse: for they oftentimes allege the Philosophers as
Authoures in their Disputations, but very seldom the Apostles.

And if at any time they bring in the Doctors, they confusedlye mingle their
authority with the authority of the Scriptures, neither doubt they to term
their writings, by the name of the Scriptures. Lomb. li. 1. Sent. did. 34. and
li. 2. sent. did. 9. etc
But we have learned and that out of divinity to take our principles from
divinity, when so ever we dispute thereof: and that we ought so to do, it is
manifest even by Logic, which does forbid to go from the principles of one
art to another, or to wander without the compass of the science, wherein we
have begun to dispute. Sithen then, divinity is far above all other
sciences, it were not only v^rie foolish, but also impious and ungodly, to
make it subject to the principles of Philosophy. And also to make the Doctors
equal with the Prophets and Apostles, is altogether a thing intolerable.
Wherefore I think no man doubts (except he will reason like an Atheist) but
that I have sufficiently proved this first error of the Shoolemen.

The second error is this, that in matters of divinity which are most true
and plain, ^. Error. To reason probably on plain truths.
they dispute both Pro and Contra, as it were with probable argument upon the
grounds thereof: when as they ought not so to do in these points: it being
both from the use of true reasoning, as also from the nature of divinity: for
Topicall talk of disputations are to be left to common kind and exercises.
But treatises or disputings standing upon infallable grounds (of which sort
most chiefly are the disputations of divinity) do require demonstratiue,
plain, and evident disputatio^s, which ought to stand on most true,
necessary, and infallable Sylogismes or arguments. Indeed the Philosophers
were wont sometimes to dispute both Pro and Contra, touching the principles of
their arts and sciences, that the truth might thereby more manifestly appear.
But the divines dispute not about the principles of divinity, because they are
of themselves most true, and without all controversy. And furthermore there is
nothing more contrary to the nature of faith, then doubtfulnesse, and that
accademicall wavering in giving consent; the which being a long time a go
buried and clean wiped away by the most learned disputations of Saint
Augustine, Contra Aca.
and other the old Fathers, is now at last most vnluckely (I know not by what
means) raised new by the School Doctors, and even as it were brought out
again from hell. Apolog, ad (...), louin
Very sharply did Hierome taunt Iouinian, for that he disputed in a question
of divinity after the manner of the Schools, and not according to the true
use of doctrine: If then he so taunted him, how much more sharply would he
inueigh against these our School men* which have accustomed themselves to
dispute no other ways even in the principles and grounds of divinity.

And moreover it comes to pass and often times happens to the School men
which are tossed now on this side, and now on that side, as in many* and
sundry waves of Arguments: at the last (I say) it comes to pass, y^ they
themselves know not to what haven, as to a sure port to betake themselves:
Yea, even so, that that subtle Scotus, as also many other do leave their
matter even raw and undetermined, giving leave to their Readers to be on
which side they will. If you be of this side (say they) then must you
answer the contrary arguments: but if you had rather to be on the other
side, then lo, this have you to answer to the contrary part. Naie: what is
this: That in many objections they say nothing, but bid the Reader seek the
resolution himself if he will have it: yea, and again sometime they say,
let him answer that can. I pray you now tell me, are these diuinelike
disputations wherein above all other things is required a certain persuasion
of faith? or is this analitical or resolute, where as the Philosophers will have
nothing taken for resolute and certainty, except it be brought to an
infallible knowledge: and then to place these things in the most firm degree of
truth?

The third error is that they obscure and do not beautify the truth with
their subtle craftiness: 3. Error* They darken the truth.
for they make those things which be difficult and hard, more hard by their
crooked and ill favored questions: and again, those things, which are easy,
and not hard of themselves, they altogether darken by their intricate
obscurity and darkness of questions; and as the common saying is, they seek
to undo a knotte where none is.

And is there any man (I pray you whatsoever) except he have altogether
hardened himself with these their barbarismes, which does not utterly fly
them: yea if he do but only hear the horrible hissing of their barbarous
words, right soon persuades himself, g he shall never be able to carry in
his mind those things, which his ears cannot abide to hear. Wherefore, that
which Augustine sometime spoke of Sophistry, Con. Aca.
may very well (as me thi^keth) agree with ye school doctors, to wit, that it
was like to Cacus cave: for while as the Schoolmen do so rejoice in strange
opinions as in foreign riches, they so affect obscurity and seek such
starting holes, that so often as they dispute, they seem not to explicate the
matters, but rather to make the same intricate, and in truth there is not so
much heard the voice of men, as the bellowing of beasts, out of those dark
caves of their obscure questions.

And finally the fourth error is, Error. 4 Is their vain questions
that the schoolmen or rather questionarie Doctors, do spend their time in
vain and frivolous questions, and those not so expounded, as darkened by them:
the which vainness in words the Apostle would have altogether abandoned from
him, who is a preacher in the Church of God. For a little after he says,
Foolish and unprofitable questions forsake, 2. Tim. 2
knowing that they breed strife. And how true this is, it does enidently
appear in the questionarie Doctors, of whom you shall scarce find two that
do agree in one opinion. For so Scotus does disagree from Thomas of Aquine,
and Occam from Scotus, and the other from Occam, that you can scarce enter into
their writings, but that you must be pertaker of their contention and strife:
when as indeed those are the true divine treatises and exercises in divinity,
which establish and confirm our faith, and are made to the edifi^ng and
comfort of ye whole church. And therefore r^ght well does Augustine admonish
vel, saying: E^chi. ^d Lauren. cap. 55.
That there is no need to determinate or open those things with danger, which
may be unknown without danger or hurt* whereby we may easily perceive that ye
kind of disputing which y^ Popish school doctors have used, has very little
or no fellowship, with ye true divine treatises or excercises. Wherefore y^ I
may have some fa^uour of those which profess themselves eni^ious to Logic:
here I show them how y^ they may turn their former vpbraidings and
repr^hentions: and may say y^ the philosophy of these questionarie doctors and
schoolmen is altogether vain deceit, yea, the mother of contention, that
crafty art of building and destroying, which ought utterly to be repulsed from
ye true Church of God, together both with the Moabites and Ammonits: Thus let
them say, and then I must needs confess, that I have nothing to say against
them.

But the Popish School men of this our age, The Popish schol doctors of ou^
time frame not such arguments in their disputations as y^ ancient learned
were wont.
fa^e unto themselves another ^inde of writing: for these contriue not together
naked Silogismes as the other were want, but they use long and tedious
declamations, chiefly against those which profess the sincerity of pure
doctrine of ye Gospel: in doing of which matter, they willingly abstain from
silogismes or arguments. For where as for the most part they blow forth their
malicious (...), and (...) their vile (...), thinking it cannot be aptly
concluded in mode and figure after a short form of argument, therefore they
rather (...) a more larger scope of disputing. Since the^ as I suppose* it is
manifest even by those things which I have before declared, y^ the
disputations of ye popish doctors are neither true divine disputatio^s, nor
ordered by ye rules of logic. It shall be necessary and needful therefore
to set down some method, The method to dispute both divinely and school like,
necessatie in our time.
whereby we may dispute both divinely and also schoolike: and (to repeat
Augustines words) y^ we may be able utterly to banish the false brauling of
sophistry, the which (I would to God) the learned divines and those which are
skillful in ye same most excellent art of Logic, (of the which sort I doubt
not but there be many) would determine with themselves to do, and so to set
down both to us now, and also to the posterities hereafter, ye way to
dispute both schoolike and diuinelike. For if S. Augustine most excellently
compared ye knowledge of humane sciences, D^ doct. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 40.
unto ye tresure of Egypt, which ye Israelites carried away with them: truly
then we which see many in these our days to abuse those so^en ornaments and
riches, to the f^aming of error, that Idol: it were not amiss but very
requisite and necessary, that the good and learned men, should willingly bestow
those riches, to the building of the tabernacle of God, and to the fortifying
of the truth against the errors of men. And until those which do excel in
the study of divinity, as also in the science of Logic, do take in hand to
perform this matter, I will set down something as touching this, (although
slender) for those young men's sakes, which are studious of Divinity: so that
they which hereafter write, may add the true colors to these my first and
rude liniaments.

There are two ways how to entreat of Divinity, Two vvayes to entreat of
divinity.
the one compact with a full and flowing style, which teaches the simple, A
similitude.
For like as the view of man's body is a great deal more pleasant to behold,
while it is clad with the flesh, and the blood running in each vein, having a
comelye color: yet notwithstanding if we come at any time to the Anatomy,
then the faculty of each part, and the constitution of the whole body is a
great deal better known: so if any will wisely and diligently weigh those
larger and pleasanter treatises, The brief and school like treatises are as it
were an Anatomy of ye large and copious vvriting or speakings
and bring them to arguments as unto Anatomies, then without doubt he shall
easily perceive, whether they be absolute and perfect in every point; or
whether there be any thing wanting: and as the Physician shows forth even
as it were with the finger, the original and causes of diseases, so shall he
here do touching errors, if there be any. The former sort does indeed
delyght the minds, as wll of those which are learned, as those which are
unlearned: but this latter manner of exercise, since it is occupied in that
only kind of matter, which appertains to doctrine, is more meet for those
which are best learned, who are nothing moved with the flood of vain words, if
especially there be no force of matter contained in them, because that speech
without reason, is not to be counted any thing worth. Augustine, Ciprian,
Hillarie, Hieronimus, and diverse old learned Fathers, have used this kind of
disputing very much: and this also the schoolmen seemed to profess, but with
what success I have showed already. But chieflye we must consider and have
great care on does sides, that when we dispute touching doctrine, all our
arguments be necessary and pertaining to doctrine, so that they be grounded
upon most sure principles and infallible grounds of Divinity. And above all
things, we must beware that we take not things which may be disputed on both
sides, for things necessary: things which be strange, for those that are
known: falshoode, for truth; the which truly does happen oftentimes in much
lauishing out of speech, the which ye adversaries of the truth, most commonly
abuse, where by they may the more conuenientlye hyde themselves under the
couerte of many words: so that when they have said much, ^hey would also seem
to have spoken truth. The best and chiefest for this mischief is, if after the
long circumstaunces, that then there be^ fet down a brief Logical handling
of those their words spoken before, to be as it were an Anatomy and
recapitualation of all subtle sophemes, and crafty fallaces: And when the
falsehood of words is clean taken away, it will bewray those things which are
false, it will set truth against falsehood, and bear them both out: yea finally
it will bring to pass (even as Augustine sometime said) That each thing with
other, Cout. Man. lib. 3.
cause with cause, and reason with reason may strive together. And here who
sees not, that when errors are clean taken away, how easily the truth will
overcome: and the same truth which the huge flood of words had over whelmed,
will even willingly as it were advance her self up again. Since then that
schoollike handeling of matters will bring so great profit (so ye Logic be
directed by the true rules of divinity) I the^ entreat and beseech these
learned divines of this our age, which are defe^ders of ye gospel, yt they have
^are heerof, and set down unto us some certain and easy method of this
schoolike way, how to handle each point: y^ which we may follow, and the which
also may be both to us present, as also to ye posterities hereafter a most
true touchstone whereby we may try the sundry works of diverse men, which have
written of divinity: ye which if they shall perform, they shall greatly profit
the Church of God, especially in these times, in which each man strives in
setting forth of books touching the principal points of divinity, who may
do best. For where as the Ciuilians only write touching their laws, the
Physicians of their faculty, and so all others of those arts and sciences
which they profess, and in ye which they are conversant: yet notwithstanding
it comes to pass (I know not by what means) that not only divines, but
also men clean void of divinity, of all sorts, are wont now every where to
dispute in their books touching divinity: so yt herein I assent with
Nazianzene, De mod. in disp. Ser.
which before time has most grievously complained of this matter. And we have
thought good to publish this our small labor abroad, not yt we think we have
obtained ye same method whith we desire, but that by this means we may at the
least give a testimony that we look for a more exact method from the
learned divines, yea, and earnestly desire them to perform the same.

Behold then we here set down a schoolelike treatise of divinity, taken
out of the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, to wit, A treatise of
ye word of God written.
touching the word of God written, against man's traditions, about which
matter there is great controversy between us and the Papists. And for this
cause I omit the handling of this point at large, because it may be easily
seen in the writings of late, set forth on both parts: of which writings I
will make as it were a certain resolution or anatomy in this school like
treatise. How the disputations of diunitie differ from others, and that they
ought reverently to be handled.
But before I come to this my purpose, I am willing somewhat to admonish the
Reader, how that these disputations touching ye Scriptures does far differ
from all others. For in disputations of Philosophy, Physic, civil
government, and such other, there eloquence shows it self, there desire to
excel does rule, there oratorie pleading bursteth out: yea, oftentimes in
such matters, men desire nothing but to show forth the braveness of their
wits, or else seek after glory and praise. But in divine disputations, where
(as Augustine says) Bravery must not be sought, De doct. Chri. li. 4. cap. 19
but good documentes and lessons, and that with great reverence: yea, and very
reverently we must dispute of holy things, not as upon the stage before men,
but as in the midst of the Church before the living God and his Angels: not
for the desire of victory, but for the maintenaurce of the truth, in as much
as Paul forbids the Pastors of the Church, once to speak of vain
questions, 1. Tim. 6.
or contentions of words, which can scarce be done without the detrument of
the truth. Wherefore praying aid at the hands of almighty God, that he will
direct and establish this our labor by his holy spirit, let us proceed into
this most holy conflict, in the which the word of GOD is the place of combat,
God himself the chief Judge, truth the victory, salvation the garland of
triumph. And hereby with more valiant minds we take upon us this most noble
conflicte, because it otherwise happens in this, then in other battayles, for
there he alone is crowned which vanquisheth, but ye end of this battle is
such, that even he which is vanquished (so that he acknowledge himself
overcome and embrace the truth) shall likewise be crowned, Quest. ver. 108.
together with the victour. And Augustine says, that it is better to be
overcome of the truth, then to be willing to overcome the truth with
falsehoode. For whatsoever men practice against the truth, yet this must they
know, to wit, that verity cannot be vanquished: the which Augustine also
calls perpetual victory. De Ciuie. Dei. li. 2. cap. 29. 1


Furthermore, this point of doctrine, The use of this disputation.
touching the which our disputation is, is of so great weight that it may be
thought (and that worthelye) to be the very foundation of all Religion. And
therefore (not without great cause) the Prophet David does acknowledge the
word of GOD to be a Lantern, Psalm. 119.
the which except it lighten our feet, of necessity we must walk in most
horrible darkness: yea, also we both stumble and fall. But the defenders of
the Popish Church, do so hotly strive and contend for man's Traditions, and
think them no less worthy to be retained, then some precious Picture of
Pallas, the which being taken away, they think it not possible any longer to
defend or maintain their pontificiall chair, wherein there have been so many
Vicars assaulted, and now at the last (Truth preuaylyng) shall be quite
overthrown and brought unto naught. But that we may come to the matter, The
division of this work
this disputation shall be divided into six parts. First, we will

THE FIRST CHAPTER.
He, 1. ve. ^
At sundry times, and in diverse manners, God spoke in the old time to our
Fathers by the Prophets: In these last days, he has spoken unto us by his
son.
WHen Tertulian would enter into the conflict of disputation, and join with
the adversary: he was wont to bonder the whole sum of the question, with
certain bonds (for so himself says) whereby he might not swerve from the
matter which he had in hand. And that we also may do the like, Our opinion and
mind touching the word of God.
we will first propone or set down our mind and opinion (which is the opinion
of each reformed Church,) touching the word of God, by the testimony of the
same word of God which is this.

All necessary principles of christian faith, are contained in the holy
Scriptures.

This our sentence or opinion we thus expound, out of that place of ye Epistle
to ye Hebrews which ministers unto us, The declaration of our opinion or
mind.
sufficient matter for this disputation. God spoke in the time of the old
Testament in diverse and sundry manners to our fathers, to wit, by oracles,
visions, dreams, by Vrim and Thummim, finaly by ye prophets, speaking by the
motion or inspiration of the spirit of God, and the same word of God, (the
spirit of God so commanding) was committed to writing, both by Moses, and
also by other Prophets, and most holy men: Now in these last days, Jesus
Christ, the chief and most perfect Doctor and teacher of his Church being
given to the world, taught the Apostles by mouth, and ordained them teachers
for his Church, which did publish in writing the doctrine of the Gospel
received from Christ, and by them taught by mouth. Since then ye word of God is
the measure of our faith, and that that word of God remains in the most holy
monuments or writings of the scriptures, it follows of necessity, that all the principles which are necessary to faith and salvation of the Church, are
contained in the holy Scriptures: and whatsoever the Apostles have taught, we
ought to look for them in the holy Scriptures: neither ought we to receive any
tradition in matter of faith. And because matters are made more manifest by
u^militudes, we will take our similitude from a King, which by mouth
proclaims an Edict, and then wills the same to be printed, the which being
done, men are not wont curiouslye to enquire of others, which either heard or
were present at the proclamation, what is contained in the Kings Edict, because
the Edict is in print, to ye which they must stand, and the which they must
also believe. So then I affirm, in as much as the word was proclaimed and
declared by the Apostles and evangelists, and by them committed to writing, it
were in vain and foolish now a days any other where to be sought, then in
the Scriptures: what the Apostles and Evangelists did teach by mouth.

But now the opinion of the adversary is this. That all principles of Religion
necessary for our Christian faith, The opinion and mind of ye Papist^.
are not contained in the holy Scriptures. The which their opinion they thus
expound. Although the word of God be the measure of our faith, yet the whole
word of God is not extant in the scriptures: The declaration and exposition of
their opinion.
for many things were spoken by the Apostles and Evangelists which they writ
not. Furthermore the Catholic church say they, (meaning the Church of Rome) is
so endowed with the spirit of God, that she is able of her self to deliver
those things which are necessary both to faith and salvation. Wherefore that
we may have the whole word of God, the Apostolical and eccle^^asticall
traditions must be added to the scriptures: this is their opinion. The state
and point of this controversy
Now then you may see manifestlye, what is the state or issue of our
controversy: for this is that which must be discussed: whether the whole word
of God delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, and necessary for our salvation,
be contained in the Scriptures, which is the word written, or not: we affirm
that it is: they say nay: so then there ^anne be but one of our opinions
true: as is manifest by the first grounds of Logic. The terms of this
question expounded
In any reasoning, the affirmative or negative (...) needs be true, but
before we go about the confirmation of our opinion, we will set down the
bounds and limits of our question both briefly and short. What the word of
God is.
When we say the word of God, we mean not that eternal Word the Son of the
eternal and everlasting father, being the second person in Trinity: but that
external word by the which God has made manifest unto men his will and
pleasure, and therefore we add and say that word which was delivered and
taught by the Apostles and Prophets, so that it may be more manifest what we
mean by the word of God. What tradition is.
Also this word Tradition may not only be referred to the word taught by
mouth, but also to the word written, as it is manifest in the second to the
Thessalonians, the second chapter, where the Apostle says, Stand fast and
keep the traditions or instructions which you have been taught either by word
or by Epistle. And even after this sort also, have the old fathers used to
speak, as we will show in the proper place: notwithstanding in this question,
according to the manner of speaking, it is restrained to that word which is
taught by mouth. What is meant by this word: Necessary to salvation.
Furthermore we mean by the word of God, necessary to our salvation, al those
things which God has commanded us to believe with a most sure persuasion of
faith, so that we may make a difference, between faith and opinion, and
between the principles of Christian religion, What is meant by holy Scripture.
and the probable disputations and ordinances of men. Last of all, by ye name
of the holy Scripture, we understand all the books Canonical both of the new
and old testament. And thus much I thought good to speak briefly touching the
explication of our question.

The second Chapter.
Hither to we have declared our mind and opinion touching the word of God: A
demonstratiue or evident disputation.
now it rests that we confirm the same by most certain proofs and
arguments derived and taken out of the same word of God, and so at the last a
flat demonstratiue or most true argument being gathered from most true
principles, we may rid the whole matter out of all obscurity, placing it in
the most manifest light of truth. And to bring this to pass, we will places of
Scripture being collected and brought together, we will fet a true definition
of the word of God: the which definition also, shall be ye proof of our
argument, cutting away all exception and doubt. And although in the reciting of
the places of scripture, I do not curiously labor touching the order thereof
(for each place of scripture is of sufficient authority to make any
conclusion) yet notwithstanding, I have taken some care, that the order of the
places of scripture, may answer unto each parts of the definition, as much as
may be. Wherefore let us begin with this place of the Apostle, which has
ministered occasion unto us of this disputations.

The first place.
God at sundry times and indiuers manners in the old times, Heb. 1
spoke to our fathers by the Prophets, but in these last days, he has spoken
unto us by his son.

Whereby we conclude thus.

If the word of God being sufficient or necessary unto the salvation of the
church, The Sylogisme or argument
was delivered first unto us by the Prophets and then by Christ and his
Apostles, and that word of GOD so delivered by the Prophettes, is this day
only to be sought for in the writings of the Prophets. Then truly the word
of God delivered unto us by Christ and his Apostles, must be sought for only
in the writings of the Apostles, except any good reason may be given to the
contrary.

But the word of God necessary to the salvation of the Church, was delivered
first unto us by the Prophets, and then by Christ and his Apostles, and the
same word of God delivered by the Prophets, is this day only to be sought in
the writings of the Prophets and no where else: neither any good reason to the
contrary can be rendered, why the like should not be, touching the word of god
delivered by Christ and his Apostles.

Wherefore we conclude, that the word of god necessary to the salvation of the
church, is only to be sought for in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Now let us try our argument. The explication or proof of the argument.
This syllogism or argument is hypothetical or double, ye use whereof is very
necessary so often as we shall be occupied in ye comparing of things together.
And ye hypothetical or double arguments are very needful in divine
disputations, is manifest both by the old Doctors, also by ye new schoolmen,
who most often use them. Wherefore I doubt not to use these, even as well as
the categoricall arguments: because the matter or grounds of our disputations
are not Topicall, or standing on the invention of art, but grounded on
expressse places of Scriptures, and therefore those kind of arguments, are not
inferior to others. The ground or matter therefore of our argument is made
manifest even by the light of nature, The confirmation of the conference.
who bids us of things like, to judge the like. And these principles which
we have drawn from nature her self, the Apostle teaches us that they are not
to be rejected, when as in the matter of regeneration, he brings the
Corinthians to the consideration of nature: For being schooled by natures rule,
says Tertulian, Tert. de resur. car.
thou may the easilier believe the Prophecy. Now if we mark the substance,
we shall find the word of God both in the old testament and in the new to
be all one: For the Apostle professes, saying: That he has spoken nothing,
but that which the Prophets and Moses had before spoken. Act. 26.
I confess that the publishing of the word of God in ye new Testament, was a
great deal more excellent and fruitful then before: yea, and that makes for
our cause, and therefore far wide is it, that it should hurt us or our matter,
as hereafter in our disputation, we will more at large prove. Let us then make
a comparison between the old and new Testament, as much as appertains to
the word of God exhibited in them both after this sort: If God spoke by the
Prophets in the old testament, then also he has spoken by the Apostles in the
new testament. And if the prophets taught the word of God by mouth, the like so
the^ the apostles have done. And if the prophets committed to writing the word
of God, so also have the Apostles. Wherefore if the prophets comprehended the
whole doctrine of ye old testament in their writings, why should not we say, yt
the Apostles have also comprised the whole doctrine of the gospel, in their
books? Now let the defenders of the contrary opinion, bring forth and show
some reason to disprooue this my assertion. I say some good reason, not borrowed
from the dreams of men's brains, nor from topicall and cauilling arguments,
but derived from the word of God. But this they cannot do. Furthermore, I urge
this place of the Apostle which we have in hand, and reason thus. If the word
of God delivered after diverse manners, ways, and at many times, be now
altogether to be found in ye writings of the prophets: why should not we say
the like of ye Gospel, being ye word of god, which (as ye apostle witnesses)
was not at sundry times or in diverse manners delivered? For otherwise who
sees not, y^ the apostles comparison in the recited text, were of no force.
For if ye Apostle had said thus, then were our adversaries opinion true: to
wit, Like as in times past under ye old testament God spoke at sundry times and
in diverse manners: so now likewise has he also spoken to us in ye time of the
new testament at sundry times, and in diverse manners that is by ye writings of
the apostles, by apostolical traditions not written, and also now speaks by
the traditions of ye church: ye which how it repugneth and is contrary to ye
mind of ye apostle, even our adversaries themselves cannot deny ye same: and
thus much touching ye first part of our argument. The minor, The confirmation
of the second part of the argument.
which is ye second part of our argument, contains in it self, three
members. First, y^ the word of god (necessary to ye salvation of ye Church) was
delivered unto us, first by ye prophets, and then after by Christ and his
Apostles: and this is manifest by this place of the Apostle, in that he says,
In times past he spoke by his Prophets, but in these last days by his son:
And that this last speaking apperteineth also to the Apostles, it is manifest
by the words of the Apostle, in his second chapter of this Epistle, where he
says, y^ the gospel was first preached unto us by Christ, and then confirmed
by those which heard him. And again John the 20. and 17. Christ says, Ioh,
20. 17
As my Father sent me, even so send I you. And it cannot be denied but that the
Apostles published the Gospel in writing.

Romans the first, where he says: Put a part for the Gospel, Romans 1.
which he had promised before by his Prophets, in the holy Scriptures. Lu. 16
And again Luke 16. They have Moses and the Prophets. John. 6. John. 6.
It is written in ye Prophets. Acts. 26. Paul says. Act. 26.
O king Agrippa beleeuest thou ye Prophets? I know thou beleeuest. Luke. 24.
And he began at Moses, Lu. 24
and at all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all the Scriptures ye
things which were written of him. To conclude, because I will not recite many
places, finally Peter by the words of the Prophets means the writings of the
Prophets. 2, Pet. 1.
2. Epistle, chapter. 1. And in the last end of the same chapter he says
thus: For ye prophecy came not in old time by ye will of man, but holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by ye holy Ghost. Now if our adversaries will not
yield unto us, let the^ bring good proof unto us to the contrary: but y^, (as
I have already said) they cannot do.

Now the third and last member is, that they of the contrary part, can bring
forth no proof to the contrary, but that we may conclude touching the word of
God delivered unto us by Christ and the Apostles, y^ it is wholly contained in
the writing of the Apostles, as well as the word of God delivered by the
Prophets, is contained in the writings of ye Prophets, to wit, so much as is
necessary for our faith and salvation. But if at any time our adversaries
affirm that they can bring some good reason to ye contrary, then they must
bring such as must be both true and also agreeing to the Scripture. And thus
the parts of our argument being confirmed, ye conclusion thereof must needs be
true.

The second place.
It seemed good to me most noble Theophilus, Act. 1
to write unto thee thereof from point to point that thou might know the
certainty of those things, whereof thou have ben instructed.

To this purpose also these places may serve. Jude.
I gave my diligence ( says he) to write unto you of the common salvation.
Philip. chap. 3. Philip. 3.
It greeueth me not to write the same things unto you, and it is profitable
for you. 1. John. 1.
John. 1. Epistle. chap. 1. We declare unto you that which we have seen. 2.
Peter. chap. 3. 2. Pet. 3.
This second Epistle I now write unto you beloved, wherewith I stir up your
pure minds, to call to your remembrance the words which were spoken before of
the holy Prophets, and also the commandments of us, the Apostles of the Lord
and savior. 2. 2. Pet. 1.
Peter. chap. 1. I will not cease to put you always in remembrance of these
things, although ye be already instructed therein.

From these and such other places, we draw this argument.

If the Apostles and Evangelists published in writing the Gospel, to his end,
The argument.
that the truth of those things which they taught by mouth, might be the better
known and confirmed, and that thereby also it should the better sink into the
mind and memory of men: then truly the Apostles and Evangelists, left all
those things in writing, which by mouth they had taught, being necessary to
faith and salvation.

The Antecedent is true,

And therefore my conclusion is also true

The ground of our argument which is ye first part cannot be denied, The
explication or proof of the argument.
for then ye middle would repugne with ye end: the which far be it from us, y^
we should once think, especially in them which did both speak and write ye
gospel, with one and the self same spirit. As for ye second part of our argument
it is confirmed by ye former places in plain words.

The third place.
Thou shall not add to the word which I teach and command thee. And again,
Deu, 4. Prou. 30.
Thou may not add unto his word least he reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar. Wherefore I say, The argument
if it be not lawful for man to ad any thing to the writings of Moses, then
truly, after that the writings of the Apostles, were joined to the writings of
Moses and the Prophets, we may plainly say, that the scriptures do contain
all those things, the knowledge and faith whereof is necessary and sufficient,
to salvation.

The antecedent is true:

Wherefore we ought not to doubt of the truth of the consequence.

The first part of our sylogisme is manifest not only by the similitude, The
examining or trial of ye argument
but also by the often comparing of the word of God delivered by Moses, as
also by the Apostles, as it is proved in the first place. Our Minor is proved
by the places before recited: which proves that we may not add unto the word
of God. And least our adversaries should say, that that place of Moses is not
tied unto the word of God written by Moses: we will recite certain places,
which shall cut off all shifts of our adversaries. Moses Exodus. 24. Writ all
these words of the Lord. Again, Deuteronomy. Moses wrote this law. Again, Deuteronomy. 28.
Exodus 24.
All the words of this law, Deu. 31.
which is written in this book. Deu. 28.
And Paul in the Act. 24. I believe (says he) all those things which are
written in the Law and in the Prophets. Act. 24.
And that which Moses says Deuteronomy. 27. Let each one be accursed which abides
not in all the words of this law: Deu. 27.
Paul thus expounds Gal. 3. saying, Gal. 3
In all things which are written in the book of the law. By which places we
may easily perceive, that the word of God touching the which Moses speaks, is
not to be interpreted the writings of Moses alone, neither to be applied unto
certain unwritten verities delivered only by the mouth of Moses, as the Jews
doctors do falsely surmise, whose errors have long time since been even hissed
out of the Church of Christ.

The 4. place.
Get thee to the law and testimony: Esa. 8.
If they say not after this word, there is no light in them.

Hereof we frame this argument.

If the people under the law ought to repair to the Scriptures, The argument.
and nothing was to be received in matters of faith the which was not contained
in the holy Scriptures: then truly by greater reason, afterward that the
doctrine of the Gospel written of the Apostles, was joined to the writings of
the old Testament, (the which Apostles did explicate and teach the true
meaning of the law) those things alone must be received in matters of faith,
which are contained in the writings of the old and new testaments.

The antecedent is true:

Wherefore also the consequent must be true.

The first part of our argument is manifest of it self, The examining or
trial of the argument
through the force of comparison. Although, (if we have respect to the ground
and substance thereof) the Apostles spoke no other thing, then y^ which was
before spoken by Moses and the prophets as Paul affirms. Act. 26. Act. 26.
Yet no christian has at any time doubted, but y^ the publishing of the word
of God was far more excellent and plentiful, after the Incar^ation of Christ,
then it was before: like as ye apostles in diverse places have taught. 2. Cor,
3. etc.
Wherefore; if before his incarnation, they ought to be ruled by the word of
god written, how much more then ought we now? The minor is manifest by the
recited places. And h^re I am not ignorant, that this before recited place of
the prophet, is diversely. expounded of the learned: but howsoever they expound
these words, it comes to this effect: that they live in most horrible
darkness which despising the word of God, take unto themselves the errors of
inchanters, witches, and man's dreams.

The fifth place.
Thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, 2. Tim. 3.
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in
Christ Jesus: for the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct, in
righteousness: that the man of God may be absolute being made perfect to
every good work.

If such be the force of the holy Scriptures, The argument.
that it makes a man wise and perfectly instructed unto salvation, then ought
we to be content with the holy Scriptures in causes and matters of faith.

The Antecedent is true, And therefore the consequent must be the like.

The first part of our argument is manifest through the nature of perfection:
The examining or triail o^ ye silogisme
for if ye scriptures make us perfect, to what end then serve traditions not
written? And unto this end serves the saying of Paul before alleged. The
minor is manifest and proved by the place recited of Paul. But peradventure
our adversaries will here object and say, that Paul spoke here only of the
scriptures of the old Testament, because Timothy was instructed from his
youth. But since Paul here adds and says, Through the faith that is in
Christ Jesus, he does manifestly declare, that the doctrine of the Gospel,
was joined with the knowledge of the old Testament. But they may say, that the
Gospel was not then published in writing, but only delivered and taught by
mouth. First let them tell me, whereby they gather this? for it is manifest by
the fourth Chapter of that his Epistle, that Paul wrote this same Epistle,
very near about the time of his death. And here if you will make a good
account of the times, you shall easilye perceive, that then: when this Epistle
was sent unto Timothy, all the Epistles of the Apostles, (or well near all)
were put in writing. And furthermore, what matter were it, if then the doctrine
of the Gospel had not been published in writing, inasmuch as it was afterward
done. Finally, if ye would that Paul should here speak touching the writing
of the old Testament only, then would I make mine argument of more force and
reason thus: If the writings of the old Testament were of such force that they
were able to make men wise unto salvation, how much more shall the whole
Scripture of the old and new Testament, be able to perform the same? But he
which shall deny y^ this same excellent sentence of Paul touching the whole
Scriptures, (to wit, that it was given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
to teach) does appertain unto the writings of the new testament, he is not
only to be thrust out of the number of divines, but is also to be banished out
of the society of Christians. Neither yet let them go about to cavil with
us, for that the old translation has this word Prepared, and not absolute
Perfect to all good works. For truly (that I may not omit any thing, and so
swerve from our argument) the Greek word signifies Perfection, as in the
Acts. 21. ver. 5. (...).
But when the days were full perfected and ended, we went on our journey, etc.
Where and in which place, Luke uses the same Greek word which Paul does use
in the Text to Timothy, signifieng as you see Absolute and Perfect. Also the
compounde of the same verb in Greek has the like signification: As Matthew.
21. ver. 26. By the mouths of babes and sucklings, thou have made perfect thy
praise. Again. 1. Thessa. 3. ver. 10. (...).
Night and day praieng exceedingly, that we might see your face, and might
accomplish or make perfect, (...).
that which is wanting in your faith. And again, Heb. 13. ver. 22.

The 6. place.
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life. John. 5.


If the people in times past under the law, The argument.
do think, and that not without good cause to have eternal life in the
Scriptures, that is, that all those things were contained in the Scriptures,
the knowledge and faith whereof attained everlasting life: then truly by
greater reason we ought to believe the self same, being now under the Gospel:
after that to the scriptures of the old testament, the writings of the Apostles
was also joined, which interpret and teach the verity and truth of the old
testament.

The antecedent is true: The explication or trial of the argument.


And therefore there is no doubt of the consequent.

The force of comparison, confirms the first part of our argument: for such
kinds of reasons has both Christ and his Apostles Lu, 23. 31.
used, 1. Pet. 4. 17 etc.
neither can our adversaries deuie, but that the writings of the new Testament,
are more excellent then the writings of the old.

The other part of our argument is proved by the express words of Christ: for
so far was it from Christ, that he would reprove the Jews for searching the
Scriptures: but did himself rather reason after that manner.

The 7. place.
That ye may learn by us: that no man presume above that which is written, 1.
Cor. 4.
etc.

If we ought not to presume to be wise above that which is written: The
Sylogisme
and the principles of faith, appertain unto true and perfect wisdom: then
truly ought we to be contented with the scriptures in causes and matters of
faith.

The antecedent is true:

Therefore the consequent cannot be denied.

The first part of our Argument is manifest of it self: The exaaminatio^ of
the Silogisme
The other part is proved by the place of the Apostle.

Yet here I must also confess, that this place of the Apostle Paul, is
otherwise expounded of certain new Writers (to wit) of those things, which
Paul himself had before written. The which sense if any man be willing to
follow, then thus make we our argument: If Paul called back the Corinthians
unto his own writings, how much more then ought we to be called back unto the
writings of the whole Scriptures? But because the old writers whom our
adversaries follow most, do expound this place of Paul generallye, I had
rather to frame mine argument from the interpretation of them. There may be
also framed an evident and plain sylogisme in the second mode of the second
figure, flatlye denieng their assertion in this sort.

Whosoever groundeth any Article of faith upon traditions not written, takes
upon him to be wise above that which is written. An evident argument


But no man truly obeying the Christian and Apostolic, doctrine, does take
upon him, to be wise above that which is written.

Ergo, No man truly obeying the christian and apostolic doctrine, does ground
any principle of faith upon traditions not written.

The 8. Place.
Many other things did Jesus which are not written in this book: John. 20.
but these things are written that you might believe that Jesus Christ is the
son of God, and in believing you might have everlasting life through his name.

If the Apostles and Evangelists wrote those things which seemed sufficient and
necessary, The argument.
that we which believe may have eternal life: then truly the Articles of our
faith, are to be grounded upon the Scriptures, and not upon traditions which
are unwritten, which our adversaries term Apostolic.

The Antecedent is true.

And therefore the consequent cannot be denied.

The truth of the first part of our Argument is manifest, The explication of
the argument.
except peradventure any man would go about to think himself wiser then
either the Apostles or Evangelists: the which God forbid that any man should
do. The consequent is proved by the words of John.

The 9. place.
The law of the Lord is perfect, giving life and true wisdom unto man: yea,
Psa. 19
the law of the Lord is right and just, Psa. 119
more precious then gold, Deu. 4.
sweeter then honnie: the wisdom and understanding of the Church, Psa. 4.
and he is blessed that meditateth or occupies himself therein.

If the scriptures of the old testament in their kind were perfect, The
argument.
because therein is contained true wisdom, and made those blessed even as
many as willingly and constantly did meditate therein: then truly after
that the writings of the Apostles were joined unto the old testament, (the
which writings of the Apostles do explicate and teach the verity and truth of
the said old testament) then (I say) by good right and consequence the whole
scriptures both of the old and new testament, may be called perfect, as that
which perfectly contains all necessary doctrine for the church of Christ.

The antecedent is true: The explication of the argument.
And therefore the consequence must be also true.

The antecedent is manifest enough of it self. The minor is proved by the
recited places. For by the name and title of the law, is often understood ye
whole scriptures of the old testament, as it is manifest by the Apostle Paul
Gal. 4. ver. 21. as also the circumstance of the before alleged place does most
manifestly prove. Gal. 4. 21.
Now from these and such other places we will gather a true definition of the
holy Scriptures after this sort.

A definition of holy Scripture. Heb. 1. 1 2. Ti. 3. 16 Heb 1. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 21
Lu. 1. 3 1. John. 1. 1. Ioh. 20. 31 etc.
The holy scripture is the word of God given by divine inspiration from God,
and by the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, (moved by the spirit of God)
was written in the books Canonical of the old and new testament, that the
verity and truth of God, might be taken and set free from the oblivion and
corruptings of men, and that the Church might be perfectly instructed and
confirmed in all those things, the knowledge and faith whereof is necessary to
salvation.

This definition is most perfectly and substancially true. The explicating of
the definition. 2. Pe. 3. 1. 2 Col. 3. 1 Pro. 30. 6 Esa. 8. 20 etc. Psa. 1. and
19. and 1. 9 etc, 2. Tim. 3 16. 17. 2. Pe. 1. 12 Ioh. 20. 31 2. Tim. 3 15 John.
5. 39
For it stands upon ye Genus and difference, and contains al those causes,
both which ye Logitia^s say belong to ye Subiectu^, as also y^ belong unto ye
Attributu^. And especially it contains ye efficie^t cause, under ye which is
added ye instrume^tal, and the^ ye final cause, which two causes in such kind
of matters, are especially to be considered. The spirit of god is ye cause
efficie^t, who used ye prophets and apostles as instruments: ye co^i^eruatio^
of ye truth, and confirmation of the church, is the end wherefore ye word of
God was put in writing: so this definition stands upon his full parts: and
the thing defined, and the definition, do both agree together. Now from this
definition as from a most perfect and true ground, we make thus our
demonstratiue argument.

Whatsoever is the word of God given by inspiration from God, The argument.
and written by the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, by the motion of Gods
spirit, etc. that contains all principles necessary to christian faith. But
the holy Scripture is the word given by divine inspiration, etc. Ergo the
holy Scriptures contain al principles necessary to the christian faith.

This argument is most evident and necessary, and stands grounded upon
grounds of the former places, and contains the verity and truth of our whole
question. Wherefore does the Scriptures contain all these things, the
knowledge and faith whereof are necessary unto salvation. Truly because the
word of God was written by the Prophets and Apostles to this end, that the
Church should be perfectly instructed, etc. Again, whatsoever is spoken of the
one party may be said of the other. The unfolding of ye former reason.
Furthermore, if any do ask what these things be, the knowledge and faith
whereof are necessary to salvation? I answer, the Scriptures. And again when
I name the Scriptures, I name all those things, the knowledge whereof is
necessary to salvation. The like also may be said touching the ground of our
argument, the which is the definition of the Scripture, as is before said:
wherefore this our demonstration and argument is most manifest, and has brought
the truth of our opinion out of all question or doubt: to wit, that the holy
scriptures contain all those principles necessary to Christian faith, the
which was our purpose to prove.

The third Chapter.
NOW after that the truth of our opinion is made manifest by the former
demonstrations and affirmative disputation as at the first we did determine: A
disputation confutatiue, vherein is refelled or confuted the opinion or
judgment of ye Papists,
so will we now come unto the negative disputation, which is to refell and
refute the opinion of our adversaries. For although ye truth being made
manifest, ye falsehoode must needs be confuted and overthrown, and by this
our affirmative disputation we have manifestly proved, yt the scriptures do
contain all those things, the knowledge and faith whereof is necessary to
salvation: yet notwithstanding this ou^ ^egatiue disputation proceeds as
rising of necessary consequence, which is this: That there is nothing to be
sought for out of the holy scriptures, the knowledge and faith whereof, is
necessary to salvation. And by force of the consequence, traditions not
written by the Apostles, are not to be received in any Article and principle
of faith: yet notwithstanding, it comes to pass (I know not by what means)
that we are more delighted in the confuting of error and falsehoode, then in
confirming the truth. Wherefore I could not let slip this kind of disputation,
whereby the reader may be thoroughly confirmed in the knowledge of ye truth. This
therefore is the opinion of our adversaries which repugneth with ours, even as it
were Ex Diametro, to wit. That the holy scriptures, do not co^tain al things,
the knowledge and faith whereof is necessary to salvation. The which error we
thus confute.

If Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, The first argument against
papistical traditions
did always confirm the principles of faith by the Scriptures, and not by
unwritten traditions: and our adversaries on the contrary part will confirm
the principles of faith very seldom by the Scripture, but most vsualli^a^y
unwritten traditions, then truly our a^^ersaries do otherwise teach the
Church, then either did Moses, the Prophets, Christ, or the Apostles.

The Antecedent is true,

And so is the consequent.

And by force of the consequent our adversaries are not to be allowed in ye
manner of instructing ye church. The unfolding of ye former reason.
The antecedent is true: and the co^seque^t is proved by this inductio^,
collected from places of holy scripture.

Moses does call them back to the law written, as S. Paul does interpret
it. Deu. 27. Gal. 3


The same Moses, Deu. 31
commands the law written to be published before all the people.

Joshua exhorts the Israelits, Iosu. 23
that they do those things which are written in the book of the law.

In the time of Iosia king of Israel, 2. Kin. 23.
the people swear to observe those things which were written in the law.

The Prophets each where call the Israelites, Esa, 8.
to the writings of Moses.

After the people returned from the captivity, Neh^m, 8.
the law of Moses was recited: and the worshipping of God was taken from that
law written.

Christ bids the^ search the Scriptures. John. 5. Mat. 22.


Christ speaking to the (...) says, ye err, because ye know not the
Scriptures.

They have Moses and the Prophets, Lu. 16.
let them hear them.

And Christ opened the understanding of the Apostles, Lu. 24.
that they might understand the Scriptures.

Paul preached Christ, alleging the law and the Prophets. Act. 26.


Appollos reproves the Jews and proves that Jesus is Christ by the
Scriptures. Act. 28. etc.


The Thessalonians or chief of Beraea are praised, Act. 18.
because they searched the Scriptures, Act. 17.
whether it were so, yea, or no, as Paul had preached.

And thus I conclude, that I may not bring in all those places of Scripture,
which Christ and the Apostles most often times alleged.

This kind of induction is most firm and cannot be refelled by any argument.
And ye force of ye conseque^t to what end it is directed does manifestly
appear, for ye prophets and apostles are ordained of god, to be instructers of
ye church, and were inspired by the holy Ghost. And Christ himself is the most
perfect doctor of the Church, whereby we see yt they which teach ye church of
Christ other wise then Christ himself, his Apostles and Prophets have taught:
that is, not laieng those foundations which they laid, but other: that they
instruct the Church of Christ amiss. But our adversaries teach otherwise,
inasmuch, as they call ye church not to the Scriptures alone, as is before
said: but to traditions not written. And out of the former argument, there
arises this conclusion.

If the Apostles (who although they were endued with the spirit of God) and
taught by mouth, The second argument against traditions.
yet notwithstanding did refer themselves unto the Prophetical scriptures:
then a great deal more ought our adversaries to refer their principles of
doctrine, unto the holy Scriptures. And since they do not so: they are not to
be heard.

The antecedent is true:

And therefore the consequent must be true.

The antecedent is manifest by comparison: The explication of the argument.


And the truth of the consequent is confirmed in the former argument.

If all things be not contained in the scriptures, the knowledge and faith
whereof, The third argument against traditions,
is necessary to salvation, then it follows, that the spirit of God did not
accomplish his effect, when he gave the scriptures unto the Church.

But the consequent is most false and blasphemous:

So likewise is the antecedent.

The consequent of the former propos^tion was proved, when we went to search
out the causes of the scriptures in ye second chapter of this our disputation,
The unfolding of the argument.
where we affirmed yt the word of God was to this end and purpose committed to
writing, that it might be freed and delivered from the corruption of man, and
that it might help the memory of the godly, and finally, that the Church might
more and more be instructed and confirmed in those things, the knowledge and
faith whereof, is necessary to salvation. Now, if all those things be not
contained in the scriptures, then truly it follows, y^ the spirit of God did
not perfectly, but in part accomplish his effect: the which God forbid. And
certainly, if you grant this, (which cannot be denied) that the scriptures
were given unto the church not rashly nor in vain, but by the great providence
and wisdom of God: then I urge this and say: If the scriptures were given by
God, that the word of god should be set free and delivered from the corruption
of men, I pray you would the spirit of God then, have some certain things
necessary to salvation to be set free from the corruption of men, and some
things not? If the Scriptures were given to help the memory of the godly: was
it then given in part only? or shall we say, that of those things which were
necessary to salvation, that some things are to be committed to memory, and
some things not? or if the memory of those things could have been kept and
preserved without the scriptures, to what end were the Scriptures? for the
spirit of God does nothing in vain. If the Scriptures were written, to the
end our memory might be helped, who then can deny, that our memory must be
helped by the Scriptures, in all things necessary to salvation? Finally, and
to conclude, If the Scripture were given by the spirit of God, that thereby
the Church might be the better instructed, why then should not the Scriptures
have in them al those things, which are necessary to salvation? Wherefore,
what starting holes so ever our adversaries seek: yet the truth of our former
proposition remains: to wit, that they go about to frustrate the spirit of
God, of his effect in giving the Scriptures, except in them be contained
whatsoever is necessary to our salvation.

The consequent no Christian can deny.

If the Apostles were led into all truth by the spirit of God, The 4. argument
against traditions.
as it appears Ioh. 16, and wrote not all things that were necessary to
salvation, that came to pass either because they ought not to write them, or
because they would not write, or because they could not.

But to affirm that they ought not, is false: that they would not, is absurd:
and that they could not, is the part of one that disputes like an Atheist.

Wherefore the antecedent is false, absurd, and altogether from Divinity.

The consequence of the former proposition is manisest, The opening of the
argument,
except our adversaries can bring any thing to the contrary. For we dispute not
here of every man, but only of ye Apostles, whom ye spirit of God governed,
and directed in the writing of the Gospel.

The minor is manifest, except our adversaries can prove what reason there is
of dissimilitude or unlikeness in things not only like, but also even being
the self same. And this truly is most certain and most undoubted amongst all
Christians: that if the Apostles wrote not all things which are necessary to
salvation, that it was because they ought not so to do. Qur adversaries of
necessity, must prove some one of these causes, or else them what was the
cause, that ye Apostles ought to write some things which were necessa^ie to
salvation, and to omit other some, or else truly yt the Apostles themselves
have by manifest and plain words testified, that they have not written all
things which appertain unto Christian faith and Religion, for good and
necessary causes, which God himself would not that men should know. But
undoubtedly our adversaries can prove neither of these, and therefore the
conclusion of this argument, rests most firm and unviolable.

If the Canonical books of the old Testament, The fifte argument against
traditions
do contain all things which appertained unto the old testament. And the
Canonical books of the new Testament, do not contain all such things, as
do appertain unto the new testament: then does it follow, that the old
testament is more perfect then the new.

The consequence is false:

And therefore the antecedent is false.

The consequent of the mayor is thus proved. The unfolding of the argument 2.
Cor. 3. 14


The books of the old testament are called the old testament of Paul where
as he does entreat of the reading of the old testament. To this may be
added, that which Moses says: Deu. 29. 21
The covenant (says he) which is written in the book of the law: 2. Reg. 23.
and in the divine and holy history, there is mention made of the book of the
covenant. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that the old Testament, (that is
the writings of the old testament) is agreeable to his title. For nothing can
be allea^ged besides yt scripture, which may rightly be said to appertain to
the old testament: to wit, the knowledge whereof were necessary to the
salvation of those godly fathers, that lived under the old testament. Now if
you say not the like of the new testament, who does not see that the new
testament is more weak and unperfect then the old? For it is as much as if
you would thus expound the title: The new testament: (that is to say), Some
certain things, appe^taining to the new testament. The which how absurd it is*
I suppose I shall not need with (...) more arguments to prooud, for no (...)
has at any time heretofore affirmed; that the Scriptures and writings of
th^^ we (...) not so perfect, as the writings at the old. Wherefore we will
(...) more to the pr^uing of our (...)*

If the Scripture of the new testament be a covenant, The 6 argument against^
traditions
will, or testament, and nothing must be added unto a will or Testament, then
truly it is not lawful to a^de any thing to the writings of the new
Testament.

The Antecedent is true:

And the consequent is the like.

And by the force of the same consequent, the traditions not w^tten of the
Apostles, are not to be received.

The antecedent is manifest.

The minor does contain two parts the (...) part is mainfest and proved by
the very title, The trial of the argument
to wit, y^ it is a will or a testament, neither needs the^e any other
probation. The latter part is proved by Paul, when he says: Gal. 3.
That it is not lawful to add unto a man's Testament: and from thence he
gathers that we ought not to add unto the divine Testament of God. But if
ye interpret it to be a testament, and not a rouenant: then our conclusion
remains of more sorce: for dares any man add unto the Will and Testament
of a man? The which if it be not lawofull to do in the Will and Testament of a
man, how much less then is it lawful so to do in the Testament of God.

If till the later end and consumation of the world, The 7. argument against
traditions
we ought not to look for any other books canonicalt, besides these which we
have already in the writings of the old and new Testament: Then it follows
that the Scripture is absolute and pefect in every part.

The antecedent is true,

And therefore so is the consequent: and by force of the said consequent the
Scripture has no need of any traditions not written.

The Mayor is evident enough, especially since God is the author of the said
scripture, The explication of the argument.
which would not suffer the same during the world to remain imperfect, because
he being the author is most perfect.

The Minor our adversaries themselves cannot deny, for they are not ignorant
that the time (now after Christ is exhibited and given to the world) is called
the fullness of time, as the Apostle says.

If traditions not written are as well to be received as the Scriptures (as our
adversaries would have it) then must we believe the writings of the Doctors
with the like persuasion of faith, The 8. argument against tradition^
as we believe the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

But the consequent is false,

And therefore the Antecedent cannot be true: and by force of the consequent
traditions not written, are not to be received in matters of faith.

The consequent of the mayor proposition is thus proved. For so often as our
adversaries propoue unto the traditions of men, The explication of the argument.
which they call Apostolic, we deny that they are the traditions of ye
Apostles: then they recite Tertulian, Ireneus, and especially one Clement, I
know not who, which of late years has stepped out of the Monkish Cloisters:
all these Doctors, say our adversaries, affirm the traditions to be the
traditions of ye Apostles. But if such kind of traditions are to be received with
like authority with the scriptures, then it follows, that with like
constancy of faith we must believe that those traditions are the traditions of
the ((...), even: as we believe that the hoye Scripture was ^witten by the
commandment of the holy Ghost: The which if it be true, then it follows
again, that we must even give the like credit to the writings of Tertulian,
Irenaeus, and Clement, as we give to the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles. But let it be that sons demands why I do believe that the
Apostles did preach by mouth, that Christ was (...) for our saluation^ I
^^^swere, that I believe because, that the (...) and Euangelis^e^ (...) so
written. But if I should^ demand our (...) wherefore they believe that the
Apostl^^ ta^ght those (...) by mouth whi^^ do appertain with their (...)*
then they* will answer, they do (...) it because some of the old Doctors
(...) believe the writings of the (...), with the (...) bele the (...) Apostles
I do not here dispute (...) the mind and opinion of the old fathers, of which
we will speak in his proper place, but here only I am willing to ma^^e the
consequent of our former proposition, somewhat more plain.

The Minor is manifest: for what godly man did ever make the writings of the
old fathers equivalent with the writings of ye Apostles? Naie; I suppose our
adversaries themselves will not say so, except they be altogether unmindful
of their own Canon taken out of Augustine. Can. ^ go solis Did. 9.
And the force of the conseque^t which we have added unto the end of the
argument is manifest, as it shall appear in the argument here following.

We may not believe any traditions touching the which there remains no
certainty. The 9. argument against traditions
But all traditions not written, the which our adversaries bring forth are even
such, that there remains no certainty touching them: Ergo we may not
believe any traditions not written, which our adversaries bring or allege.

And by force of the consequent all traditions are to be rejected and not to
be received in causes of faith. The opening of the argument.


The truth of the Mayor proposition is manifest of himself.

And the minor is proved by these inductions following.

Clemens Alexandrinus affirms That the Apostles delivered certain secrets
unto some men as traditions from the apostles, and cites this place of Paul.
1. Lib. 1. stro (...). li. 5.
Cor. 2. We speak wisdom amongst those which are perfect.

Tertulian contrariwise, Li. de prescri.
refelleth that error with most grave arguments.

And Irenaeus says, Iraen. lib. 13. ca. 2.
That this was the opinion of the old Heretics, and answers that place of
Paul which those Heretics did corrupt.

Many do attribute the whole cannon of the Mass unto the Apostles.

Contrariwise, Saint Hierome and some other of the old Fathers affirm, that
the Apostles were content with the Lords prayer.

Epiphanius says, Aduer. he res. in Epilog.
That the Apostles did command both thursdaie and fridaie to be fasted through
the whole year, and that in the whole time of Lent only to use bread, salt,
and water.

Contrariwise, Augustine says, That it was never determined by Christ nor his
apostles, what days we should fast.

And Irenaeus writing to Eusebius says. That that fast of Lent was diversely
used in times past, Epist. 86. li. 5. c. 26.
when some fasted one day, some two, some more: neither does he call it a
tradition of the Apostles, but a custom of a simple and private institution.

Also Tertulian when he had made his revolt from the Church unto Montanus,
reckoning up the objections of the Catholics, which they used against the
Montanists: Because ( says he) we observe the eating of dry meats, they
say, that the constituted fasting being worn out, Lib. de. (...)
touching any other, we may fast at our own will, and not by the
commandment of any law or discipline, etc.

And in that controversy touching Easter day, which a long time in times past
troubled the Church: Soc, lib. 5. c. 22
those of the West ( says Socrates) referred their institution to Peter and
Paul, and those of the East, to other of the Apostles: but neither of the^
brought forth any certain or approved scripture for the proof thereof: and
therefore I think it was a custom.

Tertulian says, Adu. Mar. li. 1. and de cor. (...)
That by traditions of the Apostles, milk and honnie was wont to be poured
into the mouth of the infant in baptism.

And Saint Hierome makes mention only of wine and not of honnie, In cap. 55.
Es^ei cont. Lucifer,
and calls it custom.

Our adversaries contrariwise observe not themselves those rites and
ceremonies, although they would be accounted obseruers of the traditions which
the Apostles left.

Tertulian in the former place makes mention of oblations and offerings for
birth days, As before.
to be amongst the rites and ceremonies which came from the Apostles.

Contrariwise, the Church left this custom after the Nicene counsel, Tertu,
as before.
for that it sauoured of Paganism.

Many of the old Fathers referred these things unto the Apostles: first, that
it was not lawful to kneel when they prayed on the Sundaie: And again, that
it was not lawful to deck the head with garlands and flowers, and many such
like things.

Contrariwise our adversaries themselves think these things may be observed
because they put garlands about the necks and heads of their Images, etc.

Ciprian witnesses, Ser de (...).
that the Eucharist or Communion was wont to be given to infants.

And contrariwise our adversaries themselves think not this expedient to be
done.

Irenaeus says, that by tradition Christ suffered when he was almost fifty
years old.

Contrariwise the Church has most constantlye refused that saying.

Clemens refers his Canon to the Apostles, making them authors thereof.

On the other side even the Church of Rome her self has a long time rejected
those Canons, In Cannon Apost.
as if they had been forged by heretics.

Furthermore, Zepherius Bishop of Rome, Cont, Can. Did. 16 ibi, C^placuit
ibi.
has received sixty of the same Canons, and after the sixth Synod received
85, etc.

Finally, that we may leave infinite of such examples, and come unto our
adversaries, those things which they refer unto the Apostles, histories
attribute to others, as Lent to Telephorus, etc. So that now by these
examples, the truth of our minor proposition is made manifest.

It the old heretics for the most part, (when the word of God failed them)
did ^he unto traditions, The 10. argument against traditions
and falsely fathered them upon the Apostles: and our adversaries do thee same
now at this time. Then truly in this point, they are to be accounted rather
among the heretics, then with the true Catholics.

The Antecedent is true,

Therefore the consequent is also true.

The Mayor proposition is manifest of humselfe. The vnfol^ding of the argu^ment
And the Minor is thus proved. They which urged the ceremonies of the law,
did shroude themselves under traditions, which they called Apostolic, as the
old Doctors do testify. And in the Acts of the Apostles, Act, 15. 24
chap. 15. ver. 24. Luke seemth to touch the like. 2. Cor. 11. 13
And Paul in 2. Corint. chap. 11. verse. 13. says, That the old heretics
were wont falsely to take upon them the names and titles of the Apostles: And
in another place he exhorts the Thessalonians, 2. The, 2. 2
cha. 2. ver 2. not to suffer themselves to be seduced from ye faith, neither
by word, neither yet by epistle, as coming (says he) from us* The which last
words I do not so restrain unto this word Epistle, but refer it unto that that
they should not be deceived by word: for there is no doubt, but that the
Heretics would often times boast that they had heard those things which they
did teach, even from the Apostles: whereby they might get unto themselves
credit. Li. 3. ca. 2 Li. 3. cap. vlti,
This thing does Ireneus testify, lib. 3. cap. 2. And Eusebius declares ye
one Papias did forge his errors, as though (says he) they came from
unwritten traditions. I will not here speak any thing of the Jews Calaba,
which maintain by their dreams unwritten traditions, as the chiefest pillar of
their religion, as Elias, in Thisbith: as in the Radical Kara Baruck appears.

If the traditions which repugne the writings of the Apostles are not
Apostolyke, The 11. argument against traditions
and the traditions of our adversaries are altogether such: then truly the
traditions of our adversaries are not Apostolic.

The Antecedent is true,

Wherefore the consequent is also true.

The verity of the Mayor proposition is most plain, The expou^ding of the
argument.
or else it would follow that the Apostles did not write by the same spirit by
which they did speak, the which God forbid that we should once think. The
Minor shall appear by this induction, which the reader shall most castly find
in the writings of the Doctors: whereby it is manifest, that those principles
of Religion in controversy between us, which they refer unto the unwritten
traditions of the Apostles, do manifestly repugne with the writings of the
Apostles* so that whether soever our adversaries turn them, they shall be
constrained to refer their principles of Religion, unto the writings of the
Apostles. For I will urge the former ground and argument: that if those
principles repugne with the writings of the Apostles, then they are not
Apostolic: If they confess that they do repugne, then have we our purpose:
if they deny it, then of necessity they must turn to the writings of the
Apostles, that these their opinions, whereof the question is, may be tried by
them, whether they repugne with the writings of the Apostles, yea or nay:
whereby it comes to pass, that our adversaries (after many errors) will
they or nill they, must needs return again within the compass of the
scriptures. But least we should be ouerlong in these our arguments, we will
comprehend the sum of all our former arguments in this one sylogisme.

If that these Errors do follow the opinion, The 12. argument and sum of all
that has been said against traditions.
of our adversaries touching traditions not written, to wit, that they
otherwise teach in the Church, then the Prophets and Apostles have taught: that
the spirit of God has not accomplished his effect in publishing of the
scriptures: that the Apostles neither ought, neither could, or would write all
things necessary to salvation: that the writings of the old testament, is more
perfect, then the writings of the new: that the holy Bible is not correspondent
to the title, which is a Testament (if it be lawful for men to add to the
will of God): that the holy scriptures given after Christ's incarnation, and
afterward the writings of the Apostles are not absolute in every point. And
that the same credit must be given unto the writings of the old Doctors,
which is given unto the scriptures of God: that we must believe those things
whereof there is no certainty: that the cause of the old heretics was not a
little helped which leaned unto unwritten traditions: and finally that the
Apostles did not speak with that spirit with the which they did write.

If (I say) these former absurdities do follow the opinion of our
adversaries touching Traditions not written. Then truly the mind and opinion
of our adversaries touching traditions not written, is of all godly and true
Catholics to be utterly refused and rejected.

The antecedent is true:

And therefore the consequent cannot be false.

The mayor proposition cannot be denied. The trial of this argument


The minor is made manifest in this our former negative disputation: wherein we
have overthrown the opinion of our adversary.

And here we end the third Chapter: and now we will proceed to the wiping
away of all the objections which our adversaries can make.

The 4. Chapter.
IN our former disputation we have confuted the opinion of our adversaries, and
have even as it were with our finger pointed out their manifold errors in
which they must needs remain, so long as they do obstinately strive for
these their traditions, which they call unwritten. And we affirm, that they
were never written of the Apostles, neither yet to be written of any others.
But because they maintain their opinion by diverse and sundry arguments, so to
hide the falsehood thereof, and to deceive the simple: I think it very needful
to answer all their arguments, so many as we know. First of all therefore,

The doctrine of the Gospel was not written with ink, The first objection.
but with the spirit of God, not in Tables of stone, but in the heart.

Ergo, we must return unto the doctrine taught by the mouth of the Apostles.
Neither must we cleave so precisely unto the writings of the Apostles.

The antecedent is manifest by Jeremy, chap. 31.

This is the covenant which I will make with the house of Israel, lere. 3 ^.
I will put my law into their mind, and will write it in their heart, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people.

Again Paul. 2. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 3.
It is manifest ( says he) that you are the Epistle of Christ ordained by us,
not written with ink, but with the spirit of the living god: not in tables of
stone, but in the fleshie tables of the heart.

That we may orderly answer unto each part: The aunsvvere.
First we will try the antecedent, then will we come to the consequent: and
this order will we keep, to help the memory of the reader.

Now, will I answer the antecedent, concerning y^ which, I see they cannot
well agree, no not the Popish schoolmen among themselves: for when the Apostle
unto the Heb. 8. Heb, 8.
had set down a difference between the old and new testament, he brings
forth this place above recited of Jeremy, where the schoolmen begin to
question, what should be the cause wherefore it is said, that the gospel should
be written in the mind? Some bring forth this reason: for because the grace of
God cannot be written. Of which opinion is Thomas, whom ye whole swarm of
schoolmen and Questionarye Doctors do most esteem. But some had rather this
to be the cause: for that ye doctrine of the Law, began from writing, (for by
and by the Tables of the Law being written, were publyshed): but the doctrine
of the gospel began from the preching of Christ and his Apostles. Touching the
which controversy, that we may not wander out of our determined limits) let
the Reader look Lira his eight chapter in the Epistle to the Hebrews chap. 10.

But for as much as appertains to the former Objection, we say, that
neither Jeremy nor Paul do there deny the writings of the new Testament,
but that they only dispute there touching the esstcacie of the spiritual
gifts of the holy Ghost, which were far greater in the time of the new
Testament, then ever at any time before, loel. 2. Act. 2.
according to the Prophecy of Joel, which Peter expounds the second to the
Acts.

Wherefore those places must be understood by comparison: for otherwise it
would follow, that the law of God was not written in the mind and heart of
the godly, which lived in the time of the old Testament: which thing, these
places of Scripture, which here we allege do otherwise prove.

Esa. 51. Harken unto me, Esaias. 51.
ye which know justice, the people in whose heart is my law.

And Psa. 37. Psalm. 37.
The law of the Lord is in his heart. Also 51. Recreate a new heart within me O
God, Psalm. 11
and renew a right spirit within me. Also Deuteronomy. 30. Deu. 30
The Lord will circumcise the heart. And again Psalm. 1. Psa. 1.
His delight is in the law of the Lord, and does meditate therein day and
night. And in diverse other places, does David testify, that he has the law
of the Lord even as it were ingraffed within his mind. And finally, that I may
pass over many such like places, Pro. 3
when Solomon shows forth precepts out of the law of God, he bids that
they should be written in the tables of ye heart. And thus much touching the
Anteredent, where our adversaries commit most great error, Taking their
argument from yt which is in some sort granted, to be granted generally. The
errors of ye objection
reasoning: Secundum quid ad id quod impliciter. Now therefore I deny their
consequent, the errors of the which I will perticularly recite. The first
error is, that ye consequent cannot follow: for it follows not to say the
doctrine of the law was written in Tables, ergo the doctrine of the Gospel is
not written at all. Again, the Gospel is written in the heart, ergo it is not
written in Tables: Who sees not that these are frivolous arguments, and that
their consequents are false. Again, they bring in a new kind of reasoning and
reason from an universal affirmative, to a particular negative, for thus they
say. God wrote all the doctrine of the Gospel in the mind of the godly: Ergo
certain things appertaining unto the doctrine of the Gospel are not written
by the Apostles. The which kind of concluding even children would hiss at:
for of necessity thus they must reason. Nothing yt is written in the heart is
written in tables, but the whole doctrine of the Gospel is written in the
heart, ergo no part of the doctrine of the Gospel is written in tables. The
Mayor is so false that every man may see it.

The second error is, Falacia in figura dictionis, as ye Logitians term it,
The 2. error.
for they confound words of one signification, with those of diverse
significations: for, to write in tables is a proper kind of speech, but to
write in the heart, is a borrowed kind of speech, and therefore of diverse
significations, spoken by a Metaphore, and similitude: Whereby it comes to
pass, that Paul used another kind of speaking, when he said that the
Corinthians were his Epistle, (for he went forward with the argument he had
in hand) which was when false Apostles would have crept into the minds of the
Corinthians by Letters of commendations, then (says he) I have no need of such
Epistles, for you are mine epistle, for my labor and my diligence is manifest
toward you, even in the eyes of all men. For all see, and (as I may say) may
read in you the doctrine of Christ, which I have preached unto you: and to
conclude, this is the sum, that the Corinthians were so perfectly instructed,
and so well taught in the doctrine of ye gospel, yt they might well remain
therein. Whosoever thefore does gather by these words of ye apostle, that the
apostles did not write all things necessary to salvation, truly he may be
thought not to be well in his wits.

The third error is, for that they make the efficient cause to repugne with
the cause isntrumental. The 3. error.
For God is he who writes the Gospel in the heart: but Matthew, Paul, and
the rest, write the doctrine of the Gospel in tables, and were the instruments
of the spirit of God. Therefore Paul in that place said, that the Corinthians
were his Epistle: and the epistle of Christ ministered says he by us, Lo
here you may see that he makes distinction between his own ministry and
the efficacy of the holy Ghost. Wherefore our adversaries conclude as if one
should reason thus. God has restored a sick person unto his former health,
ergo the Physician prescribed nothing, gave him nothing to drink, neither yet
used any outward remedies. Now if this conclusion be of any force, then this
must needs follow, GOD wrote the Gospel in the mind, ergo the Apostles wrote
not the whole doctrine of the Gospel in Tables.

The fourth error is, The 4. error.
because the consequent agrees not with their antecedent: for if in the
antecedent they oppone ye invisible Scriptures unto ye visible, then truly
they would bring this to pase, ye one scripture being, ye other cannot be: for
unto what other end do they apply their opposition opponing ye invisible
scriptures to the visible, but yt they may conclude somewhat? But in the
consequent they come back again and say, that certain things are not written
necessary to salvation, when as they should have said (if so be they would
reason like logitians, as before it is showed, y^ there was nothing written
necessary to salvation. But the manifest truth in this point has amassed them.
And that they may see how vnhansomely they go to work in their ^pposition: I
demand this, whether the faithful have not all those things written in their
hearts, which are written in Tables, being necessary to faith and salvation?
Truly I think yes. For Saint John says, John. 20.
These things are written that ye might believe, and in believing have eternal
life. So far void is it therefore, that the one being, the other should be
clean taken away: but rather the one is a help to the other: to wit, that
the visible writings of the Apostles, is a furtherance unto the invisible
writings of the spirit of God.

The 5. Error is, The fifth error.
Secundum ignorantiam Elenchi, as the Schoolmen say; because they put in
other words, then the Apostle Paul used. For thus Paul says, Ye are our
Epistle not written with ink, but with the spirit of God: for he speaks of
the invisible Scriptures, neither does he therefore utterly take away the
visible, as his Epistle which he then wrote to the Cornthians is witness. But
our adversaries reason far otherwise, for they say, the Epistle not written
in Tables, but delivered by hand: the which is far both from the words and
mind of the Apostle.

The absurdities which follovveth ye former objection
Now let us overthrow the consequence of our adversaries, being full of
absurdities and without reason.

If we must not absolutely stick unto the writings of the Apostles, because God
has written the Gospel in the minds of the godly: the should it follow,
that the writings of the Apostles are not necessary for godly men: If all
things (as they say) are not written which are necessary to salvation, to
what end then appertains the scriptures? For all things (say they) that are
necessary to salvation, God has written in the minds of the godly. But this
argument cannot be concluded in one part only: for either it is universally
true, or else universally false, and so the whole authority of the scriptures
must be utterly abolished, the which God forbid.

Again, If this consequence be of any force, that is to say, we must have
recourse to unwritten traditions, because GOD has written the gospel in the
minds of the godly: then would it follow that the spiritual efficacy of God
should be confounded with the external and visible ministry of the Apostles,
and that traditions delivered by mouth, are the invisible Scriptures of God,
the which the holy Ghost did imprint in the mind of the faithful, the which
thing is most false.

Again, if they make any good conclusion out of that place of Jeremy, that
all things are not written that appertain to the Gospel, because under the
new testament God does write his law in the minds of the faithful, when as it
was written in tables under the old testament: Ergo by the force of this
opposition it follows, that God in the old testament did only remit sin in
part, and that he was the God of the Israelites but in part also: because that
Jeremy adds, saying, that it will come to pass that in the new testament God
will remit the sins of the people, and be their God. The which is too too
absurd and contrary to the opinion of all men.

Now finally let us turn this argument of our adversaries upon themselves, The
objection is turned upon the adversaries.
and say thus.

All the laws of God are written in the hearts and minds of the faithful, as
our adversaries seem to affirm by the former places cited: (for Paul says,
it is not written with ink, but with the spirit of God) but none of the
traditions of our adversaries are written in the minds of the godly, for they
are written with ink, and not with the spirit of God: Ergo none of our
adversaries traditions are the laws of God.

So that hereby it is most manifest as I suppose how foolish or rather no
argument at al, The correcting of ye former objection
this argument of our adversaries is, y^ which that we may correct, we must
say with the word of God, that the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists,
does contain all that doctrine of the Gospel, the which the Apostles and
Evangelists did teach and afterward put in writings, the which also God by his
spirit did write in the minds of the godly, and thus much touching this
objection. And now we come unto the second.

The Church of Christ for the space of 20. years wanted the writings of the
Apostles, The 2. objection
and was only contented with their traditions: Ergo the writings of the
Apostles are not absolutely necessary unto salvation, neither is it needful
that al things appertaining to the doctrine of the Gospel, should be contained
in the writings of the Apostles.

The Antecedent is manifest by reading of histories.

Although I do not meddle much with the antecedent, The aunsvvere
neither do dispute touching the number of years: yet would I that the
readers should call to their remembrance, that the Church wanted not the
scriptures, before that the Gospel was extant by the writings of the Apostles.
Yea, that Christ himself and the Apostles did preach the Gospel out of the
writings of the Prophets, as before in his proper place we have showed.

Wherefore the antecedent of our adversaries is no other thing then a
foundation laid upon sand or water: so that the conclusion which they bring
cannot stand.

Therefore I deny the consequent, The error of the objection.
for the error is (as the Logitians term it) Secundum ignorantiam Elenchi:
for they change the form of affirmation, and come from the time past, unto
the time present, and the time to come. The Church (say they) wanted the
gospel. Be it so, although the writings of the Prophets to contain the
promises of the Gospel, insomuch that the Apostles did altogether depend
upon the said writings of the Prophets: add here unto also (if it please you)
that the writings of the Apostles, were not altogether necessary: what do you
hereof conclude? That they are not now therefore necessary, or hereafter
shall not be: What man is so ignorant to grant that? This is the difference y^
the Apostles ought first to have preached by mouth before they committed any
thing to writing: And when the Apostles did preach the gospel, they did then
publish by mouth those things which afterward they wrote: But since the
Apostles died and could not by mouth instruct the Church, without doubt their
writings are now so necessary unto us, as their preching by mouth was in those
days: in steed whereof their writings do now remain. An absourditie.
Let us bring them therefore to an absurdity. If the consequence of our
adversaries be of force or value: this is also of force or value, the Church of
the Isralites, not twenty years, but two thousand years, or somewhat more,
wanted the law written: therefore it was not necessary to the Church, that the
law should be written, or the law written contained not all those things ye
were necessary to ye doctrine of ye old testament. But this is very absurd?

Let us turn the argument of our adversaries against themselves after this
manner.

If God being perfect wise, The objection is returned.
has not suffered the church of Christ, long time to want the writings of the
Apostles, both that he might maintain the truth of the Gospel, as also he
might provide for the safegarde of his church: Ergo, these men are blasphemous
against the providence of god: which deny that all things are contained in the
apostolical writings, which are necessary to the doctrine of the Gospel.

For to what end would God by his divine providence, that the Apostles should
write the gospel, which they by mouth did preach? was it because they should
deliver an uncertain and imperfect doctrine? Furthermore, if at any time the
Church was contented with the preaching of the Apostles: to wit, in the first
primitive church: I beseech you why shall not she now at this time be
contented with the writings of the Apostles, yt which (as is before said) are
now in steed of the apostles prechings, rather then to run to the fained,
forged, and false traditions, which were never written by the Apostles.
Wherefore the argument of our adversaries is false, the which we thus correct.

In the first primitive Church the Apostles depending upon the writings of the
Prophets, The corction.
did first of all preach by mouth the Evangelical doctrine out of the writings
of the Prophets. And afterward, least that the doctrine by them preached,
should be either corrupted of men: or else, (such is the infirmity of man) the
remembrance thereof should by little and little slide out of the hearts of
men. That therefore they might leave yt holy verity, which they preached unto
us, most firm and sure, they committed ye same unto writings, by the working
of ye holy ghost, to be a pledge for ye posterities, which after should come.
Christ being co^uersant with his apostles. 40 days after his resurrection, 3.
Objection.
taught the^ those things which did appertain unto the kingdom of god, neither
are those things which he taught the^ now exta^t in any writings, Ergo al
things appertaining to the kingdom of god, are not written of the apostles: and
therefore are to be sought for in traditions not written of the apostles. The
antecedent is manifest in the first chap. of the Acts of the Apo. ver. 3

I admit the former part of the Antecedent, Answer
but I deny the latter, for the Error is in Fallacia petitionis principij, as
the Schoolmen say.

I therefore deny the consequence. The error
For from whence have they learned or rather dreamed, that those things which
Christ did then teach, were not written of the apostles: nay, that dream of
our adversaries, is plainly and manifestly refelled and confuted. Matthew. 28.
Mark. 16. Luke. 24. John. 20. and. 21. All which four Evangelists do show us
things which Christ then taught. And Luke in special words does witness ye
Christ did expound those things which were written of him: so unlikely it is
that he should call us back to traditions not written.

But let us bring them to an absurdity.

If Christ after his resurrection, did teach all those things which did
appertain unto the kingdom of God (for that seems to Absurdity.
be the very sense and meaning of the words of Saint Luke, which are these,
Act. the first, verse. 3. He spoke those things which appertain to the
kingdom of God. And those things which he then taught are not written of the
Apostles: Ergo, those things which are written of the Apostles, do not
appertain unto the kingdom of God. An absurd and a blasphemous argument.

Let us turn it against themselves thus. Objection returned.
If the Apostles were fully instructed and taught of Christ touching those
things which appertain to the kingdom of God: And the holy Ghost inspiring
them, did write touching the same kingdom of God: ergo they wrote all things
most fully, and omitted nothing whereby we should run to fetch any thing
from traditions not written.

That therefore we may now correct and amend this their error, we say, The
correcting of the former objection.
ye Christ to the end he might appoint his Apostles to be most perfect Doctors
and teachers of the Church, did after his resurrection for ye space of 40.
days, most diligently instruct them touching all those points of doctrine
which appertained unto the Gospel, that the Apostles being so instructed,
might not only declare the same doctrine by mouth, but also that they might
commit all those things unto writings which appertain to the kingdom of God
and salvation of his Church.

Paul confesses that he wrote in part Objection.
and not in whole, ergo Paul wrote not all things which are necessary to the
salvation of the Church. The antecedent is proved Romans 15. I have written unto
you brethren somewhat boldly (says he) after a sort, or as the very Greek
is: In part.

Now let us make plain the antecedent. Answer.
Paul says, that he has written to ye Romans in part, and this word In
part, the which the old interpreters have translated word by word, is not to
be joined with this vearbe, I have written: but this word More boldly: the
which the very order of the text, and the Greek phrase, do most manifestly
show: for otherwise the Apostle must have said [ Tomeros] and not have added
the Preposition [ Apio] the like phrase is manifest in ye 2. Co. 2. c. 5. ve.
which is thus: If any have caused sorrow, y^ same has not made me sorry, but
partly or in part, lest it should more grieve you al. I deny ye consequence of
their argument. The error is, The error
secundu^ figuram dictionis, and their consequence hangs not with their
antecedent. For Paul wrote not all to the Romans say they, ergo he wrote not
all necessary to salvation. But Paul wrote more the^ yt which he wrote to the
Romans: so here we see yt their conseque^t on co^clusio^ agrees not with
their first proposition. Paul wrote not all, ergo al things necessary to
salvation is not contained in the writings of the apostles. This is too too
absurd an argument and not worth the aunswering.

Christ said unto his Apostles, that he had many things to speak unto the^
which they could not bear away: 5. objection.
ergo the apostles have not written all things necessary to salvation. The
antecedent is proved in the 16. chapter of the Gospel after John.

Now touching their antecedent: Answer
first of al I do greatly wonder yt our adversaries do stick their ship upon
those rocks upon which ye heretics heertofore have made so great shipwracks.
S. Augustine in his Tract. 97. upon John, does testify, yt the heretics were
wont to take this place of John to color their errors, In Joan Tract. 97.
but Augustine himself does handle those words of Christ with so great
reverence, yt if they would hear him he would easily withdraw our adversaries
from their curiosity: for Augustine upon ye same says: Which of us can
declare those things, In loan Tract. 96.
that Christ would not speak: which of us can do that, for which there is not
sufficient authority of prophets or Apostles. Thus far August. But let
Augustine cease to inquire those things, for the Papists are now grown to this
point, yt they rehearse unto us things which Christ never spoke, and that with
great boldness, when as they commend and set forth unto men the rites and
ceremonies of their Mass, and other like trumperie. And I would to God that
they would be persuaded, that those their traditions, that is to say, the
foul filth of their errors and superstitions, could never flow from so pure a
fountain, to wit, as Christ. But let us return unto the exposition of ye same
place, the which we will take and draw from the very place it self. Christ
his words are these: John. 16
I have many things to speak unto you, but you cannot bear them away now,
but when the spirit of truth shall come, he shall lead you into all truth.
Wherefore that we may now use rather the words of Tertulian, then our own, we
say thus: De prae. haeret.
Christ said plainly, I have many things to say unto you, but yet adding
this, When the spirit of truth shall come, he shall lead you into all truth: he
heerby shows, that the Apostles were not ignorant of any thing, etc. Whereby
it comes to pass, that the Apostles taught all those things, which were
necessary to salvation: and as Tertulian says, did publish a sufficient rule
unto al men. Therefore Christ in this place means thus, yt then ye Apostles
should be fully and perfectly instructed, when they should be endowed with ye
visible and miraculous gifts of the holy ghost, and this our exposition is
easily gathered from John. Ioh. 14. 26
Now I come to the consequence or conclusion: in ye which truly I find not
any show of truth, nor any kind of taste of true divinity, for their error is
secundu^ ignora^tiam elenchi, The error
as the schoolmen say, inasmuch as y^ like proportion of time is not observed.
The Apostles before ye resurrection of Christ and before they had received the
miraculous gifts of ye holy ghost, were not able sufficiently to bear away al
things which appertained to ye mysteries of christian religion: ergo say they,
the Apostles were ignorant of those mysteries after the resurrection of Christ,
and after the receiving of the gifts of ye holy Ghost. Truly a very foolish
kind of reasoning. Christ had many things to declare unto them, ergo say our
adversaries, they must be those which ye papistical massing prists do fondly
dream of. No doubt of yt, their consequence hangs not with their antecedent,
therefore we may urge the^ to this absurdity.

If the Apostles wrote not all things which were necessary to salvation,
Absurdity.
because they could not bear away many things which Christ had to speak
before his resurrection, and before the sending of the Holy ghost, then would
it follow that the Apostles were not led into all truth by the holy ghost
after that he was sent unto them. The which is most false, and reproved even by
the place of John. For he says, And he shall lead you into all truth. Also it
would follow, that Paul did never declare the full counsel of god, the which
thing is most false, as Paul himself affirms Act 20. and 27.

Now therefore we will turn this their argument upon their own heads, saying
thus. The argument returned.
If the apostles wrote not al things because they could not bear away all
things, the^ truly did they never teach all things by mouth. And by force of
the consequent, this place of John can nothing appertain unto traditions of
the apostles not written.

But perchance they will say, that those mysteries of salvation, ye which
Christ hid from his apostles, were reveled to ye Bishops of Rome, y^ which if it
were true, then truly the Bishops of Rome, were no more to be called the
successors of the Apostles only, but those who far did exceed all the
Apostles: the which God forbid that we once should think.

Let us therefore amend this error in this sort, Error corrected
and affirm, that although the Apostles before the sending of the holy Ghost
were not so fully capable of the mysteries of God, which appertain unto the
doctrine of the Gospel: yet notwithstanding, after the comforter was sent, and
after they were led into all truth, it is most undoubted, that the whole truth
which appertains unto our salvation, was both taught by mouth by the
Apostles, as also published in writing.

Paul commends the Corinthians, because they kept his traditions. 6.
Objection.
Ergo, Paul taught many things by mouth which he wrote not.

The antecedent is proved. 1. Cor. 11. I praise you brethren (says Paul)
that you remember all my things, and keep the traditions or ordinance, as I
have delivered them unto you.

Now let us come to the examining of their Antecedent. Answer.
This place of Paul is expounded by Chrysostom and Ambrose, as also of many
other learned of this our time, not touching doctrine, but touching
ecclesiastical rytes and ceremonies. Others again confess indeed, that
Paul does here entreat of certain rytes both appertaining to good order and
comeliness. But yet notwithstanding, our adversaries deny, that these words
which they object unto us, are to be restrained to those rytes: and they rather
understand and interpret this place generally, because Paul here has spoken
it generally: for he says, I commend you brethren, for that you have
remembered all my things, etc.

Also they add this word Tradition here used indefinite or generally, scarce
sound in the writings of the Apostles, restrained or tied only to traditions
which appertain to orders and rytes of the Church. Wherefore they expound Paul's
words after this sort: You will keep in memory all those things which I have
taught, and therein truly I greatly praise you. But because amongst other things
which I delivered unto you, to be observed touching rytes and ceremonies in
your Ecclesiastical assemblies, and for that certain are contencious amongst
you, which do not so well like of them: and therefore I declare these my
reasons, by the which I was led to deliver them unto you: this is their
exposition of this place. But after what sort soever our adversaries do
understand it, yet truly their conclusion shall never be of any force. For if
he dispute there touching rites and ceremonies only, then is this place without
the compass of our disputation: for we dispute touching those things which are
necessary to salvation, and not of rites and ceremonies, which may be changed
for diverse causes.

Again, if they be willing here, that he should entreat of doctrine, yet
serves it not any thing for their purpose, as I will now declare, for I deny
the consequent.

Paul delivered many things to the Corinthians. The error
Ergo some of them (say they) are not written. The consequent hereof is false.

Yet I confess that this place has deceived Theophilact and some others. Yet
truly (that I may speak it by the favor of all the godly) they have here
fowlie stu^bled in a plain and leuel way. For first Paul did write that same
tradition touching the rytes of the which, he there speaks. Again although he
had not written to the Corinthians, yet he might write unto others. To
conclude, if they were not extant in the writings of Paul, yet might they be
found in the writings of the other Apostles. But Paul says, Be followers of
me, as I follow Christ. He therefore delivered nothing, that might in one jot
be repugnaunt with Christ, the which notwithstanding our adversaries do. I
will here annexe certain other places, which also our adversaries abuse. 2.
Thessa. 3. 2. These. 3
We warn you brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinatelie, and not
after the traditions which he has received of us. And then follows the very
same tradition, which Paul wrote. Again. Acts. 16. And as they went through
the Cities, Act. 16.
they delivered them decrees to keep ordained of the Apostles and Elders. But
yet notwithstanding even those very decrees of the Apostles were then written,
as it is manifest Acts. 15. verse. 23. and 24. Again in the foresaid 11.
chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, That which I
received of the Lord, I delivered unto you. Also in the same Epistle, chapter.
15. verse. 3. he says the like. But yet notwithstanding all those things are
written, wherefore he that does thus conclude, saying: Paul taught by mouth,
Ergo he wrote not: truly he is altogether ignorant of the right order of
Disputation.

Let us therefore now bring them to an absurdity. Absurdity.


If by reason that Paul taught by mouth, traditions to the Corinthians, it
follow that those traditions be not written: Ergo, the traditions that women
should be covered in Ecclesiastical assemblies, and touching prophecieng
bare headded and many such like, are not written: which is false, as appears
in the forenamed. 1. Cor. 11.

We will now therefore, Objection returned.
turn their Argument upon themselves, saying thus.

If the traditions which Paul does there, dispute of, to wit, touching
Propheciengs bare headed, and touching women to be covered, are neglected even
of our Adversaries themselves, because their Monks preach not bare headed, but
covered with their hoods? how much more shall it be lawful for us, to neglect
those traditions, which our adversaries feign, being not written in the word
of God, and only falsely cloked under the names of the Apostles?

That we may therefore amend this error, The correcting of the objection.
we must say that Paul does in that Epistle put them in mind of those things
which he had taught them by mouth, when as he had diligently considered how
great the inconstancy and leuitie of man is. Whereby we see, that we must
altogether cleave to the writings of the Apostles, least the forged devices of
men, do withdraw us from the truth of the gospel.

Paul bids the Thessalonians to keep the traditions which they had learned
either by word or by Epistle: 7. Objection.
Ergo, Paul wrote not all Traditions necessary to faith.

The antecedent is proved 2. Thessa. 2. verse. 15.

Now let us try the antecedent. Answer
In these words of Paul, Either by word or Epistle: they are willing to make
this word Either an absolute distunctiue: to which their opinion I do not
agree. For I mark in the writings of the Apostles (that I may here speak
nothing of other Authors) this perticle or word so repeated to be a copulative
rather then a disjunctive. I prove it by these places. 1. 1. Cor. 13, ^
Cor. 13. ver. 8. where the Apostle says, Whether propheciengs be abolished,
whether tongues cease, and knowledge vanish away. Again, 1. 1. Crr. 15. 11
Cor. 15. ver. 11. Whether I or they, so we have preached, and so ye have
believed: that is both I and they have preached, etc. Also to the Colloss. 1.
Col. 1. 20
verse. 20. Reconciling to himself all things by himself, yea, I say,
reconciling to himself all things, whether they be in heaven, whether they be
in earth.

So also he uses this word [Mete] in this Epistle, in the same chapter. verse.
2. wherefore it is as though he should say, stand ye fast in the doctrine,
which you have learned both by our words when we were present, as also after
in our writings.

Therefore I deny their consequence, The error
for the error as I have said is Secundum fallatiam dictionis: for first it
follows not, if the Thessalonians were taught both by word and Epistle, that
those things were taught by mouth, were contrary to those things which were
taught by Epistle. But secondly, admit that other things were taught, yet it
hurts us nothing: for if they were not written in the Epistle to the
Thessalonians, yet truly they might be written in other his Epistles. But
admit yt Paul did not write them at all, yet it does not therefore follow,
that they were not written of the other Apostles, as of Baptism, and the
supper of the Lord, etc.

Let us now ouerwhelme them with an absurdity.

If it be true by this kind of speaking, Absurdity.
either by word or by Epistle, that therefore it should follow, that Paul did
not write all things necessary to salvation, ergo on the other side it would
follow, that Paul did not preach by mouth all things necessary to salvation,
the which is absurd and false, as I prove by these places following. The 2.
2. These, 2. 13. 14.
Thessa. 2. verse 13. and 14. You are elected unto salvation through the
santification of the holy Ghost, and through the faith of the truth, unto the
which ye were called by our Gospel.

Again in the same Chapter, Ibi. ver. 5
verse. 5. Do you not remember that when I was with you I told you these
things. Again the 1. 1. The. 4
Thessa. 4. Ye know what commandment I gave you to abstain from
fornication. 1. These. 2.
Again, 1. Thessa. 2. We did not only desire to imparte unto you the Gospel
of GOD, but our own selves. And in another place he attributed unto them a
most sure persuasion of faith, which they received by preaching, Whereby it is
proved, that Paul did deliver to the Thessalonians, all things necessary to
salvation: the which things could not be if the argument of our adversary
might prevail.

Therefore we will turn their argument upon themselves, saying.

If the Theslalonians were throughlye instructed in christian religion, The
objection returned,
and that by the preaching of the Apostle, which he preached by mouth, and
nevertheless were to be confirmed by the writings of the Apostle: how much
more ought we to cleave to the writings of the Apostles, which were not
present at their Sermons, neither yet instructed or them by mouth.

Therefore the error of our adversaries must be amended, The correcting.
and we must say, that Paul instructed the Thessalonians not only by word,
but also by Epistle, when he had seen of what great value his writings were, to
confirm the faith of the godly. And thereby also that the holy Scripture might
be more highly commended unto us.

Paul prayed that he might see the face of the Thessalonians, 8. objection.
and that he might accomplish or fulfill those things which were wanting in
their faith: Ergo he reserved many things to traditions, which he spoke by
mouth, being necessary both to faith and salvation. The Antecedent is proved
2. These. 3. Answer.


I do thus answer their antecedent. Many of the old writers do understand
this place touching doctrine: Chrisost.
For Chrysostom refers it to the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead.
Ambr.
Ambrose to the trinity. Although Chrysostom seem not to agree with
himself, for thus he says: not as though unto you (says he) there were any
part of faith wanting, or yt you ought or need to learn any thing. And I see
this opinion of interpreters greatly to please certain of the learned new
writers. But other expound the name of faith touching the constancy of faith,
as in the same chapter he says: 1. These. 3.
I sent that I might know your faith, least Satan had tempted you by any
kind of means, and that our labor had been in vain. But our adversaries
stand upon these points: First there is attributed unto the Thessalonians the
fullness of faith, 1. These. 1.
as is before said: Secondly there is no doubt but that they were baptized, and
therefore perfectly instructed in christian religion. They bring forth many
other arguments unto this end: and chiefly ye whole 2. cha. of ye first epistle
unto ye Thessalonia^s. But let our adversaries choose which interpretation they
will, yet shall it not serve any thing for their purpose.

Now concerning their consequent, The error
I deny it: for if by this word faith, they understand a through persuasion or
constancy of faith: the error is in the diverse signification of the word. But
if they had rather expound it touching doctrine, then their consequence is
false. For they do not well conclude: thus they say, some thing was wanting to
ye faith of ye Thessalonians, ergo Paul did not declare by mouth all things
unto them: or else all things were not written by the apostles necessary to
faith. For it is one thing to teach, and another to learn: and there may be a
defect in the scholar, when as there is none in the master. Therefore Paul
says Phil. 3. Phi. 3. 1
It is profitable for you and not troubleso^e unto me to repeat those things
again unto you. But that we may return to ye Thessalonia^s: You know (says
he) what commandments we gave unto you, that you should abstein from
fornication, etc. But let us grant this, yet truly it follows not, because
there was some thing wanting unto the faith of the Thessalonians: that therefore
Paul and the rest of the Apostles wrote not all the things necessary to the
doctrine of yt gospel. These arguments truly are of no value nor force,
neither yet sca^tly hang together. Therefore we may well bring the^ to an
absurdity, saying. If this argument of our adversaries do prevail, Absurdity.
that the apostles reserved many things which they taught by mouth unto
traditions, being necessary to the salvation of the Church, because Paul
wished that he might see the face of the Thessalonians, that he might supply
those things which were wanting to their faith: the^ it would follow, that Paul
himself was all the apostles, and the Thessalonians the whole universal
church, the which is too absurd. And therefore we may turn their argument
upon themselves, Objection returned.
saying^ If our adversaries do hereby prove their traditions because Paul
desired to see the face of the Thessalonians, that being present, he might
fully instruct them by mouth: Then would it follow that this appertains
nothing unto us, which a long time since could not see the face of Paul. But
perchance they will say y^ the old fathers wrote those things which Paul then
taught when he was present. But because I will not say y^ that is false, I will
make them this answer. If those things were worth y^ writing, why did not
Paul himself write the^? If not, why should ye old doctors write the^?
Therefore thus we may avoid their error, saying: That Paul did therefore desire
to see y^ Thessalonians, Correction
yt thereby he might the more firmly establish their faith, when as he did
manifestly perceive of what great efficacy ye presence of their techer was.
But seeing we cannot enjoy this benefit, we must plainly cleave to the
writings of the Apostles, and those their writings ought to be of so great
value unto us, as if that the Apostles themselves were present to speak unto
us, and so much the rather because in those writings, we may hear eue^ ye
voice of Christ.

Paul wrote unto the Corinthians, that when he came unto them, 9. object.
he would set the rest in order, ergo he reserved many things to be taught by
mouth. The antecedent is proved. 1. Cor. 11.

Thus I answer their antecedent, Paul does not here speak of the chief
points of faith, Answer
but of Ecclesiastical order. For the Greek word which he uses, signifies
to determine some matter according to some order. As Paul to Tit. 1. chap.
says: Ordain elders as I have commanded thee, where Paul uses the very
same Greek word. And again, 1. Cor. 16. Paul uses the same word in the
active voice, touching the bestowing of their liberality, and says, because I
have commanded, etc. And speaks of an order to be kept in the same matter,
and so the french men say, Ordonner in their tongue, and we say Ordain.

Now I deny their consequent: Error
for the error is Secundum figuram dictionis, for y^ proper signification of
the word, signifies another thing, then they mean. Also their consequence is
false.

Paul would set in order certain things amongst the Corinthians when he was
present: Ergo say they, he would constitute new principles of faith. Again
they reason thus: Paul deferred certain things until his coming, the which
he would set in order among the Corinthians, ergo he never wrote them. Also
those things are they which the Prelates of Rome do obtrude and thrust upon
us as traditions springing from the Apostles. All these arguments are foolish
and false, or worse if worse may be.

And therefore we may well bring them to an absurdity, Absurdity,
saying: If that be true which our adversaries would, to wit, that Paul then
when he wrote that Epistle, had not delivered to the Corinthians al those
things which were necessary to faith: then would it come to pass (which GOD
forbid) that those thing which follow in his Epistle, were not true: to wit,
that the Corinthians were made rich in all knowledge: 1. Cor. 1
The 1. Corinthians. Also he says: I declare unto you the Gospel the which I
preached, the which also ye have received, in the which ye stand, and by the
which also ye are saved. 1. Cor. 15
1. Cor. 15.

And again, Ye abou^d in all things, in faith, in word: in knowledge, in all
zeal, and in all love toward us, even so see that ye abound in this grace
also. 2. Cor. 8
2. Cor. 8. And again, What is it in the which you are inferior to other
churches. 2. Cor. 12
2. Cor. 12. And many such like examples.

Finally, this their objection may be turned upon themselves, and correted as
we have done in the former arguments,

John would not write much, Objection
Ergo, he wrote not all things necessary to faith.

The antecedent is proved in the 2. and 3. Epistles of John, where he says
thus: When I had many things to write unto you, yet would I not write with
paper and ink.

I admit their antecedent, Answer Error
yet I deny their consequent. For these things hang not together. John had
many things to write, Ergo they were principles of faith. Ergo, also they are
not any where exta^t, for otherwise this absurdity would follow.

That the same Lady unto the which John wrote, Absurdity.
was not fully instructed in christian religion: therefore those hang not
together with John's speeches, when as he comme^deth the faith of the same
lady, as also of her children, who^ he affirms to walk in the truth. And
therefore this argument may be turned upon themselves, as ye other before.

Many other things did Jesus, 11. obiec.
beside those which were written, the which if they were every one written,
the whole world would not contain the books: Ergo, all things necessary to
faith are not written by the Apostles.

The antecedent is proved John. 21.

I gaunt their antecedent: Answer
yet I deny their consequent. For the error is, Secundum ignorantiam Elenchi:
for they wander here without the compass of our question. John speaks in
that place of miracles which Christ did, and our disputation is of doctrine
necessary to faith and salvation. For these are ye words of John, Christ did
many things, and therefore heerof comes no consequent. Al ye miracles yt
Christ did, are not written: ergo say they, all y^ principles of christian
religion and doctrine are not written.

Now see here how our adversaries beat themselves with their own weapons: For
if our adversaries refer their traditions unto those things which John faith
are not written: The papists over throw their own traditions
Ergo, those traditions are infinite and with out number, and so by the force of
the consequent, without the compass of knowledge. And truly I easily confess,
that such kind of traditions are so greatly increased, that the world now can
scantly bear them.

We may therefore turn their argument upon themselves thus: The objection
returned.
John says, Christ did many other things, which are not written: but he also
affirms, That those things which are written, are written to the end we
might believe and have eternal life. Ergo, those things which are written, are
sufficient to salvation.

The error therefore of our adversaries may thus be amended, Correction
saying. John and the rest of the Evangelists, did choose out of those things
which Christ did, being otherwise infinite, those which seemed necessary:
whereby it comes to pass, y^ we ought to be contented with the writings of
the apostles.

The Apostles did often recite testimonies taken from the traditions of such
ancient men, 12. Obiec.
as lived before their days. Ergo, we must not only stick to the
Scriptures.

The antecedent is manifest. 2. Tim 3. As Iannes and Iambris withstood Moses.
Again, Jude ver. 9. Michael the Archangell disputed about the body of Moses.
And a little after he recites the Prophecy of Enoch, Behold the Lord comes
with many thousands of his saints.

To their antecedent I answer thus, Answer
Indeed I confess, that the Apostles did sometimes recite certain
sentences taken out of the books Apocripha: And to answer the place of Paul
in Timothy, I do not doubt but in his time y^ some book did remain touching
those Magis Iannes and Iambris: for Pliny in his 30. book of his natural
history. chap. 1. does there reckon up Iannes amongst the ancient Magi, the
which he would not have done, except he had learned it out of some book. And
furthermore, I answer that those Ethnickes, were not altogether to be
refused of the Apostles: Act. 17 Tit. 1.
for so Paul recites certain verses out of Aratus and Epiminides: but I do
affirm, that the Apostles did not therefore use these testimonies, that by them
they would confirm any principle of faith, 1. Cor. 15.
for when they would so do, they had always ready express places taken out
of the writings of the Prophets, and those they did expound according to the
motion of the holy Ghost. But when they would teach any doctrine touching
manners, or declare some thing, touching the which very few or none did doubt,
the^ if peradventure they remembered any thing written in the books Apocripha,
or in the writings of those Ethinks, they did not so dislike their sentences,
but that they would apply them unto their purpose: yet notwithstanding, the
Apostles did not attribute so great authority unto them, that they should be
of sufficient authority themselves: for god forbid we should once think so. But
they were willing by that means to move men's minds the more, that they might
thereby the easier receive their doctrine, which notwithstanding was otherwise
sufficiently confirmed, even by the word of God. As for examples sake it is
manifest in Exodus, that the Magi or wise men of Aegipt withstood Moses, what
matter is it by what name those Magi were called, or can those their names be
applied to any principle of faith? No, to none truly. Also Michael would not
use railing words unto the devil, as Saint Jude says: whereby we may learn
much less to speak evil of Magistrates ordained of God. This exhortation of
Jude to the reuerencing of Magistrates, is in many places to be found in the
scriptures. The like is that which Peter says, 2. Pet. 2
That the Angels do not rail on those that have authority. 2. Pet. 2. Also
the Lord will come says Jude, to reward the wicked, the which threatenings is
usual in the holy scriptures. Whereby we manifestly see, to what end the
Apostles culled out certain sentences from the books Apocripha, to the
serving of their own purpose. Now we come unto ye co^seque^t, which I deny.
The Apostles did use certain sentences taken out of the books Apocripha: Ergo,
they used them to the confirmation of faith. And again therefore also we ought
to run to traditions so often as we dispute of faith, as though the
testimonies of the holy scriptures did fail us. This is a false argument, and
no good consequent can come heerof. For the Apostles used not such testimonies
to confirm principles of religion. Yea: and even those testimonies them selves
(if you mark well the matter) you shall see them confirmed by many and expres
places of scriptures. Wherefore our adversaries seem to be forgetful of our
purposed question, while they go about to object these things to us: for this
is ye state of our question (when there arises controversy touching faith,
whether we ought to stick only to the testimonies of the Scriptures, or else
to add thereunto traditions, to the which we may give the like credit, as we
may to the scriptures. But you shall find no such thing in these testimonies
which the Apostles used, as I have before showed. Yea, and I may say that this
argument is not rightly applied against us in this cause, taken from the
Apostles.

Let us return this absurdity on our adversaries, saying thus.

If because the Apostles did recite certain sentences out of books not
Canonical, Absurdity.
that therefore it follows the Apostles did attribute authority to those
books and such like in matters of faith. Ergo, because some of the Apostles
did recite some out of the Ethnicks books, it must follow, that the Apostles
did attribute authority to those books in matters of faith, which thing is
absurd and contrary to the opinion of all men.

Let us turn this objection upon our adversaries, after this sort.

If the Apostles did at any time recite the traditions of ancient fathers,
Objection returned.
but only to beautify those things which were established and confirmed by
most firm testimonies of holy scriptures? How much less then ought we to
recite the traditions of the old fathers, to the confirming of those things
which want testimony of the Scripture.

Thus therefore we may amend the error of this their objection, and say,
Correction.
that the Apostles whereas they did apply themselves to the capacity of men,
that they might thereby the better stir them up, or the more easily convince
them, they used some times the books Apocripha, as also sentences gathred from
Ethincks, to wit, when they did dispute of those things, the truth whereof was
manifest in the holy scriptures.

The heretics did wreast the writings of Paul, 13. object
and that in the very time of the Apostles, and also it is most manifest that
the heretics: yea, and Satan himself have cloked their heresies even with the
Scriptures: ergo we must not cleave to the Scriptures alone. The antecedent is
proved, 2. Pe. 3. as also by the Ecclesiastical history, and also Math 4. If
thou be the son of GOD cast thy self down headlong, for it is written he
shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc.

I admit their antecedent.

But I deny their consequent. Answer
Neither does Peter so conclude, but rather calls them unto the writings of
Paul, then in any part to abridge the same. The error is as the Logitians
say, Secundum non causam vt causam.

The heretics abused the Scriptures, Error
and wrested the writings of the Apostles into a contrary sense, ergo say
they, we ought to run other where then to the scriptures, to the establishing
of our faith. The Scripture is not in fault, but only men themselves, which
do wrest so worthy a matter unto their own errors. Wherefore this is so
far from the Apostles mind, that we should leave the aid of the scripture,
because heretics have abused them, that rather the heretics are by the very
scriptures to be convinced, like as we have already proved out of the places
of Paul, 2. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. And when Satan abused the Scriptures, 2. Tim. 3.
Tit. 1.
that he might weaken the faith of Christ, truly Christ went not to
traditions, but with the Scriptures again overthrew the enemy. For satan
obiecting and saying it is written: Christ also on the other side answered, it
is written, and not left in tradition. Absurdity,
And therefore we must bring them to this inconvenience, saying.

If because the heretics falsified the Scriptures, we may not therefore only
cleave unto the Scriptures: then truly because the heretics falsely fathered
traditions to be Apostolic, as we have proved before both out of the
writings of the Apostles, as also out of Irenaeus and Eusebius: therefore we
may not stick only to traditions. And again, because heretics abused both
Scriptures and traditions, therefore we must neither cleave to Scriptures, nor
to traditions: the which is absurd, and even our adversaries themselves yield
to the same.

Let us therefore turn their argument upon themselves, saying. Objection
returned.


If like as Satan abused the Scriptures against Christ, so likewise the
heretics do against true Christians. Then truly as Christ used the Scripture
only to repel Satan: so likewise the true Christians must use only the
Scriptures in repelling of heretics.

And therefore we may amend their error thus: Correction.
If such be the wickedness of the heretics, ye they abuse ye scriptures, then
ought we to give al diligence, yt the scripture may keep both their authority
and purity, the which will be if the heretics be convinced by the Scriptures
alone, and those places which shall seem somewhat obscure, may take their
interpretation from places more plain. But if our adversaries hearken not unto
us: yet at the least ways let them give ear even unto themselves, Can. rela.
Did. 37
in whose decretalls this sentence remains: That from the Scriptures
themselves, the sense of truth must be taken.

The doctrine touching the baptism of Infants is not found in the holy
Scriptures, 14. obiec.
neither these words, Trinity, like substance, persons, and many such like:
all which words notwithstanding do appertain unto grounds and principles of
faith: Ergo all things appertaining unto faith are not to be found in the
Scriptures.

The antecedent is found true by reading of the Scriptures.

Now touching their antecedent, Answer
I say thus: In that they affirm the doctrine concerning Baptism of children
not to be found in the Scriptures is most false, like as our late writers have
taught in their learned works against the Anabaptists, touching the which I
will not here make any longer disputation, least I should seem to wander
without ye compass of my proponed question. Now touching these words Trinity,
like substance, and persons: I confess they are not found in the writings of
the Apostles, but yet I say y^ the very doctrine which is signified by these
words, is derived from the Scriptures: for when certain heretics rose up which
denied ye verity of ye doctrine, then the godly Fathers which lived in those
days, having care of ye circumstances, added these words: by the which they
might the more easily explicate and declare the doctrine touching ye trinity,
y^ which doctrine they had before confirmed by express and manifest
testimonies of the holy Scriptures.

Now touching their consequence. The error is, Error
Secundum fallaciam figurae dictionis. These words Trinity, the baptism of
infants, like substance, are not found in the Scripture, it is called [
Omonomos] for the words indeed are not found in the holy Scriptures, but the
things signified by the words are there found. And our christian faith
consists not in the title of words, but in substance of matter, not in many
volumes of books as S. Hierom says, but in the very ground of reason. Tract.
de ver. and pia fid.
And therefore Basil confesses, y^ he used against the heretics certain
terms, which were not found written: but yet notwithstanding (says he) they
were nothing contrary to the sense of the holy Scriptures.

And therefore our adversaries reasoning thus, we may well bring them to an
absurdity, saying.

If because the persons, the trinity, Absurdity.
and such like words be not extant in the holy Scriptures, it therefore
follows, that all things necessary to faith are not found in the holy
scriptures: Ergo these words are necessary to faith, and so by force of the
consequent: Since this word [Omoousios] that is like substance, and such other
words were only found out by the godly Doctors after the heresy of Arius
began to spring, then would it follow that the Church of Christ, before the
time of Arius, yea, and the Apostles themselves knew not al things necessary
unto faith: The which thing is most absurd and sauouring of Athisme.

And therefore we may well turn this argument home again unto our
adversaries, saying. Objection returned.


If such were the religion of the ancient fathers, that they would not invent
any one word to the entreating upon any principle of faith, the which was not
grounded upon express places of scriptures (as it is manifest by these words,
trinity, substance, and persons: and such like) what shall we then think of our
adversaries which do not only inue^t words, but also eue^ matter it self,
altogether abhorring and contrary to the Scriptures of God.

And therefore we may amend ye error of this their objection, Correction
saying: That it is lawful for the godly fathers of the church of God, to use
and invent certain words and terms, whereby the matter contained in the
scriptures, may the better and easier be expressed.

If we must altogether believe the church and in no part swerve from the credit
of the church, Obiec. 15.
and we believe the church in this part affirming, that the scriptures came
from the spirit of God, the^ truly we ought to believe the church, likewise
affirming that these and such other like traditions came from the Apostles. The
antecedent is true: and therefore it must follow that the co^seque^t is also
true.

The Mayor has two parts, touching the which we will particularly speak.
Answer
And touching the first point, I do make a distinction of the Church, which
Paul calls the house of God, the pillar and foundation of truth, which
hears ye voice of her spouse, and only depends upon his mouth, and is
always governed by the spirit of God, and cannot be seen because she is not
tied to circumstances of place, time or persons, yet notwithstanding we believe
y^ the same church is vpholden by the word of God, and that she nothing
esteems man's traditions. But this or ye visible Church, or the company of
many visible congregations may swerve from the truth, as it is manifest
touching the Churches in the East, of which y^ most part have turned to
Mahumet. I will not here bring in the ancient counsels, which have both
allowed and brought into ye church great and grievous errors. And touching this
church we may thus determine: inasmuch as she is subject to many errors, she is
not otherwise to be heard, except she speak those things which are agreeable
to the Scriptures, touching which matter I have disputed more at large in
another place: wherefore this has here no place which they say and affirm,
y^ we must altogether believe the church, and in part swerve from the credit
of the same, the^ must we believe the visible Churches, when as they propound
nothing else unto us but the word of God: and on the other side we ought not to
believe the visible churches when they swerve from the word of God, for I make
my example by the Sinagogue which very religiously has reserved the Cannons or
books of the Scriptures, yet notwithstanding she has innumerable errors. So
the^ we may believe the same Sinagogue, whereby she says, y^ the Canonical
books have sprung from ye spirit of God: and again we may not believe her,
when she rejects and casts away the doctrine of Christ. Mat. 23.
Therefore in y^ respect Christ says: lbi. ve. 16.
The Scribes and Pharesies sitting in Moses chair are to be heard, Mat. 16.
and yet notwithstanding in another place he reprehendeth and reproves their
traditions, whereby we see proved, that in one part they ought to be heard,
and on the other not. Wherefore their Minor is not true, and so the consequence
cannot stand, because there is an error, Error
Secundum fallaciam figurae dictionis. And they reasoning thus, we may well
bring the^ to a great inconvenience, saying. In the time of Tertulian the
church did affirm, Absurdity.
that an oblation for birth days was a tradition received from the Apostles,
but in the time of the Nice^e counsel, the church did affirm, that oblation
for birth days was not a tradition of the Apostles, as in his proper place I
have proved: ergo if we must in all parts believe the Church, and in no part
swerve from the Church, then must we believe the things which are manifest
opposite and contarrie one to the other, the which is impossible.

Wherefore we may turn their objection upon themselves, Objection returned.
after this sort, saying:

Whosoever affirms the scripture to be the word of god the which we ought to
believe: and likewise affirms that traditions not written are to be received,
speaks co^traries. But the Church of Rome affirms the scriptures to be the
word of god which we ought to believe, and also affirms that traditions not
written are to be received. Ergo the church of Rome affirms contraries, and
by force of the consequent we must believe her in one part, and in another not,
and if this be of any force, that we must believe the church in all parts, and
swerve from her in no part, the^ this follows by their argument, Vnsolding of
the former argument
that the Church may not well be called the Church, For ye truth of the mayor
proposition is proved thus. If you did me belee^e the scriptures, truly I will
believe yt there is nothing to be added thereunto, because yt it is so commanded
in them, Deuteronomy, 4 Pro. 30
as I have in diverse places of my book proved: and therefore this sentence of
Tertulian is highly to be embraced, Deprescr.
When we believe (says he) this first we must believe, that there is nothing
else that we ought to believe. Now if we will consider the traditions of our
adversaries, we shall easily perceive yt they are not only added by inventions,
but also contrary to express places of scripture: so ye see, yt we cannot
believe the scriptures, and also the traditions of our adversaries.

And therefore we may amend the error of the former objection after this
manner: Since we ought to believe God alone, Correction.
then most diligently ought we to take heed, least under the show of piety,
we be seduced into error, and because the name of the Church is very
glorious, therefore, if any thing be proposed unto us under the title of the
Church, we ought to give atte^tiue diligence, whether it be ye voice of the
true church or not, which we hear: and yt we may be able so to do, we must
take counsel with the word of God set forth unto us in the Scriptures, from
the which, the true church of God never swerneth: when therefore the Church
affirms unto us, that the scriptures are the word of God, we acknowledge the
same to be true, not only because the church so affirms, but because of the
inward efficacy of the spirit of God, by the which the truth of the
scriptures is sealed in our hearts: and like as the church by the conduction of
the spirit of God, affirms unto us yt the scripture is the word of God, so
we by the conduction of the same spirit, believe that that is true, which the
Church affirms yt our faith may never rest upon men, but for ever upon God
alone.

The Apostles did add unto the law: to wit the doctrine of the Gospel: Ergo,
16. obiec.
it is lawful to add unto the word of God.

To the antecedent I thus answer. Answer
Although the doctrine of the Gospel be more full and fruitful then the
writing of the old Testament, yet notwithstanding, if ye well mark the matter:
in ye new and old testament, the self same doctrine of salvation is contained
in them both, for that is most true which Paul says Acts, 26. Act. 26.
that he taught no other thing, then that which the prophets and Moses had
before taught. And again in the first to ye Romans Romans 1.
he shows yt the gospel was before promised by the Prophets, and therefore
this is false which they say, that the Apostles added to the law: for it is one
thing to add to the law, and another to erpound and refer it to his own
proper scope and purpose. For let some man bring forth an obligation (that we
may use this similitude) and the payment being made, he adds at the end that
the Obligation is satisfied, I pray you can he well be said to add any thing
to the same Obligation? So when the Apostles gave testimony to the scriptures
that Christ by his coming had fulfilled both the law and the prophets, they
did not add either to ye law, or writings of the Prophets.

Now, their consequent, Error.
I deny: for here is an error, Secundum figuram dictionis, as it is manifest
by these things which I have already spoken. Yea, also the argument cannot
well proceed from the Apostles to other men: for grant this, that God would
add unto his law, and that it was done by the ministry of the Apostles,
which wrote by the influence and motion of the spirit of God: yet truly hereby
can nothing happen, whereby it should be lawful for other men to add unto ye
same word of God.

Wherefore sithen by the argumentation of our adversaries, there would follow
the overthrow of this most noble and excellent doctrine, touching the
similitude of the old and new Testament.

Therefore we may well amend their error by this most excellent saying,
Correction
which is extant in the works of Justinius Matyre, In interg. and resp. where he
asks this, and says, What is the Law? he answers and says: It is the
Gospel foreshewed. Again he demands, What is the Gospel? he auns wereth,
The Law fulfilled. By which words it is manifest, that the Gospel is not a
new doctrine added unto the law, but a new fulfilling of the old promise.
And thus we suppose that we have sufficiently disputed touching the objections
of our adversaries, which they have wreasted out of the word of God.

The 5. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as the adversaries themselves sufficiently know how weak and
feeble those arguments are which they take out of ye scripturs against the
scriptures: then at the last they fly to the testimonies of the ancient
Fathers: the which they very diligently endeavor to beat into our heads with
Orations long and tedious, to the end that by the heap thereof, they might
over whelme us. Wherefore it seems convenient in this part of our treatise,
to set down some thing whereby not only the objections of the Papists, but
also our aunsweres, may the more easier be understood.

Now therefore yt we may gather most true and infallible principles, let us
add some certain rules to this our disputation, That we may use profitablye
the vvritings of the Fathers, certain rules are (...) to be observed.
by whose help the minds of the old Doctors may be expounded, and so by the
conduction of those rules, as by a clue of thread, we may both enter into the
many and variable writings of the Doctors, as into a most dangerous
Laborynth, and there also keep our selves occupied most safely and without
hurt.

Let this therefore be the first Rule.
THe writings of the ancient Doctors, The first rule
for the establishing and confirmation of our faith, are so far forth to be
received, as they agree with the holy and divine scriptures,

Although this first rule be plain enough of himself, Confirmation of this
rule.
especially to those that know the truth, yet will I for the confirmation of
the same, Gal. 1. 8.
lay down certain proofs. If any preach unto you otherwise, then that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accurssed, says S. Paul. And again,
Warn some that they teach no other doctrine. And again, 1. Tim. 1.
Mark them diligently, which cause division and offenses, Romans 16.
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. And again,
1. Tim. 6.
If any man teach otherwise, he is puffed up, and knows nothing. And again,
Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines: with many more places
to this effect. Heb, 13.


Yet least happily our adversaries should say, that these places repeted are
to be understood of the word delivered by tradition, and not of the word
written: leaving those things, which in the former part of this treatise are
handeled copiously and at large, I will ask them this Question: whether they
think ye Apostles to have uttered and spoken any thing in their lectures and
sermons, which does disagree with those things which they have committed to
writing? I am sure they will in no wise confess it. Wherefore, mauger their
heads, they must agree with us, that this our first Rule is infallible and
most true: to wit, that the writings of the ancient doctors, are so far forth
to be received, as they do agree with the sacred Scripture. But if they shall
perceive the ancient Doctors themselves to be of our mind: I hope then (all
doubt removed) they will together with us agree to our former rule.

This therefore is the mind of Origin: It behooves us to bring the holy
Scriptures for witnesses: for because our senses, 1. Ierem.
and allegations, without the witness of them, are altogether void of
credit. Mat. hom, ^5


And again, Even as there is not any gold sanctified without the temple: so
there is no sense without the Scripture that is holy.

Tertulian. What is there contrary to us in our writings (he speaks of the
holy Scriptures.) Do preser. heret. Ibidem.
And again. The same that we are, the same they be.

Chrysostom, In Psa. 95.
If any thing be spoken without the Scriptures, the mind of the hearers is
thereby brought into doubt.

Hierome. In Psa. 86
Whatsoever hereafter shall be spoken besides the Apostolical writings, let
it be abrogated, of no value, and altogether without credit.

Agustine. In Epi. 48. ad ^^ncen.
Do thou not bring us any cauelles from the writings of the Bishops, as of
Hillarie, or Ciprian, against the infallible testimony of the divine
scriptures. Because as it behooves us to put a difference between that kind
of writing, and the Scriptures of GOD: for, the writings of men are not so to
be read, that it is not lawful for us to think the contrary, if at any time
they have peradventure thought otherwise then the truth requires.

And again, De vnita. Eccl, ca, 10
we must not agree to the Catholyke Bishops if at any time they are
deceived, taking opinion contrary to the canonical scriptures. And again, In
Epi, ad Hiero. 19 Aug, cont. l. 11.
I have learned to give this honor and reverence only to those writings
which are called Canonical, that I faithfully believe the authors of them,
have not in any point at any time erred in their writings: but other men's
writings I do so read, that though they excel in sanctimonie or holiness:
yet I do not therefore think it true, because they so affirm, but because
they are able to persuade me either by Canonical Scripture, or by probable
reason those things which dissent not from the truth: Thus far he.

These things have our adversaries themselves recorded amongst their
Decretalls, Can. Eg^ solis, did. ^
insomuch that they may not deny this first rule: least they seem to deny
their own Decretalls.

The second Rule.
THE ancient Doctors do oftentimes by the name of Traditious, understand the
same doctrine that is contained in the Apostolical writing. That this rule is
true, it shall appear by that which follows.

Irenaeus ( as it is reported by Eusebius) does say, Confirmation. Hist. Eccl.
l^. 4. ca. 14
That Policarpus taught these things which he had learned of the Apostles:
which things both the Church delivered, and are only to be accounted true:
thus much he. He says Tradit: the Church does deliver: that is, does teach,
namely out of the writings of the Apostles. If he were not thus to be
understood, how could that stand which he has said? And those things are
only true: which thing is very easy to be gathered of the forenamed
Irenaeus, whose words are by Eusebius reported. Li. 5. c. 20.
Policarpus ( says he) did report those things which he had heard of the
Apostles, altogether agreeable to the holy Scriptures. And the said Irenaeus
says in another place, Li. 3. ca. 3
The Church of Rome wrote to the Church of Corinth, showing them the same
tradition which they had received of the apostles: to wit, that there was one
God almighty: and so consequently the doctrine contained in the books of
Moses. Cap. 4.
And a little after he says: Many of the unlearned and barbarous people,
being ignorant of the Scriptures, do diligently keep the old and ancient
traditions, believing in one God, and in Jesus Christ born of the virgin Marie.

Tertulian. The Apostolical doctrine does allow nothing contrary to the rule
of Gods word, Con. M^^, lib. 1.
namely, those things which the Apostles have taught and committed to writings.

The third Rule.
THE ancient Doctors do name that unwritten traditions, which in express
words are not found in the holy Scriptures: but notwithstanding if you
diligently mark, the effect thereof is contained in the Scriptures.

So Basil confesses that he used certain terms against heretics,
Confirmation. Tract. de pia and verafid.
which are not written, but yet notwithstanding (faith he) are not contrary to
the true sense of the Scriptures. And Nazianzenus refuteth the Macidonians, De
Theol. or. 5.
which did deny the deity of the holy Ghost, because he is not termed with
plain words in the holy Scriptures, to be the third person in the deity,
saying: y^ there are diverse things in the Scriptures which are not plainly
expressed: As for example. If y^ say twice, De Bapt. con. Dona* li. 4. ca. 23
two I will say (says he) y^ thou say four. In like manner Augustine does
prove, that the baptism of infants is contained in holy Scriptures, and that
they should not be rebaptised. Ibid lib. 2 cap. 14.
The like is to be said of the word or term [ Omoousion] the trinity, and
such like, concerning the which we have spoken in the former chapter.

The 4. Rule.
THE ancient Doctors under the name of traditions, do not mean any certain
grounded opinion touching religion, but ecclesiastical ceremonies: and to the
end they may the more beautify and set forth the order of the Church, they
commonly ascribe the said ceremonies to the Apostles as if they were the
principal authors of the same.

Now many and diverse ye rites and ceremonies of the Church have been,
Confirmation.
and with what study and diligence the ancient fathers have set forth the
same, that by all means possible they might stop Schisms and divisions in
the Church: It needs not here perticularlye to declare, since the volumes of
the Fathers do every where abound with those things, wherefore let the readers
consider what Augustine has written in two Epistles to Ianuarius. Epist. 118.
and 119.
Hierome has thus set forth the order and ceremonies of the Church. Ad Luciu^.
Let each Province (says he) have autho^trie to determine touching the
Institutions of the elders, and traditions of the Apostles: which words of
Hierome are diversely to be considered: And that many and sundry orders and
institutions of the ancient Fathers, are to be altered and changed by reason
of many circumstaunces, even our adversaries themselves have not denied,
neither were it meet in this behalf, that the Ecclesiastical ceremonies
should be made equal to the grounded doctrine of Religion. And therefore has
Tertulian said: That the only law of says does remain immutable. And
Hierome himself does give counsel, Ad Luciu^.
that such orders and customs of the church, are to be kept: which (says he)
do not hinder or hurt our faith.

The 5. Rule.
SOme of the old Fathers (having their faults) did overmuch favor these
unwritten traditions, and therefore did sometime true consent to heretics.

We have heard before out of Irenaeus, Confirmation.
that the ancient heretics did defend their heresies by unwritten traditions.
And Eusebius makes mention of one Papias, Li. 3. Hist. Eccl, ca. vl.
which brought in certain strange doctrine into the Church, affirming the
same to be delivered, as coming from the Apostles by tradition. The like
error there was of the Chiliastians, into y^ which error Tertulian and
Justinius Martire, and others have fallen. And therefore the works of the
ancient Fathers are not to be read without great judgment.

The 6. Rule.
Many and diverse books have been put forth under the name and title of the
ancient Fathers, which notwithstanding are counterfeit.

It has come to pass through the fault of those who have been the writers and
printers of books: Confirmation.
ye diverse books have falsely borne the name of those ancient Doctors, which
antiquity has commended. As for era^ple, the books entitled Rapsodiae, were
attributed to Clement S. Paul's Disciple, and also the book of the Revelation
of S. John Baptist his head, is authorized under the name of Ciprian: when
notwithstanding there is mention made of Pipin king of France: and to
conclude, there are diverse volumes under the title and name of Augustine, in
the which the opinion of Augustine is refuted. I need not to make mention of an
infinite number like unto these. Wherefore that which Hierome did somtune speak
of the books Apocripha, Ad Laetam
may very fitly be spoken of the writings of the old Fathers: Let a man
take heed (says he) of the books Apocripha, and if at any time he be
disposed to read them, not for trial of truth, but for examples sake of good
manners, let him know they are not books of them whose titles and names they
bear, but that there are many corrupt things mixed in them, and therefore it
is great wisdom how to choose out gold amongst dirt and claie: thus much
Hierome. Now these foundations being laid, it behooves us a little to search
and sifte the objections of our adversaries, which they take from the old and
ancient doctors.

Clemens Alexandrinus. 1. objection.
The workman that is sent forth into the Harvest of the Lord, Li. 1. stro.
has a double husbandry: to wit, the unwritten and the written. lbid, lib. 5
Again, As the Philosophers had certain secrets touching their opinions, which
they delivered by traditions: so likewise the Apostles. And therefore Paul
says, 1, Gor. 2
We speak wisdom amongst those that are perfect.

To this I answer thus: First, Answer.
that this Author has not handled the question sincerely and purely: and this
fault is easily to be found, even by the authority of ye scriptures: for
Christ says thus, What soever I speak unto you in secret, Mat. 12
that speak openly, and that you heard in the ear, that preach upon the house
top, etc. Wherefore Alexandrinus is plainly deceived when he goes about to
mix the mystery of Christian religion, Lib. 3. cap. 2 de pre.
with the hid secrets of philosophy. And Irenaeus and Tertulian do both
witness and testify that the old heretics were of that mind, which here
Alexandrinus does hold: and therefore abused those words of Paul, Ibidem.
saying: I speak wisdom amongst those that are perfect: as Irenaeus as I have
before said does affirm. And Clemens doubted not to say, ye even ye Grecians
were saved by Philosophy: Lib. 6 stro^
where and ceremonies, amongst the which, he ^^^koneth up that most ancient
custom, whereby the Christians did always stan^ when they did pray, from the
time of Easter until Whitsontide. In this disputation therefore Basil doubts
not to propone that which was commonly spoken touching the Apostolic
mysteries: and this is it that our adversaries so greatly triumph against us
out of the words of Basil: but truly as with all my heart, I do acknowledge
the goodness of the cause whereupon Basil then stood, when he affirmed the
holy ghost to be god, yet not withstanding (without offense of Basil be it
spoken) me thinks he did too curioustye seek for strange Arguments, when
as that matter might be proved by plain, proper, and true grounds of
Scriptures.

The Deity of the holy Ghost is in diverse places of the holy Scriptures to
be proved: to what end then sho^^d the Apostles deliver by Tradition,
certain secret forms touching that matter: and as it were (as Basil says)
whisper it into the ears of certain men? I pray you, was there any thing to
be kept close in this point of doctrine, that behooued the Christians,
especially to know and profess? Furthermore, to call that thing secret or
hid, which was then publikelye taught almost in the whole world, I know not
well how Basil could do it. And inasmuch as this fained Apostolic mysteries
was in times past the very ground of heresies, as before it is showed:
neither furtherod the cause of Basil, which otherwise is to be proved with
most firm reasons: I wish that Basil had reformed that kind of Argument, (if
it be worthy to be called an argument) especially since the old Fathers
very wisely have warned us to foresee, that many labors should not grow of
one. But howsoever the matter goes, our adversaries have nothing here whereof
they may glory or boast, for when Basil affirms this hind of speaking of ye
holy ghost, That it has sprung from the Apostles tradition. By the name of
Tradition, here he understands that which although not in manifest and flat
words remains in the Scripture: yet notwithstanding the sum and matter it
self is there contained, touching the which read our third Rule. What if our
adversaries themselves long time since, have not observed and kept this kind
of speaking in their Churches? And that I may not urge that, that same custom
is now grown out of use and forgotten amongst them, whereby they heretofore
did stand when they did pray between Easter and Whitsontide, as is before
said. Wherefore let our adversaries consider how properly they expound the
words of Basil, which are these: Which both are of like force and effect to
godliness, and how well they agree with Basil himself.

Chrysostom. 5. obiecti^.
Here it is manifest that they delivered not all things by writing: but many
things by tradition, In 2. These. hom. 4 ldem Damascen. de orth. fid. li. 4.
cap. 17. 2. These. 2.
without writing: and these are as worthy to be believed, as those which are
written. Therefore we think the traditions of the Church worthy to be believed.
It is a tradition: therefore search no farther for the matter.

Chrysostom entreating of these words of Paul written to the Thessalonians
the second Epistle and second chapter, Answer
saying: Hold fast the Traditions, which you have learned, either by word or
by Epistle. He gathers that not only Paul, but also the rest of the
Apostles did not deliver and commit all things to writings, the which how sure
an argument it is, we have declared in our former chapter: But to let this
thing pass least we should seem to make a needless repetition: I therefore
say, that Chrysostom does speak touching those traditions, which although
they are not expressed by word in the holy Scriptures, yet in substance are
there contained: for otherwise these words of Chrysostom could not stand,
saying: It is a tradition, thou may seek no farther thereof^. For then it
should follow, that we should no more search in holy Scriptures, the which
God forbid that it should come in the mind of so godly a Father, who does
most often inculcate and beat into the mind the reading of the holy
Scriptures: Therefore I suppose by this word, Tradition of the Church, by
Chrysostom is meant that doctrine the which the Church (being instructed by
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles) does deliver over unto the church:
that is to say, does teach and instruct whatsoever she has drawn out of ye
most pure fountain of ye Scriptures, touching which matter seek the second
rule.

Nazianzene. The doctrine of the Gospel is more excellent through the figures
of the Church: 6. obiecti, In lulian or. 1
which being received by tradition, we have kept even until this time.

I expound this place as I did the other before going, Answer
to wit, that, he speaks of those traditions which may be proved by the
scriptures, of the which see the second and third rules; for if that our
adversaries shall say, that the Gospel is made the better through their holy
water, and through such like trumper^es appertaining to their Mass, they would
make men laugh, nay rather I should say, weep, who reverently think, and are
well affctioned toward the true worshipping of God.

Epiphanius, We must also use traditions, 7. object. Heras. 61 75. aduer.
Arianos.
for all things cannot be taken from the holy Scripture. Wherefore some
things the holy Apostles delivered, unto us by the Scriptures, and some thing
by Tradition.

Here Epiphanius disputes touching certain rites and ceremonies, Answer
which the christians in tunes past did observe (as in the fourth rule we have
spoken) and also reckons up many more rites and ceremonies, all the which
long time since have been out of use, even in the Church of Rome. So that
herein, our adversaries do not only contend with us, but even with
Epiphanius himself, and with other, whose objections they use against us. For
if those old rytes and ceremonies be traditions of the Apostles, or if they
have like force with the scripture, or if they be worthy of the like credit
together with the scripture. If also since they be traditions, and therefore we
must seek no farther: if faith ought to be the obseruer and keeper of these
traditions, as the old and ancient Doctors say, whom our adversaries bring
for the maintenance of their cause, what impudent boldness were this then,
not only to neglect those traditions, but also now that they have been these
many years put clean off from the Church; and grown out of the memory of
man: being forlorn with time, so that they seem to be altogether mouldie and
covered with hoarinesse? What shall they then which are adversaries of
traditions do, if they dare do these things themselves, which are the great
defenders of traditions.

Hierome. 8. Objection.
Do you demand where it is written? I answer, in the Acts of the Apostles:
yea, Aduersu^s Lucifer.
also if it had no authority of Scripture, yet the consent of the whole world
in this part obtains the like authority as a precept: for many other things
which are observed and kept in the Church by tradition, take unto themselves
the like authority, as has the law written, as in baptism three times to
dippe the head under water, of the tasting of Milk and honnie, etc.

Here Hierome disputed of the unposition of hands after Baptism, Answer
and of other rites and ceremonies, touching the which thing we have spoken in
our fourth rule: but we do dispute now and in this place of those things which
are necessary and do appertain unto faith and salvation, among the which if
you will number v^ those rites and ceremonies: what will our adversaries
answer, which admit and use not the tasting of milk and honnie, which
Hierome here makes mention of, And also Hierome witnesses, that y^ was
confirmed by the consent of the whole world, which is now rejected by the like.

Augustine. Touching those things whereof the Scripture has not determined, 9.
Object.
therein the custom of the people and ordinance of our fathers, Ad Casul.
Epist. 86
are to be observed in steed of a law. And again, Those things which are not
written, Ad Ianua. Epist. 118.
but are kept by tradition, which are observed throughout the whole world:
it appears by the authority either of the Apostles or general counsels,
whose authority in the Church is most profitable, that those things ordained
and constituted, are to be kept and observed as the passion of our Lord and his
resurrection, etc.

Augustine here disputes not touching principles of faith, Answer
but of Ecclesiastical rytes and ceremonies, touching the which we have spoken
in the fourth rule. And truly since Augustine is lead only by conjecture,
thereby it sufficientlye appears that he entreats not of things necessary
to faith. But the self same Augustine in his Epistle following, does greatly
lament the cause that the Scriptures being neglected, all the whole world was
full of suppositions, and gives us admonishment to submit our selves unto the
easy yoke of Christ. I beseech you what would he the^ have said if he had
seen that huge Chaos and mountain of ceremonies and traditions, a burden more
grievous and heavier than Aetna hill, wherewith the Bishops of Rome long time
since have oppressed the Church? And peradventure many other more such like
examples as these, may be taken out of the old fathers and alleged: but the
solution of them may easily be gathered and had from the answers which I have
already set down. And lest the defenders of traditions, should think that the
ancient Doctors did so commend Traditions, that thereby they would derogate
the authority of the scriptures: behold even the old Doctors themselves as
witnesses in this matter, and shall declare their own minds what they think
touching the Scriptures, and touching traditions not written, and we our
selves will say nothing. And that the wound which by their former objections,
they seem to give us, be even by their own hands healed up again: That we
may lawfully affirm it much better to follow the Doctors with the
Scriptures, then the same Doctors wandering without the Scripture: (if it so
happen at any time) and so to be carried from the truth: which thing indeed
does rather deserve pardon the^ foolish imitation. But now let us hear the
Doctors themselves.

The sixth Chapter.
IRenaeus. First the Apostles did preach the word of God, Aduer. haeret. lib. 3
cap. 1.
and afterward by the will of God committed it to writings, and delivered it to
us, that the same Gospel so written, should be the foundation and pillar of
our faith. Lib. 5.
Again, It behooves us to fly unto the Church, and to be fostered in her
bosom, and nourished by the word of God written. The paradise of the Church is
planted here in this world, thou may eat of the tree of the Paradise says
the spirit of God: that is, feed you of every Scripture of God.

Tertulian. Take away from the heretics those things wherein they agree with
the Ethnikes, De resur. carnis.
that they may ground their questions upon the holy Scriptures alone, and
then they cannot prevail.

Thus did Tertulian in times past confute the Heretics, but now they are
accounted Heretics of the Bishops of the Romish Church, which would
confirm their opinions by the Scriptures.

And again the said Tertulian: De pros.
We ought not to be curious now after the coming of Christ Jesus, neither
ought we to be inquisitiue after the manifestation of the Gospel. When we
do believe, we desire nothing else to believe: for this first we do
believe, that there is nothing else that we ought to believe, but only
faith. And again, Aduersus Hermog.
Let Hermogenes see that he teach that which is written: but if it be not
written, let him fear that curse which is prepared for those that either add
too, or diminish any thing from the holy Scriptures.

Origin. We must of necessity call the holy Scriptures for witness, In hier.
for as well our senses as also our interpretations, without the witness of
the Scriptures are worthy of no credit.

Justinius Martyr. In Tryph.
Justinius did fly unto the holy Scriptures, that he might be safe in all
things.

Athanasius. Con. Idol.
The holy and divine Scriptures of GOD, are sufficient to the declaration and
manifestation of the truth.

Hilarie. It is sufficient for us, De Trini. lib 3.
that we be contented with the Scriptures.

Cyril. All things which Christ did are not written: In loan li. 22. c. 68
but what things the writers thought sufficient both for manners and doctrine,
are written.

Chrysostom. In Tim. hom. 9.
If we have need either to learn or to forsake any thing, let us learn it
in the holy Scriptures. Again, If any of those men which are reported to
have the holy spirit of God, De sancto and ado. stir.
do say any thing of himself which may not be proved by the holy
Scriptures, believe him not. Does Manes the Heretic say, that the sum or the
money work any thing of themselves: Where have thou read this? If he have not
read it in the Scriptures, but speaks it of himself, it is manifest that he
has not the spirit of God. And again, those that are true Christians, Mat.
hom. 49.
let them betake themselves to the Scriptures, because there can be no other
proof of true christianity, then the divine and holy Scriptures.

Basil. It is a manifest Argument of infidelity, Tract. de vera and
a flat sign of pride, if any man will reject any of those things which are
not written, pia fid.
or bring into the Church any of those things which are not written, since
the Lord himself says: My sheep hear my voice, and follow not a stranger.

Again, Whatsoever we speak or do, In morae ^i. Reg. 26
that ought to be confirmed by the testimony of the holy Scriptures. Also the
Apostle taking the example from men, Tract de ver. and pi. fid.
(Gal. 3.) does most vehemently forbid that any of those things which are in
the holy Scripture should be put out: or else (which God forbid) that any
thing should be added. Again, In moral. Reg. 8^
If whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of GOD: Then without doubt, since whatsoever is without
the scriptures, is not of faith, the same is sin. And in another place:
Epist. 80
Let us stand to the judgment of the holy Scriptures proceeding from GOD, and
with whom so ever are found points of religion agreeing to the holy
Scriptures, to them let the whole opinion of truth be allotted. Again, of all
those things which we have in use both of words and deeds, In Reg. br^uior
inte, ^
some are distinctly set down in the Scriptures, some omitted, but those
things which are contained in the scriptures, by no means must be omitted: but
of those things which are not found in the scriptures, we have a flat rule
delivered unto us by Paul, All things are lawful: but all things are not
necessary.

Hierome. Hierom in Mic. lib. 1. cap. 1.
The universal Church of Christ having in possession all the Churches in the
world: is united together by the unity of the spirit, and has the words of
the Law, of the Prophets, of the Gospel, and of the Apostles: and she may not
pass her bounds, that is, from the holy Scriptures. Again, In Agge cap. 1.
Those things which men feign with out authority of Scripture, as coming from
the Apostles by Tradition, the sword of God (which is his word) does cut away.
In Mat. cap. 23.
And also that which has not the authority of the Scriptures, is with the
same facility contemned, with the which it was allowed.

Augustine. Neither ought I to allege the Nicene counsel, Con. Max. C. 3. c.
14
neither thou the counsel of Aremineus, as though we would determine causes
therewith: for neither I am bound unto the authority of the one, neither thou
of the other: but let each thing with other: and each cause with cause: and
reason with reason be tried by the authority of the scriptures. And again,
Con. Crese, gram. li. 2
There is co^stituted and ordained one ecclesiastical cannon or rule, unto the
which belongs the books of the Prophets and Apostles, by whose writings we
ought to judge touching the writings of others, whether they be faithful or
unfaithful. Again, Con. Faust.
Our Lord would that we should believe nothing against the confirmed authority
of the Scriptures. Again, Mam. l. 13 c. 5.
Let us bring forth the divine Ballaunce of the holy Scriptures, and let us
weigh in them what so ever is of any weight or value.

Damascene. De Bapt. con. Dona. lib. 2. De orth fid. li. 4. c. 18
As a tree planted by the rivers of waters, even so does the soul of man,
which is moistened by the heavenly scriptures bring forth timely fruit,
which is true and perfect faith. And again, Let us receive, Ib. li. 1. c. 1
acknowledge, and reverence all those things which are delivered unto us by the
Law, Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, seeking nothing which is not
contained in them.

And least we should seem altogether to neglect and despise the Schoolmen,
hear what Scotus says.

It is most manifest that the Scriptures In prol. lomb. q. ^
sufficiently do contain all doctrine necessary to the pilgrim that
trauaileth here in the world.

Peter Stelliaco. (...) prin. 4. sent.
We must run unto the scriptures alone, that we may attain eternal life.

And Gracianus in his decrees, Can. Ego (...). did, 9
does repeat that sentence of Augustine, which we have before rehearsed. And
many more may be recited unto the like effect, but here we cease because we
will wander no farther.

That we may now therefore make an end of the objections of our adversaries,
which they gather from ye writings of the Doctors, we will comprehend the
effect of all those their objections, which they have or can bring forth in an
argument, which is thus.

The Doctors of the Church have thought that besides the holy Scriptures, The
con^lusion of the objections out of y^ ancient Doctors.
traditions not written ought also to be received.

Ergo all those things which are necessary unto faith and salvation are not
contained in the Scriptures.

Let us now try their antecedent. Answer
It is manifest by ye testimonies of the ancient Fathers, which before we have
alleged, yt those ancient fathers have not written all alike touching
traditions: for first it behooued to know the mind and opinion of the old
Doctors before they object them to us. But let this be the full sum of all
those things which the ancient doctors who are most to be accounted of, have
written touching Traditions. All those things which are delivered, either
appertain to the principles of religion and constitution of manners, or else
unto ecclesiastical rites and orders of the Church, but those things which
appertain to principles of faith and manners, are most surely contained in the
Scriptures, neither is it any hindera^ce if certain kinds of speech to the
easy explication of doctrine and principles of religion, be not found by
express words in the holy Scriptures, so that the matter it self, and the
sense signified by these terms be extant in the scriptures: But as touching
those things which appertain unto rites and ecclesiastical order if they agree
with the Scriptures, and serve to the edification of the Church: Yea, finally,
if they be received with the common consent of the whole Church, then are they
with great reverence to be received, and that this was the opinion and mind,
of the ancient Fathers, I think it is sufficiently made manifest by these
things which have been alleged before: whereby we may see, that the ground
and matter of our adversaries is false.

Now therefore I deny their consequent: The error of the former objection
for the error is in form of reasoning: the Argument is grounded upon the
misunderstanding of the fathers. Another error is this: for that they take
that to be granted; which lies between us in controversy. For thus
stands the case between us, whether in confirming principles of faith, the
scriptures alone be to be hard, yea or nay. But our adversaries straight
ways propone to us the opinion of Doctors, and thereby they by and by
conclude, that the Scriptures alone are not to be heard, to wit, being
unmindful, that this self same thing is a controversy between us. For if
this opinion touching the which we do dispute, may be determined by the
writings of the Doctors, then it follows, that the scriptures alone are not
to be heard in establishing articles of faith. Wherefore our adversaries do
not rightly dispute, their first principle being not rightly applied.

Wherefore the error of their former conclusion, is thus to be corrected: In
as much as the writings of all the Doctors, Correcting of ye former objection
must be brought unto the rule of the holy scriptures, both the word of God so
commanding it, and also the Doctors themselves consenting thereunto: and the
old Doctors of the Church themselves, have taught that every article of our
faith must be grounded upon the scriptures only: furthermore Ecclesiastical
rytes and ceremonies if they agree with the scriptures, if they serve to the
edification of the church: yea, finally, if they be received with common
consent of the whole Church, that then they are to be received with great
reverence: Now here we must diligently search out, whether that this opinion
of the Doctors, be agreeable to the word of god, so that so far it is to be
received, as it has his confirmation by the Scriptures. And because our whole
Disputation is here had only touching principles of doctrine necessary to
faith and salvation, that we may not seem to wander from our proposed
question, we here cease: neither will we take upon us the disputation of
ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies, which disputation if the matter so
require, and God so permit us, we will take in hand: But now we defer it unto
another time.

Thus have I ^^^^ding to the method proposed, to wit, d^^^ely and schoolelike,
The conclusion of ye whole disputation.
by the authority (...) most learned Fathers disputed in defense of the word
written, against the traditions of men. Whereby the truth of our cause
appears, and the obscure deceipts and errors of our adversaries, are brought
into open show: for in such sort have we set down, opened, and confirmed our
mind and judgment, and so confuted and dissolved the errors and arguments of
our adversaries, both by the holy scriptures and also by the writings of the
ancient fathers, that every man may easily see, this doctrine which our
reformed church by the word of God (which is therefore the true Catholic
Church) does hold and profess, is most true, which is: That All doctrine
necessary to our Christian faith and Religion is contained in the holy
Scriptures.

Laus Deo.

