The first Sermon of Mayter Hughe Latimer, which he preached before the
Kings Majesty within his graces palayce at Westminster, M. D. XLIX. the.viii.
of March.

Cu^ gratia et Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



To the right virtuous and gracious Lady Katherin Douchesse of Suffolk,
Thomas Some, her humble and faithful Oratoure, wysheth Godly favor and
everlasting salvation from god the father through Jesus Christ our merciful
Lord.
When man is borne for man, that one to another should be a God, and not a
devil, an helper, no hynderer. Unto whom also the use of the tongue is only
given, whereby they do both express and show the affections of their minds,
there is no man which can say, I have no need of any man.

But among infinite mischiefs and euyls of manns poverty and anguish, by
which he has need of other me^nes help, is the instruction of prudence or
virtue and of science. For ma^kynd does in this precel chiefly brute beasts
because they help one another by mutual communication.

In learning good and virtues manners, the use of communyng is required
chiefly, that men errynge and ignoraunte should be taught, for there is none
which shall ever learn of him self, all though he be never so happily borne.

Therefore, it shall become every man, which does inte^d to live godly, to hear
and learn godly books, to printe heavenly documentes in their hearts. For as
evil doctrine, deuilysh books, and fylthy talk do corrupt good manners: so
faithful precepts, godly books, chaste commonynge and honest, shall edify, and
confirm.

Wherefore* intendinge to do good unto al me^ and namely unto such, as err and
be ignorant, I have gathered, write, and brought into light the famous friday
sermons of Master Hugh Latimer, which be preached in Lent last past, before
our most, noble King Edward the sixte, at the new Palaice of Westminster,
the third year of his reign. Which Sermons (most virtuous Lady) I dedicate
unto your honorable grace, nothing doubting but that you will gladly embrace
them, not only because of their excellency, but chiefly for the profit
which shall ensue thoroughe them unto the ignorante.

For in them are fruitful and godly documentes, directing ordinatly not only
the stepps, conuersatyon, and living of kings: but also of other mynisters and
subjects under him. And let no man be grieved though it be not so exactlye done
as he did speak it, for in very deed I am not able so to do, to write word for
word as he did speak, that passes my capacity though I had.xx. men's
wits, and no fewer hands to write withal. As it is impossible that a litell
river should receive the recourse of the main sea with in his brymmes, so that no
water should over whelm the sides thereof: In like manner is it more unlike my
sym^le wit to comprehend absolutely the abundaunt eloquence and learning
which flows most abundantli out of godly Latymers mouth.

Notwithstanding, yet had I rather with shamefastnes declare charitably this
part of his godly documentes, and counsel then with slowthfulnes forgette or
keep close folyshly, that thing which may profit many.

Who is that will not be glad to hear and believe the doctrine of godly
Latimer? Whom God has appointed a prophet, unto our most noble King, and unto
our Realm of England, to declare the message of the living God, to supplante
and rote out al sins and vice, to plant and graffe in men's hearts the
plenteousnes of all spiritual blessings in Jesus Christ our Lord?

Moses, Ieremias, Helias, did never declare the true message of god unto their
rulers and people, with a more sincere spirit, faithful mind and godly
zeal, then godly Latymer both now in our days unto our most noble King
and unto the whole realm. iij. King. xxij
Furthermore also Iosia received never the book of gods will at the hands of
Helkia the hie preiste, or yt admonicion of Hulda yt prophetess, with a more
perfect and godly fear, then our most noble King does most faithfullye,
give credit unto the words of good father Latimer. And I have no doubt but
all godly men will likewise receive gladly his godly Sermons and give credit
unto the same. Therefore this my rude labor of another man's swet (most
virtuous lady) I offer most humbly unto your grace, moved there unto of godly
zeal, thorough the Godly fame, that is dispersed universally of your most
godly disposicion, and unfeigned love toward the living, almyghtye, eternal
God and his holy word, practysed daily both in your graces most virtuous
behauour, and also godly charity toward the edificatio^ of every membre
graffed in Christ Jesus, most humbly desiryng your grace to accept favorably
this my temerous interprise. And I your most humble and faithful Orator shall
pray unto Jehovah, the God which is of himself, by whom, and in whom, all
things live, move, and be, that, that good work which he has begone in you
he may perform it unto your last ending, thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, who
preserve and keep your grace now and ever. So be it.

The argument of the Sermon.
IN this first Sermon is declared, and taught the godly election of a King,
and a rule of godly living as touching his own person. Where he proves our
most excellent King Edward, to be our most lawful king both by nativity, and
country, yea, and now appointed in these our days to deliver us from the
danger and captivity of Egypt and wicked Pharao, that is from, error and
ignorance and the deuelishe antichrist the Pope of Rome. The form of his godly
rule also he divided here in this sermon in three parts. iij.
First that he should not trust to much unto his own strength and policy, but
only to walk ordinatly with God and to make him his lodes man and chief guide.
Secondarily that he live not lassyuyously and wa^tonly, following venerial
affections, but to live chastely. And when time shall require, to lead a pure
life, under the yoke of matrimonye, admonishing both his grace, and al other
Maiestrates to be circu^specte in choosing a wife, either for them selves or
for their children, having this always in mind, that she be, of a faithful
house, godly brought up, and of a pure life. Thirdly he admonyshed the kings
grace, that he should not desire gold and silver to much, prouyngs by many
arguments that kind of vice with the other forsaid, to be destruction not only
unto the kings grace: but also unto the whole realm and people, In these
things co^systith the whole sum of this sermon.

The first sermon Of M. Latimer.
QVecunque scripta sunt: ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. Roma. xv. ^
What soever things are written a fore time, are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of scripturs, might have hope. In taking
this part of scripture (most nobill audience) I play as atrowa^t, which when
he is at schole, will chose a lesson, wherein he is perfight, because he is loath
to take pain in studienge a new leasson, or else fears strypes for his
slothfulnes. In like manner, I might seem now in my old age to sum men, to take
this part of scripture, because I would wade easilye away there with, and
drive my matter at my pleasure and not to be bound unto a certain theme.
Paul speaks of gods word only.
But ye shall consider, yt the foresaid words of Paul are not to be understand
of all scriptures, but only of those, which are of god, written in gods book,
and all things which are therein, are written for out learning, The
exellencye of this word is so great, and of hye dignity, that there is no
earthly thing to be compared unto it The author thereof is great that is God
him self, Genesis i. a. and xvij. a. Deuteronomy. iiij. a Esa. xxvi. a. Pron. viij. c
Daniel. vij. e.
eternal almighty, everlasting. The scripture, because of him, is also
great, eternal, most mighty, and holy. Almen ought to obey god, to believe
his word, and to follow it.
There is no king Emperor, maiestrate, and ruler, of what state so ever they
be, but are bound to obey this God, and to give credence unto his holy word
in directing their steps ordinarlye according unto the same word, yea
truly they are not only bound to obey gods book, but also the minister of the
same, for the words sake, so fer as he speaks syttinge in Moses chair, that
is; God rules this world with two swerdes
if his doctrine be taken out of Moses law. For in this world God has.ii.
swerdes the one is a temporal sword the other a spiritual. The temporal swerd.
The temporal sword rests in the hands of Kings, Maiestrates, and rulers
under him, whereunto all subjects, as well the Cleargye as the laytie be
subject, and punishable, for any offense contrary to the same book.

The spiritual sword is in the hands of the ministers and preachers, The
spiritual sword.
where unto all Kings, Maiestrates and, Rulers ought to be obediente, that is
to hear, and follow, so long as the ministers sit in Christ's chair,
Mathe. xxiij.
that is, speaking out of Christ's book.

The King corrects transgressors with the temporal swerd, yea, and ye
preacher also, if he be an offender: But the preacher can not correct the
king if he be a transgressor of gods word, with ye temporal swearde, But he
must correct and reprove him with the spyrituall swearde, fearing no man,
setting God only before his eyes, under whom he is a minister to supplante
and root up all vice and myschiefe by Gods word, whereunto all men
ought to be obedyente, as is mencyoned in many places of scripture, and
among many this is one. Math. xxiij. a


Quecunque iusserint vos seruare, seruate, et facite.

What so ever they bid you observe, that observe and do. Therefore let the
preacher teach improve, i. Timo. iij. a. Peter. i. a.
amend an instruct in ryghtuousnes, with the spyrituall sweard, fearing no
man though death should ensue. Thus Moses fearyng no man with this swearde,
Exodus v. vi. vij. etc.
did, reprove King Pharao, at Gods commandment.

Micheas the prophet also did not spare to blame King Achab for his wyckednes,
iij. Regu. xxv
according to gods will, and to prophesye of his destrucion contrary unto
many false Prophets. These forsayde kings being admonyshed by the ministers
of gods word, because they would not follow their godly doctrine and correct
their lives, King Pharao punished*
came unto utter destruction. Pharao geuynge no credit unto Moses the prophet
of God, but applyant unto the lusts of his own heart, Exodus xiiij
what time he heard of the passage of Gods people, having no fear or
remembrance of gods work, he did prosecute after entendyng to destroy the^,
and was drowned in the red sea. King Acab also because he would not harken unto
Micheas was kylde with an arrow. Acab. iij. Regu. xxi.
Like wise also the house of Ieroboa^ with other many, iij. Reg. xiiij.
came unto destruction, because he would not hear the ministers of Gods
word, and correct his life according unto his will, and pleasure. The preacher
must have God before his eyes chiefly.
Let the preacher therefore never fear to declare the message of God unto all
men. And if the king will not hear them then the preachers may admonyshe and
charge them with their duties, and so leave them unto God and pray for
them. Euel preachers are to be refused, and not to be believed.
But if the preachers digrese out of Christ's chair, and shall speak their
own Phansyes, then instede of. Quecunque iusserint vos, facere, facite, et
seruate.

What so ever they bid you observe, that observe and do. Change it into these
words foloweynge: Mathe. vij. g
Cauete vero vobis apseudo Prophetis qui veniunt ad vos. etc.

Beware of false Prophets which come unto you in shepes clothyng, but
inwardly, they are rauenynge woulffes, ye shall know them by their fruits:
Yea, change Quecunque iusserint (if their doctrine be evil) into Cauete a
fermento pharise orum, Luke. xij. a
etc.

That is Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharyseis, and of the
Saduces. In teachinge evil doctrine, all preachers are to be eschewed, and in
no wise to be harkened unto. In speaking truth, they are to be heard. All
things written in gods book, In godsboke is matter for all estates.
are most certain true, and profitable for all men. For in it is contained
mete matter for Kings, Princes, Rulares, Bishops, and for all estates.
Wherefore, it behooves every preacher, sumwhat to appoynte and accomodate him
self, and his matter agreeable unto the comfort, and amendment of the
audience, unto the which he declares the message of God. If he preach before
a king, let his matter be concerning the office of a king, if before a
bishop, then let him treat of byshoplye duties and orders, and so forth
in other matters, as time and audience shall require.

I have thought it good, to entreat upon these words following which are
written in the.xvii. Chapter of Deuteronomye. Deuteronomy.xvij.
Cum ueneris in terram quam Dominus Deus dat tibi possederisque eam, et ceter.
That is. When thou art come unto the Land which the Lord thy God gives the,
and enioyeste it, and dwell therein: If thou shall say, I will set a King
over me, like unto all the nations that are about me: Then thou shall make him
king over the, whom the Lord thy God shall chose.

One of thy brethren must thou make King over the, and may not set a
stranger over the, which is not of thy brethren. But in any wise, let him
not hold to many horses, that he bring not the people again to Egypt,
through the multitude of horses, for as much as the Lord has said unto
you: ye shall hence forth go no more again that way. Also he shall not have
to many wives, least his heart turn away, neither shall he gather him
silver and goulde to much. As in diverse other places of Scriptures, is mete
matter for all estates, So in this forsayde place is dyscribed chiefly the
doctrine fyt for a king. But who is worthy to utter this doctrine before our
most noble king? Not I God knows, which am through age, both weak in
body, and obliuious, unapt I am, not only because of paynefull study, but
also for the short warning. Well unto God I will make my moan, who never
failed me. Auxiliator in necessitatibus.

GOD is my healper in all my necessities. To him alone will I make my peticion.
To pray unto saints departed I am not taught, to desire like grace of God as
they had (right Godly it is (^or to believe God to be no less merciful unto
us being faithful) the^ he was unto them, greatly comfortable it is. Therefore
only unto God let us lift up our hertes and say the lords prayer.

GVm veneris. etc. Things touched most chiefly in the hole sermon.
When thou art come unto y^ la^d which the lord. etc. Thou shall appoynte him
king. etc. One of thy brethren



God. Nor he shall not multiplye

To have a king the Israelites did with much importunitye call unto God, and
God long before promised them a king, and were fully certified thereof that
GOD had promised that thing. Genesis xvij. a.
For unto Abraham he said: Ego crescere te faciam vehementer, ponamque te in
gentes, sed et reges ex te prodibunt.

That is, I will multiply the excedyngely, and will make nations of the, yea and
kings shall spring out of the. These words were spoken long before the
children of Israel had any king. Notwithstanding, yet God prescribed unto the^
an order, how they should chose their king, and what manner a man he should be,
where he says: when thou shall come in to the land. etc. As who should
say, O ye children of Israel I know your nature right well, which is evil,
and inclined unto al euyls. I know that thou will chose a king to raygne over
the, and to apere glorious in the face of the world, after the manner of
Gentyles. But because thou art styffe necked, wild, and art given to walk
without a brydel, and line. Therefore now I will prevent thy evil and beastly
manners, I will hedge strongly thy way, I will make a durable law, which shall
compel the to walk ordinatelye, and in a plain way, that is thou shall not
chose the a King after thy will and fantasye, but after me thy Lord and God.
Thus, God condicioned with the Jews, that their king should be such a one as
he him self would chose them. Anotable tale.
And was not much unlike the bargayne that I heard of late should be
betwixt two frinds for a horse the owner promised the other should have the
horse if he would, the other axed the price, he said.xx. nobles. The other
would give him but.iiii. pound, the owner said he should not have him then.
The other claymed the horse because he said, he should have him if he would.
Thus this bargayne be came a Westminster matter, the lawyers got twyse the
valor of the horse, and when all came to all, two fools made an end of the
matter. How be it, the Israelites could not go to law with GOD, for choosing
their king, for would they, nyl they their king should be of his chosyng,
lest they should walk inordinatly, in a deceyuable way, unto their utter
loss and destruction. For as they say communly Qui vadit plaue, vadit save*
that is. He that walks plainly, A common saing.
walks safelye. As the Jews were styfnecked, and were ever ready to walk
inordinatelye, no less are we English men given to untowardness, and
inordinate walking after our own fantasyes and brains. We will walk
without the Limits of Gods word, we will chose a king at our own
pleasure. i. Regu. xix. a


But let us learn to frame our lives after the noble king Dauyd which when
he had many occacions, given of king Saul to work evil, for evil, yea, and
having many times opportunity to perform mischief and to slay king Saul,
Nevertheless yet fearing, i. Reg. xxiiij. a Read ye stories they be very
pleasant and profitable.
would, not follow his fleshlye affections and walk inordinatelye, without
the will of Gods word, which he confessed always to be his direccion, Psalm.
cxviij. ^.
saying. Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum et lumen semitis meis. Gods word is
our light.
Thy word, O Lord is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my steps.
Thus having in mind, to walk ordinatly he did always avoid to do evil.
For when king Saul was in a cave with out any man, Dauyd and his men sitting
by the sides of the cave, yea and Dauyds men mouynge him to kyl Saul, David
made answer and said unto the^: Seruetiue dominus, Danyd did walk ordynatly.
ne remistani. etc. co^tra dominu^ meu^ Messiam. etc. That is The Lord keep me
from doing this thing unto my master yt is the lords anointed. At another
time also, moved by Abisay to kyl Saul sleping, Dauyd said: i. Reg. xxvi. b
Ne interficias eum, quis enimimpune manum suam inferret vucto domini. etc.
That is: Destroy him not, for who can lay his hands on the Lords anointed
and be gylteles etc. I would God we would follow king Dauyd, and then we
should walk ordinatly, and yet do but that we are bound of duty to do, for
God says: Quodego brecipio, hoc tantum facito.

That thing which I command that on^^y do. Fantastical brayns are reproved
inordinatly.
There is a great error risen now a days among many of us, which are vain
and new fangled men, climbyng beyond the lymites of our capacitye and wit,
in wrenching this text of scripture, hereafter following, after their own
fantasy and brain, i. Regn. viij,
their error is upon this text: Audi vocem populi in omnibus que dicunt tibi,
non enim te reprobant sed me reprobarunt, ne regnem super eos.

That is: Hear the voice of the people in all that they say unto the, for
they have not cast the away but me. They wrench these words awrye after
their own fantasies, and make much doubt as touching a king, and his
Godly name. They that so do walks inordinatly, they walk not directly and
plainly, but delight in balkes, and stubble way. God calls his ministers by
diverse names.


It makes no matter by what name the rulers be named, if so be they shall
walk ordinatelye with God, and direct their steps with God. For both
patriarchs Judges, and kings, had, and have their authority of god, and
therefore Godly. But this ought to be considered which God says. Non preficere
tibi potes hominem alienum. that is. Thou must not set a stranger over the.

It has pleased God to grant us a natural liege King and Lord, King Edwa^
ye. vi. is our natural king, and a most precious treasure.
of our own nation, an English man, one of our own religion. God has given
him unto us, and is a most precious treasure, and yet many of us do desire a
stranger to be king over us. Let us no more desire to be bankers, but let
us endeavor to walk ordinatelye and plainly, after the word of God. Let us
follow Daniel, let us not seek the death of our most noble and ryghtfull King,
our own brother, boeth by natiuitye, and Godly religion. Let us pray for his
good state, that he may live long among us.

Oh what a plage were it, Let us pray. for his life.
that a strange king of a strange land, and of a strange religion should
raygne over us. Where now we he governed in the true religion, A stranger
would rot out all godlynes and plant again as hypocrisy,
he should extirpe and pluck away all together, and then plant again all
abomynacion, and Popery. GOD keep such a king from us.

Well the Kings grace has systers, my Lady Marye, and my Lady Elizabeth,
which by succession and course, are enheritours to the Crown. Who i^ they
should marye with strangers, what should ensue GOD knows. But god grant
they never come unto coursynge, nor succedynge. Therefore to avoid this plage,
let us amend our lives and put away all pride which does drown men in
this realm at those days, all covetousness where in the magistrates and tyche
men of this realm are over whelmed, all lechery and other excessyue vices,
prouokyng gods wrath, were he not mercyefull, even to take from us our
natural king and leyge Lord, yea, and to plage us with a strange king for
our vnrepentaunte heart. Wherefore (if as ye sai) ye love the king amend
your lives, They that love God or the king will amend their sinful living.
and then ye shall be a mean that GOD shall lend him us long to raygne over
us, for vndowtedlye sins provoke much gods wrath scripture says.

Dabo tibi rege^ in furore meo. That is I will give the a King in my wrath.
Now we have a lawful king, a godly king, nevertheless yet many evils do
reign. Long time the ministers appointed, has studied to amend, and redres
al euyles, long time before this, great labor has been about this matter,
great crakes has been made that all should be well. But when all came to all
for all their bostes, little or nothing was done, in whom these words of
Horace may well be verified, Horacius.
saying. Parturiunt montes, nas^etur ridiculus mus. The mountains swells
up, the pore mouse is brought out: long before this time, many has taken in
hand to bring many things unto pass, but finallye their works came unto
small effect and profyt. Now I hear say all things are ended after a Godly
manner, or else shortelye shall be. Make haste, make haste, and let us learn to
convert, to repent, and amend our lives. If we do not, I fear, I fear,
lest for our sins and unthankfulness, an Hipocrit shall reign over us. Long
we have been servants and in bondage, The pope has long reigned.
serving the pope in Egypt. God has given us a deliverer, a natural king.
God has sent us a delyuerer.
Let us seek no stranger of another nation, no Hypocrite which shall bring
in again al papistrie, hypocrisy, and Idolatrye. No diabolical minister
which shall maintain all deuilyshe worckes and evil exercises. Let us no
more seek to serve a stranger.
But let us pray that god maintain and continue our most excelente king
here present, true inheritoure of this our realm, Let us pray for our king.
boeth by natiuytye, and also by the special gift and ordinance of GOD. He
does us rectify in the liberty of the gospel, in that therefore let us stand.
State ergo in liberate, Gala. v. a.
qua Christus nos liberauit. Stand ye in the lybertye, wherewyth Christ has
made us free. In Christ's liberty we shall stand, If we so live that we
profit. If we cast away al evil, fraud, and deceyte with such other vices,
contrary to gods word. And in so doing we shall not only prolong and
maintain our most noble kings days in prosperity: but also we shall prosper
our own lives to live not only prosperously, but also godly.

In any wise, The second part of his sermou.
let no such a wone prepare unto him self many horses. etc. In speaking
these words, ye shall understand, that I do not entende to speak against the
strength, polycye, and prouysyon of a king, but against excess, and vain
trust that kings have in them selves, more the^ in the living god the
author of al goodness, and geuer of al victory. Many horses are requisite for
a king, but he may not excede in them, nor triumph in them, more then is
needful for the necessary affairs and defense of the realm: what means
it, that god has to do with the kings stable? But only he would be master
of his horses: the Scripture says, Psalm. cxii.
In altis habitat, He dwells on hye, it follows. Humilia respicte He looks
on low things, God is grand master in ye kings house
yea upon the Kings stables, and upon all the offices in his house. God is
great grande master of the Kings house, and will take account of every one
that bears rule therein, for the executyng of their offices: Whether they
have justly and truly served the king in their offices or no. Yea God looks
upon the king him self, if he worcketh well or not. Every king is subject
unto God, and all other men are subjects unto the king In a king God requires
faith, not exces of horses. Horses for a king be good and necessary, if they
be well used. But horses are not to be preferred above poor men. I was ones
offended with the kings horses, and therefore took occasion to speak in the
presens of the kings majesty that dead is, when Abbeis stood. Abbeis were
ordained for the comfort of the poor. Wherefore I said it was not decente
that the kings horses should be kept in them (as many were at that time)
the living of poor men thereby minished and taken away. But afterward a
certain noble man said to me, what haste thou to do with the kings horses: I
answered, and said, I speak my conscience as Gods word directs me. He
said: horses be the maintenaunces and part of a kings honor, and also of
his realm, wherefore in speking against them ye are against the kings
honor. An answer declarynge the true honor of a king.
I answered: God teaches what honor is decente for the king and for all
other men according unto their vocacions. God apoynteth every king a
sufficient living for his state and degree, boeth by lands and other
customs. And it is lawful for every king to enjoy the same goods and
possessions. But to extorte and take away the right of the poor is against
the honor of the king. And you do move the king to do after that manner,
then you speak against the honor of the king. For I full certifye you, He
describes ye dyshonors of a King plainly and most truly.
extorcioners, violent oppressers, ingrossers of tenementes and lands,
through whose covetousness, villages de caye and fall down, the Kings liege
people for lack of sustinaunce are famished and decayed. They be those which
speak against the honor of the King. god requiret y^ a good heart.
God requires in the king and al magistrates a good heart, to walk directlye
in his ways. And in all subjects, an obedience dew unto a king. Therefore I
pray god both the king and also we his people may endeuer dilige^tli to walk
in his ways, to his great honor and our profit. The. iij. part of the
sermon.
Let him not prepare unto him self to many wives. etc. Although we read here
that the kings amongst the Jews, Kings of the Jews had a dispensacion to
have mo wives then one.
had liberty to take more wives then one, we may not therefore attempt to
walk inordinatly and to think that we may take also many wives.

For Christ has forbidden this unto us Christians. And let us not impute
sin unto the Jews because they had many wives. For they had a
dispensacyon so to do. Christ limitteth one wife unto us only And it is a
great thing for a man to rule one wife ryghtely, and ordinatly. For a woman
is frayl and procliue unto all euels, a woman is a very weak vessel, and may
sone deceive a man, and bring him unto euel. Many examples we have in holy
scripture. Adam had but one wife called Eve, On wife is hard eo be well ruled.
and how sone had she brought him to consent unto evil, and to come to
destruction. How did wicked Iesabel prouente King Hachabs heart from God and
al godlynes, and finally unto destruction. A godly woman is to be chosen.
It is a very hard thing for a man to rule well one woman. Therefore let our
king, what time his grace shall be so minded to take a wife, to chose him one,
which is of God, that is, which is of the houshoulde of faith. Yea let all
estates be no les circumspect in chosyng her, taking great deliberacion, and
then shall not need dyuorsementes, and such myscheues, to the evil example and
slander of our realm, Love which is godli is to be preferred above al erthly
things in marriage.
and that she be one as the king can find in his heart to love and led his
life in pure and chaste esposage, and then shall he be the more prone and ready
to aduau^ce gods glory, punish and extirpe, the great lecherye used in this
realm. Therefore we ought to make a continual prayer unto God, for to
grant our kings grace such a mate as may knyt his heart and hers,
according to Gods ordinance and law, and not consider and cleave only to
politycke matter or coniunccion, for the enlargynge of dominions, for suertye
and defense of contreys, setting aparte the institucion and ordinance of God.
We have now a pretty little shillyng, in deed a very pretty one. A notable
saiynge.
I have but one I think in my purse, and the last day I had put it away
almost for an old grote, and so I trust some will take them. The fynenes of
the Silver* I can not se. But therein is Printed a fine sentence: that is.
Timor Domini fons vite, vel sapientie. Prouer. xvi.
The fear of the Lord is the fountain of life or wisdom. I would God this
sentence were always prynted in the heart of the king in choosing his wife,
The well of life or wysdo^
and in all his officers. For like as the fear of God is fons sapiencie, or
vite, ^o the forgettyng of GOD is fons stulticie the fountain of folyshnes or
of death, Policy if it be not of God, brings death.
although it be never so politic: for upon such politic matters death does
ensue and follow. All their deuorcementes and other like condiciones to the
great displeasure of almyghtye God, which euylles I fear me, is much used at
these days in the marriage of noble men's children, for joining lands to
lands, possessions to possessions, neither the virtuous educacion, nor living
being regarded, but in the infancy such marriages be made, to the displeasure
of god and breach of espousals. Let the king therefore chose unto him a godly
wife, whereby he shall the better live chaste, and in so living al godliness shall
enencrease, and ryghtuousnes be mayntained. Notwythstandyng I know, here after
some will come and move your grace toward wantonness and to the inclinacion
of the flesh and vain affeccions. A notable historye of a french king.
But I would your Grace should bear in memory an hystorye of a good king
called Jews, that trauaylled toward the holy land (which was a great
matter in those days) and by the way syckened, being long absente from his
wife. And upon this matter the Phisicians did agree, that it was for lack of a
woman, The good counsel of Bishops.
And did consulte with the bishops there in, who did conclude that because of
the dystaunce of his wife (being in an other contrie) he should take a wenche.
This good king hering their conclusion would not consent there unto, but said:
he had rather be sick then unto death, then he would break his espousals. Woe
worth such counselors, bishops, nay rather Bussardes. Nevertheless if the
king should have consented to their conclusyon, and accomplished the same, if
he had not chansed well, they would have executed the matter as I have heard of
two that have consulted together, and according to the advise of his friend the
one of them wrought, where the succession was not good.

The other imputed a piese of reproach to him for his such counsel given. He
excused the matter, sayeinge that he gave him none other counsel, but if it
had been his cause he would have done likewise. So I think the bishops would
have excused the matter, if the king should have reproved them for their
counsel. No^e.
I do not read that the King did rebuke them for their counsel, but if he had,
I know what would have been their answer. They would have said, we give you
no worsse council, then we would have followed our selves, if we had been in like
case: well sir this King did well, The king fearyng god avoided evil
and had the fear of God before his eyes. He would not walk in bywalkes, where
are many balkes. Amongst many balki^ges, is much stu^bling, and by sto^ling it
chances mani times to fall down to the ground. And therefore, let us not take
any bywalkes, but let gods word. direct us, let us not walk after, nor lean
to our own judgments and procedynges of our forfathers, nor seek not what
they did, but what they should have done, of which thing scripture admonysheth
us, saying:

Ne inclinemus preceptis et traditionibus patrum neque faciamus quod videtur
rectum in oculis nostris. De. xii. a.


Let us not incline our selves unto the precepts and tradycyons of our
fathers, nor let us do that seems right in our eyes. But suerlye, we will
not exchange our fathers doings and tradicious, with scripture, but chiefly
lean unto the^ and to their prescripcion, and do that seems good in our own
eyes. But suerlye that is going down the ladder, Scala Celi as it was made by
the Pope, came to be a Mass, but that is a false ladder to bring men to
heaven. The true ladder to bring a man to heaven is the knowledge and
following of scripture. Let the king therefore chose a wife which fears God,
let him not seek a proud, wanton, The.iij. part of the sermon.
and one full of rich treasures and worldelye pomp. He shall not multiply unto
him self to much gold and silver.

Is there to much thyncke you for a king? God does allow much unto a king,
and it is expedyente that he should have much, A king may have much, for
his expenses are great
for he has great expenses, and many occasions to spend much for the defense
and suertie of his realm and subjects.

And necessary it is that a king have a treasure always in a redines, for
that, and such other affairs, as be daily in his hands. The which treasure,
if it be not sufficient, he may lawfully and with a salve conscience, take
taxes of his subjects. For it were not mete the treasure should be in the
subjects purses, when the money should be occupied, nor it were not best for
them selves: for the lack thereof, it might cause both it, and all the rest
that they have should not long be theirs. Note when the king has to much of
his comens.
And so for a necessary and expediente occasion, it is warranted by gods
word to take of the subjects. But if there be sufficient treasures, and the
burdennynge of subjects be for a vain thing. so yt he will require thus much,
or so much of his subjects (which perchance are in great necessitye, and
penurye) Then this covetous intent, and the request thereof, Who shall se this
to much
is to much, which God forbids the king here in this place of scripture to
have. But who shall se this to much, None that be servants to the King.
or tell ye king of this to much. Think you any of the Kings prieuie
chamber? No. For fear of loss of fauer. Shall any of his sworn Chapelins?
No. They be of the clausset and keep close such matters. But the King him
self must se this to much, Corporal eyes cannot se to much.
and yt shall he do by no means with the corporal eyes: Spiritual eyes are to
be had, faieth charity,
Wherefore, he must have a payer of spectacles, which shall have to clear
syghtes in the^, that is, that one is faith, not a seasonable fayeth, which
shall last but a while, but a fayeth, which is continuynge in GOD. The
second clear sight is charity, which is feruente toward his Christen
brother. By them two, must the King se ever when he has to much. But few
there be that uses these spectacles, the more is their damnacion. Not with out
cause Chrysostom with admiracion says.

Miror si aliquis rectorum potest saluari. Chrysostoms saying.
I marvel if any ruler can be saved. Which words he speaks not of an
impossibilitye, but of a great difficulty For that their charge is marvelous
great, The understanding of it*
and that none about them dare show the^ the truth of the thing how it goth:
If God will.
well, the^, if God will not allow a king to much, not grant to much unto a
king much less unto the subject.
Whether will he allow a subject to much? no, yt he will not Whether has any
man here in England to much? I doubt most rich men have to much, for without
to much, we can get nothing. Who is not fa^^tye in taking tomuch learn.
As for example. The Phisician: If the pore man be diseased, he can have no
help without to much. and of the lawier the poor man can get no counsel,
Physicions Lawiers. Marchantes
expedicio^, nor help in his matter, except he give him to much. At marchantes
hands no kind of wares can be had, Landelordes Rentraysers steplordes*
Unnatural Lords.
except we give for it to much. You landelordes, you rentreisers, I may say
you steplordes, you unnatural lords, you have for your possessions yearly to
much. For that herebefore went for, xx. or.xl pound by year, which is an honst
portion to be had gratis in one Lordeshyp, of a another man's sweat and
labor: Of this to much comes al dearthis and scarlitie
now is it let for.l. or.a. C. pound by year. Of this to much comes this
monsterous and portentuous dearthes made by man, notwithstanding GOD does send
us plentifullye the fruits of the earth, mercyfullye, contrary unto our
deserts, Not wythstandynge to much, which these rich men have, causes
such dearth, that poor men ne (which live of their labor) can not with the
sweat of their face have a living, al kind of vittales is so dear, pigges,
gese, capons, chickens, eggs. etc.

These things with other are so vnresonably enhansed. Note the covetous men.
And I think verily, that if yet this co^tinewe, we shall al length be
constrained to pay for a pygge a pound. I will tell you my lords and
masters, this is not for the kings honor. this to much is not for the kings
honor
Yet some will say, know thou what belongs unto the kings honor better
then we? I answer, that the true honor of a King, is most perfectly
mentioned and painted forth in the scriptures, of which, if ye be ignorant,
for lack of time, yt ye cannot read it, albeit that your counsel be never
so politic, yet is it not for the kings honor. A descripcio^. of the
kings honor.
What his honor means ye cannot tell. It is the kings honor yt his
subjects be led in the true religion. First in true religion.
That all his prelates and Clergy be set about their work in preching and
studiyng, and not to be interrupted from their charge. ij. A welthy comminaltie
Also it is ye kings honor that the comme^ wealth be auaunsed, that the
dearth of these forsaied things be provided for, and the commodities of this
Realm so employed, as it may be to the setting his subjects on work, and
keeping the^ from ydlenes. And herin rests the kings honor and his office.
So doing, his account before God shall be allowed, and rewarded. Thirdlye the
kings honor stands in the multitude of people.
Further more, if the kings honor (as sum me^ say) stands in the great
multitude of people. Then these grasiers, inclosers, and renterearers, are
hinderers of the kings honor. For whereas have been a great meany of
householders and inhabitauntes, there is now but a know his intent in it. For
if ye bring it to pass, that the yomanry be not able to put their sons to
schole (as in deed universities do wonderously decay all ready) and that they
be not able to mary their daughters to the auoidyng of whoredom, The decay of
learning and purity of life.
I say ye pluck salvation from the people, Salvation rests in the^
and utterly distroie the realm. For by yomans sons, Yomens sons be
teachers of god.
the faith of Christ is, and has been maintained chiefly. Is this realm
taught by rich men's sons. No no, read the Cronicles ye shall find sumtyme
noble men's sons, which have been vnprechyng bishops and prelates, but ye
shall find none of them learned men. A notable thing.
But verelye, they that should look to the redress of these things, be the
greatest against the^. In this realm are a great many of folks, and amongst
many, I know but one of tender zeal at the mocion of his poor tenauntes,
has let down his lands to the old rentes for their relief. For gods
love, let not him be a Phoenix, let him not be alone. Let him not be an Hermit
closed in a wall, sum good man follow him and do as he gives example.
Surueiers be hand makers.
Surueiers there be, yt gredylye gorge up their couetouse guts, hand makers, I
mean (honest men I touch not) but all such as suruei, they make up their
mouths but the commens be utterly undone by the^. The cry of the pore.
Whose bitter cry ascending up to the ears of the god of Sabbath, the gredy
pyt of hell burning fire (without great repentance) to tarry and look for the^. A
redress God grant. For suerly, suerlye, but yt.ii. things do comfort me, I
would despair of the redres in these matters. One is, that the kings majesty
wha^ he comes to age, will se a redres of these things so out of frame.
Geuynge example by letting down his own hands first and then enjoin his
subjects to follow him. The second hope I have is, I believe that the general
accomptyng day is at hand, the dreadful day of judgment I mean, which shall
make an end of al these calamities and miseries. For as the Scriptures be Cum
dixerint pax pax. When they shall say, peace, peace: Omnia tuta, all things are
sure: The^ is the day at hand, a merry day I say, for all such as do in this
world study to serve and please god, and continue in his faith, fear and
love: and a dreadeful, horible day for them that decline from God walking in
their own ways, to whom as it is written in the.xxv of Mathewe is said: The
reward of wicked men.
Ite maledicti in ignem eternum. Go ye curssed into everlasting punishmente.
Where shall be waylinge and gnasshing of teeth. But unto y^ other he shall say:
The bless of the godly.
Venite benedicti come ye blessed children of my father possess ye the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginnynge of the world, of the which god
make us al partakers.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate, and Wylliam Seres,
dwelling in Peter College.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


