A true Relation of the Life and Death of Sir Andrew Barton, a Pirate and Rover
on the Seas
To the tune of, Come follow me Love.


WHen Flora with her fragrant flowers,
bedeckt the earth so trim and gay,
And Neptune with his dainty showers,
came to present the month of May:
King Henry would a progress ride,
over the River Thames past he,
Unto a Mountains top also,
did walk some pleasure for to see.
Where forty Merchants he espied,
with swiftest sail came toward him,
Who then no sooner were arived,
but on their knees did thus complain:
And't like your Grace, we cannot sail,
to France no voyage to be sure.
But Sir Andrew Barton makes us quail,
and robs us of our Merchants ware.
Uert was the King, and turned him,
said to his Lords of best d^gree,
Have I nere a Lord in all my Realm,
dare fetch that Traitor unto me:
To him replied Lord Charles Howa^d,
I will my Liege with heart and hand
If it please you grant me leave, he said,
I will perform what you command.
To him then spoke King Henry,
I fear my Lord you are too young:
No whit at all my Liege, quoth he,
I hope to prove in valor strong:
The Scottish Knight I vow to seek,
in place wheresoever that he be,
And bring on shore with all his might,
or into Scot^and he shall carry me.
A hundred men the King then said
out of my Realm shall chosen be,
Besides Saylors, and Ship-boys,
to guide a great Ship on the Sea.
Bow-men and Gunners of good skill
shall for this service chosen be,
And they at thy command and will,
in all affairs shall wait on thee.
Lord Howard called a Gunner then
who was the best of all the Realm,
His age was threescore years and ten,
one Peter Simon was his name.
My Lord called then a Bow-man rare,
whose active hands had gained fame,
A Gentleman borne in Yorkshire
and William Horsly was his name.
Horsly, quoth he, I must to sea,
to seek a Traitor with great speed,
Of an hundred bow-men brave, quoth he,
I have chosen thee to be my head:
If you my Lord have chosen me,
of an hundred men to be the head,
Upon maine Mast I Will hanged be,
if twelve score I miss one shilling breadth
Lord Howard then of courage bold,
went to the sea with pleasant cheer,
Not curbed with winters piercing cold,
though it was the stormy time of the year
Not long he had been on the seas,
no more then days in number three,
Till one Henry Hunt he then espied,
a Merchant os New Castle was he.
To him Lord Howard called out amain,
and strictly charged him to stand,
Demanding then from whence he came,
(...) where he did intend to land,
The Merchant then made answer soon
with heavy heart and careful mind:
My Lord, my ship it does belong
unto New Castle upon Tine.
Can thou me show, the Lord did say,
as thou did sail by day and night,
A Scottish Rouer who lies on Sea,
his name is Sir Andrew Barton knight
Then to him the Merchant said, and sighed
with a grieved mind and a wellaway,
But over well I know that wight,
for I was his prisoner but yesterstay.
As I my Lord did pass from France
a Bordeaux voyage to take so far,
I met Sir Andrew Barton thence,
who robbed me of my Merchants ware,
And mickle debts (God knows) I owe,
and every man did crave his own,
And I am bound to London now,
of our gracious King to beg a boon.
The second part, To the same tune.
Show me him said Lord Howard then,
let me but once that villain see,
And for one penny he has from thee taken,
I Will double the same with shillings three
Now (God forbid) my Lord, quoth he,
I fear your aim that you will miss,
God bless you from his tyranny
for you little know what man he is.
^e is brass within and steel without,
his ship most huge and very strong:
With eighteen pieces strong and stout,
he carries on each side along:
With beams from her Top-castle,
as also being huge and high,
That neither English nor Portugal,
can Sir Andrew Barton pass by,
Hard news thou show, the^ said my Lord
to welcome strangers to the Sea,
But as I said I Will bring him aboard,
or into Scotland he shall carry me:
The Merchant said, if you will do so,
take counsel then I pray withal,
Let no man to his topcastle go,
nor strive to let his beams down fall.
Lend me seven pieces of Ordinance then,
of either side my ship quoth he,
And to mor^ow my Lord twixt six and seven
again I will your honor see:
A glass I Will set that may be seen
whether you sail by day or night:
And to morrow surely before seven
you shall see Sir Andrew Barton knight.
The Merchant set my Lord a glass,
so we^l apparent to his sight,
Then on the morrow, as his promise was
he saw Sir Andrew Barton Knight,
The Lord then swore a mighty oath,
now by the heavens that be of might.
By faith believe me and by truth,
I think he is a worthy weight.
Fetch ^e my Lion out of hand
says the Lord, with Rose and Streamers hye,
Set up withal a Willow wand,
that Merchant like I may pass by.
Thus bravely Lord Howard past,
and d^d on Anchor ride so high,
No top-sale down at all he cast,
but as his foe did him defy.
A piece of Ordinance soon was shot,
by this proud Pirate fiercely then,
Into Lo^d Howards middle Deck,
which cruel shot killed fourteen men,
He called then Peter Simon he
look now thy word do stand in stead,
For tho^ shall be hanged on maine Mast,
if thou miss twelve score one penny bred.
Then Peter Simon gave a shot,
which did Sir Andrew mickle scarre,
In at his Deck it came so hot,
killed fifty of his men of war.
Alas, then said the Pirate stout,
I am in danger now I see,
This is some Lord I greatly doubt,
that is now set on to conquer me.
Then Henry Hunt with rig^r ^ot,
came bravely on his other side,
Who likewise shot in at his deck,
and killed five of his men beside.
Then out alas, sir Andrew cried,
what may a man now think or say,
Yon Merchant thief that pierces me,
he was my prisoner but yesterday.
Then did he on one Gordian call,
unto Top-castle for to go,
And bid his beams he should let fall,
for I greatly fear an overthrow.
The Lord called H^rsly then in have,
look that thy word stand now in stead,
For thou shall be hanged on maine Mast,
if thou miss twelve score a finger bred.
Then up Mast tree then swarmed he,
this stout and mighty Gordian,
But Horsly he most happily,
shot him under the collor bone:
Then called he of his Nephew then,
says, sisters sons I have no more,
Three hundred pounds I Will give to thee,
if thou will to Top-castle go.
Then stoutly he began to climb,
and from the Mast scornd to depart,
But Horsly soon prevented him,
and deadly pierced him to the heart
His men being slain then up amain,
did this stout Pirat climb with speed,
For armor of proof he had put on,
and did not dint of Arrow dread.
Come hither Ho^sl^ then said the Lord,
see that thy arro^ ^yme aright:
Great means to thee I will afford
and if thou speed I Will make thee Knight,
Sir Andrew he did climb up the tree
with right good will, and all his maine
Then upon the breast hit Horsl^ he,
till the arrow did return again.
Then Horsly spied a privy place,
with a perfect eye in a secret part,
His arrow swiftly flew apace,
and smote sir Andrew to the heart,
Fight on, fight on my merry men all,
a little I am hurt yet not slain,
I Will but lie down and bleed a while,
and come and fight with you again
And do not, says he, fear English Rogues
and of your Foes stand in no awe,
But stand fast by S. Andrews cross,
until you hear my whistle blow,
They never heard his whistle blow,
which made them all full sore afraid:
Then Horsly said, my Lord aboard,
for now Sir Andrew Bartons dead.
Then boorded they that gallant ship,
with a right good will and al their maine
Eighteenescore Scots alive in it,
besides as many more were slain,
The Lord went where sir Andrew lay,
and quickly then cut off his head:
I would forswear England many a day,
if thou were alive as thou art dead.
Thus from the wars Lord Howard came,
with mickle joy, and triumphing,
The Pirates head he brought along,
for to present unto the King:
Who briefly then to him did say,
before he knew well what was done,
Where is the knight and Pirate gay,
that I my self may be his doom.
You may thank God, then said the Lord
and four men in this ship with me,
That we are safely come to shore,
since you never had such an enemy,
That Is Henry Hunt and Peter Simon,
William Horsly, and Peter's son:
Therefore reward them for their pain,
for they did service at their turn.
To the Merchant then the King did say,
in liew of what he had from thee taine,
I give to thee a Noble a day,
sir Andrews whistle and his Chain,
To Peter Simon a Crown a day,
and half a Crown a day to Peter's son
And that was for a shot so gay,
which bravely brought sir Andrew down.
Horsly I will make thee a Knight,
and in Yorkshire there shall thou dwell,
Lord Howard shall Earl of Bury hight,
for his title he has deserved well,
Seven shillings to our English men,
who to this f^ght did stoutly stand,
And 12 pence a day to the Scots, till they
come to my brother King his Land.
FINIS.
London Printed for E. W.


