Speculum Belli sacri: OR THE LOOKINGGLASSE OF THE HOLY WAR, Wherein is
discovered: The Evil of War. The Good of War, The Guide of War.


IN THE LAST OF THESE I GIVE A SCANTLING OF THE CHRISTIAN Tackticks, from the
levying of the Soldier, to the sounding of the Renai^; together with a model
of the carryage, both of Conqueror and conquered. I have applied the general
rules warranted by the Word, to the particular necessity of our present times.

GALLAT. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule peace be upon them. DEVT.
29.9. When the Host goes against the enemies, then keep thee from every
wicked thing. 1 SAMUEL 17.47. And all the Assembly shall know, that the Lord
saves not with sword: for the battle is the Lords, and he will give you into
our hands. Qui presumit de viribus suis antequam pugnet prosternitur, Aug.
Printed, Anno 1624.

TO THE MOST ILLVSTIOVS PRINCE, FREDERICK KING OF Bohemia, Count Palatine of
the Rhine, etc. As also to the most virtuous Lady ELIZABETH, Queen of Bohemia,
and only daughter to the great and mighty King of Great Britain.
THE life of man (most illustrious Prince and Princess) is said by God
himself to be full of trouble; yea, Job 14.2.
the Humanists term it (and that truly) rather a trouble then a life. (...).
Vt s^evis projectas ab undis jacet infans indigus omni vitali auxi^^o. Lucr.
lib 6. Diog. Laert. lib 9, in vita ipsius.
This needs no other proof then woeful experience through all the parts of
man's life. The Poet pretily Emblemes our infancy with a ship broken Mariner,
cast naked, hurt, and helpless from the waves upon the shore, bewraying with
woeful cries the rest of the passages answerable to the beginning. If the
consideration hereof, made that great Philosopher Democritus weep continually;
what heart of flesh, and eye of pity, can from the promontorie of our present
security, without a flood of tears, behold the wetherbeaten Bark of Gods
Church, over which (to use the phrase of the Psalmist) all the waves, Psalm.
42.8.
and billows of the Lord do pass; yea, one deep so calls for another, that
if God himself were not the Ararat to rest upon, it should be split in pieces
upon the rocks of Shittim. Quorum pars magna fui.
A great part of this distress, your Graces are: therefore for mine own part,
I could wish with Jeremy, That my head were full of water, Jer. 9.1.
and mine eyes were a fountain of tears: Jn the Crystal nature whereof, while
I looked for the cause of this evil, that memorable passage of defeated
Pompey, did offer it self to my meditation. An approved Author tells us,
that Pompey being defeated in the Pharsalick battle, as he fled to Egypt, he
took off tht way to visit the Philosopher Cratippus, whom curiously he
questioned, whether at all there were any divine Providence or Moderation of
humane things or not. For his own part he could hardly be persuaded, that God
regarded those sublunary things, because he had the worse in the better cause.
The Philosopher answered, that there was a full period appointed to Kingdoms,
beyond which they could not pass. The answer and the question now I pass,
because I shall have occasion in the Treatise further to explane them. But may
it please your Highness to observe thus much, that if flesh and blood, or
mere philosophy, be guide in this inquisition, a good man may loose himself:
for not only does the Athiest, from the adversity of the godly, and prosperity
of the wicked; peremptorily conclude, Mal. 3.14.
that it is in vain to serve God; but even the Saints of God, forgetting their
Logic, have stumbled upon the like Paralogism, Ps. 63.4.5.6, etc.
Witness the Prophet David in that psalm, where he compares the peace, plenty
and prosperity of the wicked, with the adverse and contrary things which do
befall the people of God: Waters (says he) of a full cup are wrung out to
them. Where both the quality and quantity of affliction is laid open. Upon this
the people of God are said to turn in, that is David and others, namely to the
thoughts following, Is it thus with us? Hence they gather this false
conclusion, How does God know, etc. Surely in vain I have cleansed my heart,
etc. But this they do in their frenzy, a sympton of the fever of their
affliction, which David acknowledges with censuring of himself in the same
psalm, v. 15.21.22. If your Majesty's heart has been levened (for so the word
does signify, v. 21.) with any such temptation; be not discouraged, there has
no temptation taken you but such as has befallen the servants of God. Go with
David to the sanctuary, and there you shall see the cause of your affliction,
and your enemies success for a time, namely, to work, Your trial, and their
destruction. In the mean time (renowned Princes) the Lord bids you go on;
Speak unto the children of Israel that they go forward. Ex 14.15.
As we cease not to our power, to fill the golden censor with odors, Rev. 8.
that it may be filled again with fire and cast upon the earth, (that is Gods
and your enemies;) Cicero de crator. Hutarch. in Hannib. (...).
so I have presumed (though the least of all) to present your Highness with a
model or draught of the holy War indeed, with an earnest entreaty, not to
faint or give over till God give the victory. If an experienced Soldier shall
censure this Frame as Hamball did Phormio, for his lecture of Military
Discipline, with the livery of a fool; or as Archidamus did Periander, who of a
good Physician, made himself by his evil favored Verses an extreme evil
Poet: let him observe well, and I hope he shall find no wrong offered to his
Element As for the meannesse of the Frame, your gracious acceptance, as a
stately Roof, shall cover all the deformity. Jn great things it is enough to
will: as Princes are Gods, so in this they resemble him, to respect the good
will more then the work. If I can bring but Goats hair to cover the outside of
the Tabernacle; or wield but a sling against the Goliath of Babylon, or bring
but some odors to the Censor of your anointed selves and yours, it shall
comfort me, and happily encourage others to show the way more fully, at the
which I have pointed. Whatsoever it is, I am bold to present it to your
Highnesses joint protection. You are together, the subject of calamity; yea,
the But and point blanke whereat they aim: You are jointly together prayed for,
that the Lord would plant you, as he has plucked you up, and give you double
joy for your sorrow, and glory for your confusion: yea, that you may not only
be built up, but that you may jointly build up Jerusalem, which is the praise
of the world. In the mean time gracious Princes, possess your souls in
patience; For the patient waiting of the righteous shall not always be
forgotten.

Your Highnesses in all humble duty. A. L.

TO THE PRINCE HIS HIGHNESS CHARLES, The Hope of great Britain.
Most gracious Prince:
WHILST with mournful eye I often viewed the deep and long continued distress
of your dearest sister, and of her royal Lord, it gave me occasion to inquire
into the equity of their cause, which in all impartial judgeme^t shall be
found so just, that they and all that love them may appeal to God for the
pleading of it: but perceiving the success not to answer the cause, and that
some for want of love and some for want of judgment, did judge the cause by
the events; I went, with David, into the sanctuary whence I discovered the
causes of their calamity (notwithstanding of the goodness of the cause)
namely the all-wise God to be the chief workman, who puts every one into
the refining pot that he appoints for his treasurye, they and theirs, and in
them especially all the families of God to be the gold; Aegipt or Babylon to be
the sornace; the Amalekits to be the fuel or fire-workemen; the croaking
frogs to be the bellows; and the purging and refining of his own people to
be the work. Upon this discovery between love and fear (yea out of more love
then skill I must confess) I undertook the framing of this model of the
sacred War; wherein I handle at large the particulars of the said discovery as
they do occur in their proper places. Heerin briefly, by way of application,
I have laid the particuliar passages of both sides to the general rules
illustrated by the fittest examples (that my reading would afford me) that the
regularitie or obliquitie of every passage may appear. I have laid open
(according to my small skill) the pand^micall diseases of war, together with
the remedies: by the way, I have touched upon domestic affairs: and in all
this course I have made the sacred word the loadstone, the compass, and the
lesbian rule, whereby to square and direct all the rest. This I presumed to
dedicate to their Highnesses: because they are the special parties (as the
Lord speaks) that have seen affliction by the Rod of Gods wrath: Lam. 3.
but considering how they and theirs, Gods cause in their hands, and whatsoever
is commended to them, stands need both of a protector and revenger; I was
emboldened on the knees of my bounden duty, and best affection, to entreat
your grace that (according to your accustomed favor) you would vouchsafe to
look into this looking-glass; and howsoever its unpolished ruggednes may
rather be discovered by your complete skill and Heroic experience in Arms,
then its ability to direct so Princely a Director; yet that sure word
wherewith this glass is steeled, will both be light to lead you, and strength
to make you victorious: and as a Trumpet, though a mean Officer, serves to
rouse the courage of the greatest Commander; so this shall rather give an
Alarm to your Martial spirit, the^ ad to your Highness literature, courage or
skill. Gird on your sword then, Gracious Sir, go on in the Lord, and for the
Lord, and prosper. Our eyes are fixed toward God, and then upon you, in te
unu^ oculi omniu^ conversi: you are the tree, from whose shade the Saints do
look for shelter, and refreshing, and which shall kill, by Antipathye, the
Snakes of Babel. If your Grace would give me leave I could lay down many
motives: as first, Gods honor in the dust; Religion at the stake; the healing
of the beasts wound, and the setting of Dagon again upon the stumps. Secondly,
it was Iosuahs honor to deliver the crafty Gibionits (once become his
confederates) from the five Kings, whom he put to the sword: what honor shall
it be to you to vindicate from disgrace, and wrong a paragon of Princes, a
tried Jewel above the patience of her sex, an only loving and a lovely Sister,
a Prince persecuted by the wicked, and deprived of all for the maintenance of
the truth; a Princely issue, as dear and near to you, as Lot was to Abraham:
and lastly, the people of God in an Aegiptian thraldom? Tears here are the
best Orators. I will say no more, but as the wife of Intiphernes said to Darius
concerning her brother; you can never have another Sister. Thirdly, that cruel
and cursed crew that hunt for their souls, would devour you and yours, if
opportunity should serve. Fourthly, it shall be your greatest honor to fight
Gods battles, and who knows but that you are the man for whom God has
reserved that honor. Charles the great made Rome great; And may not a greater
Charles raze Romes greatness? Concerning the ruin of Rome which must be
accomplished by your Princely name, I commend to your Grace this prophecy;
Imperium, f^s^es; C. fastus seeptra, triumphus,
Quaefuerant; penitus; C. veniente cadent.
Fifthly your late, and admirable deliverance out of the paw of the lion, and
out of the Iaw of the Bear, requires by course that you should encounter with
Goliath. Non potuit perire ta^tarum lachrimara^ filius. Aug: conf. Lib. 3. c.
12. Tu non inventa reperta es.
Sir, God thought on you, and on us in you, when you thought not on your self;
and blessed be God his name who has made that principal good, that the son
of so many prayers could not perish. Yea, we may truly say to our comfort,
that you are found again. Lastly, your Princely resolution and irrevocable
word, has engaged you to the service of Sions deliverance: if you should leave
Sion helpless (which God forbid,) it were in a manner hopeless. To enlarge
these motives to your Grace, were but to bring the gleanings of the grapes to
the vintage of your literature and policy; craving therefore pardon for my
boldness of speech and bluntness of phrase, Play my self, the subject, and
my humble suite at the soote of your Highness censure.

Your Highness his most humbly devoted. A. L.

TO THE HONORABLE AND HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable, and most Worthy;
AS many things fall in, between the end, and the putting of it in execution:
So whilst J was in hand with this Treatise, by the providence of God, and his
Majesty's call, you were assembled in the Honorable and High Court of
Parliament. Which Assembly we pray, may be like that assembly of David and his
States in Hebron; where first they made a covenant before the Lord, and
thereafter went to war against the Iebusites, and then against the
Philistims, and overcame them both. 2 Samuel 3.15.
Strike your Covenant then with the Lord, and your war shall surely prosper.
For the discovery of your Adversaries (which is a main principle of war) you
need not a Vox populi, you have vivam vocem Principis: Only this little Work,
which I humbly commend unto your view, I wish may be, vox tubae, to your
martial designs: a perspectiue it is, whose optic medium is the word of God,
which will make you perfect to this, and every good work. As for order, I hope
your Honors are advised to take a strict order with the enemies of your own
House, that is, the Draconarie companies of English Romanists, whom I need not
describe to you; for you know them by their colors; only they may be noted by
this brief Description; They are the Popes Asses, the Devils Dromidaries, the
Spaniards familiars, and the Jesuits Cabinat. Ere you go to war, do as Joshua
did with the five Kings whom he couped up in a cave, that they should not make
head with recollected forces. Ies. 10.
Shut up the Amorits, and roll the stone to the Caves mouth, and then fear not
but you shall deal well enough with Amale^k. 2 Samuel 5.
As David made sure the Jebusites that dwelt in the prime place of his Kingdom,
before be went against the Philistims; do you so with these Iebusites that
dwell in the heart of your Country. David took in Metheg Amath, by which is
meant Gath; the word signifies, the bridle of Amath, or of the hilly Tract: 2 Samuel 8.
For being the strength of the Philistims, David made it a bridle to them. So
take in Gath; that is, the strong Fort of our home Philistims, and it will be a
bridle to our enemies abroad. The Princes of the Philistims would not trust
David, but caused the King to send him back from the battle, least he should
betray them to his Master Saul: Cap. 29.
and should the Princes of Israel trust the Philistims, who have devoted
themselves to Babel, and their Country to their Cyrus (as they call him?) You
are the Eyes and Arms of our Sovereign, the Body of the land, the Council and
Strength for war, the Sword and Shield of Gods distressed cause, the Terror
of the Adversary, the rod for the wicked; the Sith to mow down sin: and in
a word the very Helm of the State: Then as you look to have honor here, and
glory hereafter, Stand fast, and quit your selves like men for God and your
Country. As the Greek Ephori, the Roman Senators, and the States of Venice to
this day, do lay down themselves, and all private passions of fear, flattery,
and the rest, before they enter the Senate house, Vt Reipub. serviant; so you
must be all the Commonwealths, and none of your own. You had need of the
Senatory ornaments, enumered by Iethro, especially Wisdom and Courage: The
greatest good, has the greatest opposition. A Crown cannot be had without
contending for it; you have not only the weal of Caesar's Crown, but of
Christ's Crown, to look to; a jealous care of the latter, is the safety of the
former: for they who honor God, God will honor them. As the external evils
of the body (such as heat, cold and wounds) may well be prevented, and easily
cured; but internal evils (as sickness, ulcers, and the like) are not
commonly foreseen nor easily cured; so the open enemies of State are quickly
discovered, and easily opposed, but the mothes and cankers, ulcerous plagues,
and hecticks, arising out of the State it self, are so hardly discovered till
they be past cure, that they become the spoil of policy, and opprobrie of
Statesmen. Polib. lib. 11. bist.
Of those inward evils have a special care, and keep close to your rules
without slavish fear: And howsoever it fall out, it is greater cunning, and
matter of more commendation in the Physician to make a true use of his rules,
then to eure the Patient. As tediousness is not for such a presence, nor
weakness worthy to direct such a Senate, I deprecate what may be found amiss,
and with this close I shut up all; Do you what you should, and let God do
what he list.

Your Honors in all possible service. A. L.

TO THE TRVELY SINCERE READER.
IT is a common Apology (Judicious and Christian Reader) that men are Ioath to
write because so many write. It is true in deed that this is the first of the
three main remoraes in way of writing: for there be too many books, either to
no end, or to an evil end; the former blurreth paper, the latter blotteth the
mind; the former cloyes, the latter corrupts, like flies in hot weather. The
other two letts are neglect of men's pains, and storming at the truth: yet for all these, the abuse of a good thing or evil inter^animent, must not stop the
use of it. Yea, (...).
because so many speak (as the Philosopher says) I was ashamed to be silent.
Many poisons must have many antidotes. As the Popes shop, wants no sort of
workmen; some to mine, and some to undermine; some to cosen, some to cut; some
to poison, some to dispute; some to fight, and some to give the Alarm: so with
these souldierly Ignatians, or men-Serpents treatise does encounter; not
teaching treacheries and treasons, or an Equivocall holy war, but the true
art of the holy war indeed. Instances of such flery and flying serpents we
have had too many at home, as Morton for the Northern rebellion, Saunders for
Ireland; and to omit the treasons against the person of the Queen, by Parrie,
Balliard, Somerfield, Watson, Lopes, and the rest. Would not Garnet at one
stroke have cut the heads from us all? These fellows have more cunning then
Archimedes; they would move the whole earth, if they had but England to stand
on. It is to be feared that they have got too much footing, and that we have
more Legions of those evil Spirits amongst us then we are aware of. Paracelsus
tells us, when frogs heap together one upon another, it is a sign of a
plague; so we have cause to fear those plaguey froggs, whose doctrine and
practice sound nothing but treachery and Arms: Classasicum bellisacri.
witness Shoppius in his Alarurn, and many others of that grain. They tell
us indeed that Englands fear of them, is like that of Alexanders espiall, who
discovering Apes imitating a march from the mountains took them to be
soldiers indeed. M^derat. Answ: Cap. 1.
Apes they are, and indeed for counterfetting of Christ, for malice, mischeife,
subtilitie against his flock: the Metempsuchosis well beommeth them, but they
march from the mountains of Babel, like soldiers; and it is to be feated,
that with Aelians-Ape they will kill our young ones in the cradle, if they be
not looked to. They mock and disgrace the Lion, whose only cure and best
security consists in their ruin. Against their Apish flatteries and
overtures of peace, ^^^c non (...)
the law of not believing is the best remedy: for an ape will ever be an ape.
Simia semper erit simia.
He that relieth upon the faith of the faithless papist, may one day, with
woeful experience, say as Bricidas the Lacedemonian said, I was wounded, my
shield betraying me. As for the matter, Prodente me clypio, vulneratus sum.
the general subject thereof has been handled by diverse; but in every
particular as here, and with this Method not by any that I read of. I have
made Gods word the ground and rule of my System. The application of the
general rules, exemplified to the particulars, is without partiality. My
freedom of speech (I hope) shall (as Hierom of Sicil said) be unseasonable to
no good man, be he never so great: (...).
for I hate no man's person, no not the enemy, but his sin. Herein you may
perceive, as Basil said of History, the virtues of the good, and the vices of
the wicked. Here from the cunning of the enemy, we may pick some points of
discipline; and from their sins against us, we may learn to mend our own. As
for the frame of the work; if the Art cannot commend the matter, yet let the
matter commend the Art. I have endeavored rather with simplicity of phrase
and aptness of dictio^ (as becomes the subject) to express the truth, then
to adorn with colors. As with Hierom, every man's writtings deceives himself:
Vnu^ quemque sua scripta fallunt.
and as Galen, It is hard for a man not to err; so I say with Austin
(concerning his books) what good thou shall find, let it be thine, and mine in
affection: but whatsoever is amiss, let it neither be thine nor mine in
protection, but rather in correction, which I shall willingly bear. I know I
shall not please all (neither would I) yet I hope I shall profit some. The
censure, of the malevole^t Momus, and envious Zoilus without, I weigh not: for
it is enough to me to satisfy conscience if not calumny; If within I shall
meet with a Phalaris, Hoste^ apud me, and in meo penetrali reperire. Lips. de
Constable.
I shall with Langius be content with my lot to have a bosom enemy: but till
I have proof I will neither prejudge nor fear. And since my aim is neither
lucre nor applause, but the good of Gods Church; if I be not well taken, my
good intent shall make good my private loss; the favorable acceptance of
this, may encourage me to take pains in subjects of the like nature. If any be
disposed to quirke me for making so many gates to so poor an edifice; let the
necessity of action, and the opportunite of occasion excuse me: and had it not
been to shun tediousnes, I could out of this subject have made a large quarter
to every gate. Let the largeness of the subject, and variety of aspect excuse
my prolixitie, and lead you along to read without wearying: adventure but
your patience, as I have done my pains; and I doubt not but you shall find the
last wine the best. But without further Apology I leave it to your liking, and
your liking to Gods disposing.

Thine in all love A. L.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of the Chapters.
CHap. 1. The evil of War. page 1. Chap. 2. The Good of War. page 6. Chap. 3.
The Guide of War. page 9. Chap. 4. Of the Authority required in waging War.
page 20. Chap. 5. Of the Virtue of a Soldier. page 23. Chap. 6. Of the
Fitness of the Soldier. page 31. Chap. 7. Of Discipline in General. page 34.
Chap. 8. Of the Lawful undertaking of War. page 38. Chap. 9. Against whom to
War. page 40. Chap. 10. The orderly pursuit of War. page 41. Chap. 11. Gods
presence first of all to be sought. page 45. Chap. 12. Of depriving the Enemy
of all Means. page 49. Chap. 13. War must be as well Offensive as Defensive.
page 50. Chap. 14. Of the safe leading of the Forces. page 52. Chap. 15. The
Manner of safe Incamping. page 53. Chap. 16. The Fixing of the Colors. page
56. Chap. 17. The Matter of the Camp. page 59. Chap. 18. Of Camp Discipline.
page 66. Chap. 19. The Motions and Actions of War. page 73. Chap. 20. War
especially requires Counsel. page 76. Chap. 21. The evil of evil Counsel,
or want of good Counsel. page 81. Chap. 22. That great Ones must use Counsel.
page 82. Chap. 23. The Qualification of Counselors. page 90. Chap. 24. Of the
particularities of the Counsel of War. page 97. Chap. 25. Gods word the ground
of Counsel. page. 100. Chap. 26. Gods Ministers the disposers of this sacred
Counsel. page. 104. Chap. 27. The wise carriage of Counsel. page. 122. Chap.
28. The execution of things consulted on. page. 132. Chap. 29. The true use of
Stratagems, page. 133. Chap. 30. The Oppugnation of an Hold. page. 139. Chap.
31. The Carriage of the Besieged. page. 148. Chap. 32. The Exercising of Forces
in the Field. page. 167. Chap. 33. The ordering of the Battle. page. 174.
Chap. 34. The Joining of Battle. page. 177. Chap. 35. The fight it self.
page. 210. Chap. 36. The duty of the General and Soldier in Fight. page. 211.
Chap. 37. Of the Issue of the battle in General. page. 224. Chap. 38. Of the
Carriage of the Conqueror. page. 225. Chap. 39. Of the true Use of Victory.
page. 227. Chap. 40. Of the moderation of the Conquerours passions, and of his
Temperance. page. 243. Chap. 41. The carriage of the Conquered in General.
page. 254. Chap. 42. Of acknowledging the defeat to be from God. page. 257.
Chap. 43. The mooving cause of the defeat is to be observed. page. 162. Chap.
44. Of quitting God of all injustice. page. 271. Chap. 45. Of humiliation for
sin, and forsaking of it. page. 272. Chap. 46. Of the generous behavior of the
conquered in regard of his enemy. page. 282. Chap. 47. Of the patience of the
conquered. page. 287. Chap. 48. Of the Hope of the Conquered. page. 297. Chap.
49. Of the end of War. page. 313.
Speculum belli Sacri: OR THE LOOKING GLASS OF THE HOLY WAR.
CHAPTER I. The Evil of Wars.
A Certain Thessalian being demanded who were at most ease, (...).
answered they who ceased from war. True it is indeed: for war is the fruit
of sin, the wages of sin, and the cause of sin; yea eve^ on the one part it is
sin it self. War is the friut of sin. Gen 4.
All these are evident from the Scriptures. The first from that first war
betwixt the two Brethren Cain and Abel, wherein Cain killed Abel; the ground
whereof was his wrath; Jam. 4.1.
from whence are wars (says S. James) and contentions among you, are they
not hence even of your own lusts, that fight in your members? Had there never
been sin in the world, we should have had no war; for by sin we made war with
God; and God, and all the Creatures at war with us: which war continues
between God and all those that are not reconciled to him in Christ Jesus. It
is with all those as it was with Amalecke, Ex. 17.16.
with whom the Lord swear that he would have war from one generation to
another: Yea, Esa. 57.17.
there is no peace to the wicked says my God, neither external, internal or
eternal; neither at peace with God, with others, nor with themselves. Amongst
the evil qualities of the wicked man, this is reckoned as the chief, Ps.
140.1.2
that he is prone to war; Release thou me Jehovah from the evil man, from the
man of wrong etc. Every day they gather wars. Yea in this the wicked man
discovers the image of his father the devil, Rev. 20.8.9.
who being let loose after the thousand years expired, goes out to deceive
the people, and to gather them together to battle. War the wages of sin.


And for the second, that it is the wages of sin, and that the special; it is
as clear as the first, from plain places of Scripture, from Gods order in his
proceeding, and David's avoiding of this, when God gave him his choice of the
punishment. For the first, the Lord threatening to harden himself against his
people in punishment, as they had hardened themselves against him in sin, Lev.
26.25
says thus: I will bring upon you a sword that shall avenge the quarrel or
vengeance of my covenant.

It appears also in the order of Gods proceeding, by comparing of places of
Scripture together, as the first and second Chap. of the prophecy of Joel. The
Lord having plagued his people with famine, by the which they were not moved to
repentance; he commands the Trumpet of war to be sounded, and tells them
that he would bring a fierce and cruel people against them, whose merciless
and monstrons tyranny he compares to the devouring of fire; and for the
fierceness of their consuming wrath, he calls that plague, The day of the
Lord, a day of darkness, a day of blacknes. Thirdly, and lastly, David
delivers thus much in choosing rather the plague, War the cause of sin.
Rara fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Lucan.
then the prevayling hand of the enemy.

3. War is likewise the cause of much sin, as pregnant testimonies, and
woeful experience teaches. The proverb is as true as common, That faith and
piety are rare in arms.

We may justly now with Erasm: that great Master in Arts take up the
complaint made by him of his time. We war continually, Nation against Nation,
Kingdom against Kingdom, City against City, Prince against Prince, People
against People; friend against friend, kinsman against kinsma^, brother against
brother, yea, son against the father, which the very Heathen held impious and
barbarous: yea, that which is most detestable of all; Christian against
Christian: and yet there be (says he) that commend and applaud this hellish
practice for a holy course, instigating the inflamed fury of Princes by adding
oil to the flame (as they say) till all be consumed. And what is come of this?
I may answer, What evil is not come of it? I may justly apply that of
Aristophanes, (...).
which Lypsius applies to the troubles of his time.

That God, the heaven and earth has set on fire. In war, renown, honor,
wealth, chastity, life, wives and children; yea, and religion it self, lies
at the stake: nothing so sacred; no sex so tender, no age so impotent, which
the barbarous soldier will not contaminate, defloure and kill. It is the
soldiers sport, as one says truly, to ruin houses, to ravish Virgins, to
spoit Churches, Iocus and ludas in militia etc. Ludo. vives in epist. ad Henr.
8. Angl. reg. Silent leges inter arma.
to consume Cities and Towns to ashes with sire: yea, these be the ornaments of
war; to profit none, to hurt every one, to respect neither sex nor age; yea nor
God himself; for his, in war, are neglected, and the laws of peace and war
contemned.

All laws in Arms are silenc't by the sword. The world for the proof of this
affoords a world of woeful experience, both from sacred and profane Writ. To
omit the examples of ages past, let us view, with compassion, the instances of
our own times: and as God usually does commemorate his latest mercies to lead
men to repentance, and his latest judgments to terrify men from their sins;
so let us look upon the latest wars in France, Bohemia, and the Palatinate.
Is it not with Gods people every where, as it was with them in Asa his time;
There is no peace to him that goes out or comes in; but great vexations are
upon all the inhabitants of the Countries, 2 Chronicles. 15.6 7.
and Nation is destroyed of Nation.

And though my heart does quake while I remember: Et quanqua^ animus meminisse
horret. Phil. 2.1.
Yet to use the words of the Apostle; If there be any confolation in Christ,
any comfort of love, any fellowship of the spirit, any compassion and mercy;
behold all you that pass by, your mournful sisters Bohemia, and the
Palatinate, with their torn hair about their eyes, their vail taken away, their
crown fallen, their sanctuaries defaced, their people flain, their land laid
wast; young, old, Priest, and people, exposed to the immane and bloody cruelty,
the beastly filthiness, and Ismaelitish mockery of the cruel enemy. In a
word, was there ever sorrows like to theirs? Yea, I may safely say, the old
Threns of Jeremy has got a new subject. And what is the immediate cause of all
this evil of sin and punishment? Tu bellum causa malorum. (...).


Even bloody war, thou art the cause of all. It is the part therefore of wise
men (says one) if they be not the more provoked, to be quiet; yea, of good
men, if they be provoked, to change peace into war: but so that they change
war again into peace with all possible conveniencie. Men disposed to
unnecessary war, are compared by some unto two Gamsters, whereof the one is
undone, and the other is never a whit the richer; Plin. l. 8.2.
for all the gain is in the box. Compared also they may be fitly to the
Elephant, and the Dragon, Plin. l. 8. c. 12.
which in their cruel conflict are each killed by other. The Dragon (as it is
written) sucketh out the blood of the Elephant, and being drunk therewith, the
weight of the falling Elephant oppresses the Dragon, and crusheth out the
blood, which some calls (but falsely) sanguis Draconis; but they both perish.
And so it often falls out with the unadvised undertakers of war. Upon this
ensuing evil, the wise and learned have taken occasion to check the humors of
Princes so disposed: as Lodovic. Vives to Pope Adrian; and in his epistle to
Henry the 8, King of England; there his motives and counsels against
unnecessary war, are to be seen at large. The proverb is true indeed, (...).
Sub melle venenuncl^tet.
That war is very sweet to those that never tasted it; but those that taste
it shall be forced to confess, that there is poison under the honey. This
Hannibal (the honor of Carthage) knew very well, when the Roman Ambassadors
came from Rome to treat of the continuance of peace; one Gisco, as great a
coward as a vainglorious bragger, without either the practick or true theorick
of Arms, gets him up in a pulpit, and takes upon him to persuade the
Carthaginians to give up with the Romans, and to renew their war; Hannibal
perceiving the fool to be out of his element, pulled him out of the Pulpit,
and went up himself, where he persuaded the people, with impregnable reasons,
to continue their peace, and so prevailed. He knew, by experience, it was not
so easy to manage war, as to talk of war, and therefore blessed are the
peace ^akers, who make such peace indeed as stands with Gods honor and the
public good: otherwise, as authors aver, and experience teaches, A just
war is to be preferred to an unjust peace: Melchizedech was King of peace and
King of righteousness. Peace and righteousness kiss each other. Austin in
Psalm 48.
No man can enjoy (says Austin) the one without the other. Saul's making peace
with Agag brake his peace for ever with God; therefore one said well, Melior
est illa pugnaque ^eo proximum facit, quen^ pax illa qui seperat a Deo.
Nazianz. in Apol. War, how it is sin.
That war is better that makes a man nearer to God, then that peace that
separateth him from God.

Now for the last thing; that war it self unlawfully undertaken is sin, it
appears from that quarrel that God for ever had with the Amalakites, who
were the first that made war with the people of God, when they took their
journey. It appears likewise from the ground of war, which is always naught
(at least, either on the invaders part, or on the defendors) arising as one
observes well, from malice, or injustice, etc; and so, by consequence, it is
either on the one part, or the other, from the instigation of the devil;
because of all those evils of war, the ancient Latins derived the name of
war from an unruly beast, Bellum a bellua dictum quide^ volunt.
as becoming beasts better then men: and therefore, as far as is possible,
it is to be avoided.

CHAP. II. Of the good of War.
NOtwithstanding of all this, that has been said of war; yet War well
undertaken is not only lawful but also necessary: and that upon a twofold
ground, either upon the law of Nature and Nations, not repugnant to the Law of
God, undertaken for the defense of our selves or confederates; and this is
called a Defensive War; such was that of the Israelites against the Amalakites
Or it is grounded upon the absolute command of God, for the revenging him upon
his enemies, or the delivery of his friends: as Moses is commanded to take
vengeance of the Midianites; Numb. 31. Deuteronomy. 25.17.18. Genesis 14. v. 14.20.
yea, to remember Amaleck, and not to forget him, but to raze out his
remembrance. By the same warrant did Abraham reskue his nephew Lot, from the
four Kings. The like warrant and vvatch-word is given to war against the
Whore and her confederates. Rev. 19.17
I saw an Angeil stand in the Sun, who cried with a loud voice, saying, etc;
So that War, both defenfiue and offensive (the due circumstances thereof
observed) is lawful.

The reasons thereof be many, The lawfulness of war a against the
Anabaptists. 23. Number 31. Iud. 1.2.6.
which I the rather press, for tha^ frantic and groundless conceit of the
Anabaptist, holding it altogether unlawful for Christians to make war. First
we have (as I have showed) Gods commandment for it, as we may see in the
places quoted. Which commandment is not only peculiar to that time and
people, but it belongs to all upon the like occasions. Secondly, God has set
down laws of war. Thirdly, Number. 1.2^ and 10.13. chap. 13.20. Deuteronomy. 20. Gen:
14.14.2. 1. Sam. 23. Luke 3.4. S^ Christiana disciplina omnia bella damnaret,
hoc potius concilium, etc. ut arma abijcerent. Aug: Ep. 5. ad Mar. 11.
God is called the God of war as well as of peace. Jehovah is a man of war,
that is an exellent warrior. Fourthly, the practice of the Saints approved by
God, as of Abraham, David, etc. Yea John Baptist in correcting of the abuses of
the calling, did not cashire the calling, but rather approved it. Austin, well
observes, that if Christian discipline had condemned all Arms, then John had
given the soldiers counsel to cast away their Arms. The good Centurion goes
on in his calling; and the devout soudier is a soldier still. Act. 10.13.
Sergius Paulus, a prudent man, heard the word and believed, yet still remained
Deputy. Yea, war is lawful by the law of nature and nations, because it is,
as one says, a us Quia opus est justiciae defendentis pios, and effendentis
impios.
work of righteousness, defending the good and offending the bad: Therefore not
abrogated by the gospel. Yea, they who omit this work of righteousness upon
good ground, are Homicidae sunt ipsoru^ and paricidae sunt Ecclesiae.
called homicides of themselves, and paricids of the Church, and common wealth.
As for the obiectio^s of the Anabaptists, it is more time to fight then to
answer them. The places of Scripture by them wrested; resist not evil. And
when any smite thee on the one cheek turn the other also, and such like, may
be answered thus; that rather then private men should revenge their own
private wrong, they should suffer wrong; especially, if it make for the glory
of God, or gayning of their brother. As for Christ's leaving of his peace with
his, and the accomplishing of that prophecy, Esa. 2.^.
they shall break their swords into mattockes, and their spears into sithes;
I answer as the prophecy is true and truly accomplished, yet but in part,
and not so fully accomplished as it shall be; it is likewise true, that Christian
Princes should labor for such peace as is both prophesied of, and partly
accomplished; and so should all men labor both for the internal and external
peace spoken off: (...) Iliad.
But we must understand with whom we live in this world, with men of strife,
men of bloods having Dragons hearts, Serpents heads, Bloody coulors with that
cruel Motto of the wicked man, spoken of by Homer, deadly war delights him.
Such is that incarnate devil in the Revelation, called the red Dragon; by
which is meant bloody Rome, Rev. 12.3.
in her persecuting Emporours, deciphered there by her Arms. Of as deep a dye
is that bloody whore in the arms of her last lover the Pope; for the which
she is called the scarlet whcore, Rev. 17.4. and 16.
which is not only bathed in the blood, but is drunk with the blood of the
Saints. Such is the nature of all the devils limbs and bratts of the whore,
Nil nisi bella crepa^t.
they think of nothing but war; They sound nothing but war: and shall the
Saints that be slain, and the souls under the altar cry still for revenge,
and Christian Kings and Princes keep their hands in their bosom? Militare no^
est delictum, etc. August. de de verb^ dom: Noli exstimare nemine^ Deo placere
posse. Fortitudo quae per bella tuetur a barbaris patriam plena justitiae est.
Offici: (...).
Surely this is to bring blood upon their heads, and to sin both against the
Law and the Gospel. It is not a sin (as Austin says) to war, but to abuse it.
Do not think (says the same Father) that a man cannot please God in war,
for David was a warrior, and God gave to him a great testimony. The force of
war (says Ambrosius) that maintains the country against bloody and barbarous
enemies; defends the weak, and such as are subject to oppression; delivers
the confederates that are in danger, from the hand of the bloud-thirstie, is
full of righteousness. There be but two ways, says Tully, to decide matters,
either by dispute or arms, and men must have recourse to the latter when there
is no place for the former. Thucidides, like a wise man, pressing all me^ to
keep the peace, secludes not the lawfulnes of war, if necessitic enforce it.
Good men (says he, if necessity enforce them change peace into war.

To conclude this point; the Apostle wills us to have peace with all men, but
if it be possible: where the Apostle implies, that it is impossible to have
peace with some. Romans 12.1
Yea, while the godly speak of peace, their enemies prepare for war. Lu. 22.36.
Therefore we must do, as the Apostles were commanded in another kind; Sell
our coats and by swords. Or as Nehemiah, Nehe. 4 14 and 17.
in the same kind, encouraged the people: Fight for your brethren, your sons
and your daughters, your wives and your houses; yea, it stands us upon it to
do the work with the one hand and with the other hold the sword.

CHAP. III. Of the Guide of War.
THus having showed the incommodities of war, and the equity of it, I come to
the third and last point of the treatise, namely, the ordering of war. This
is the main point; for the clearing whereof, I have with as much brevitie as I
could, handled the former two. Here again to Apologize my want of skill, and
to deprecate censure, were to be jealous of the readers good will, and to
detract from my highest patronage. To come then to the point.

In every war there be two things especially to be observed. That it be
Iustum and Just; just in it self, that is, justly undertaken; and it must be
justly, and duly followed. For the first, we must first know what a just war
is, The description of a just war.
which may be thus defined: That which is undertaken, for a just cause, by a
competent person, in place of Magistracy, in a lawful manner, against an
external or internal enemy; following it orderly by the law of nature and
nations, having for the end Gods glory and our own peace: to the same effect
as divines tell us; to a just and lavvfull war three things are required; A
good cause, a well ordered affection, and a lawful authority; Or if you will,
for the better ordering of war by its proper laws, let us observe three sorts
of polemick laws; some concerns the preparation, some the battle it self,
and some the sequel or the event. Some parts of the description apperatine to
the first laws, some to the second, and some to third. The just cause of war.
To come in order to the first, there must be a just cause, which may briefly
be expressed, under the maintenance of religion, or civil right, either for our
selves, or our Christian confederates (...) Thus was the war of the Israelits
against the Amalekits, Exodus 17: So against the Midianites, Numb. 25.17. and
18. For they had hurt them both in their bodies and in their souls. A like
good ground had Abraham for his war against the four Kings, namely, the
rescuing of his nephew Lot, out of the hands of merciles and bloody enemies.
It is true indeed that Lot had no good ground for being there, neither is it
thought, that the King of Elam wanted just cause to come against Sodom, to
repress rebels; but howsoever they had nothing to do with Lot, by whom they
were not wronged; and this gave Abraham just cause without further
expostulation of Lots oversight, to adventure his own life, and the life of
his, for the delivery of his friend. And indeed as the cause was just, he did
but what he should have done; yea, if he had not done it, it had been both sin
and shame to him. Will thou not (says the Wise man) preserve those that are
led to be slain? Prove. 24.11
In the war enjoined by God to his people against the nations, and in other
wars permitted occasionally, they were always to look to the equity of the
cause, as the main ground whereupon they were to go. For God himself injoyneth
nothing without a good ground. The Romans, who had only the light of nature
to guide them, in their procedings had always respect to the ground of their
war, before they would undertake it. Amongst many instances observe these
two. The Campani who were nieghbours to the Romans, being invaded by the
Samnites, a mighty people, desired aid against them, pressing them with many
forcible arguments; as from the law of proximitie or neighborhood, of
affinity, of ensuyng commodity, and finally from the Romans generous
disposition: but all these allegations not affording a sufficient ground, this
was all the Romans did for the present, they sent Ambassadors to the
Samnites, desiring them to cease from war against their neighbors, which the
Campanian deputies knovving to be lost labor, they yield themselves up as the
right of the Romans, with this speech; If you think much to defend us from
the unjust invasion of a Tyranons enemy, yet defend that which is your own.
Upon this voluntary dedition, Tit. Live li. 7. Decad.
the Senate undertook the defense of them, having a just title for the ground
of the war.

Another instance offers it self, in that dispute between the wisest man and
the best man in Rome; namely, Cato and Scipio Nassica. Because the
Carthaginians began to rig ships contrary to the articles of peace; it was the
judgment of Cato and others, that war should be denounced out of hand; but
Scipio was of another mind, because he thought it was no sufficient ground for
war; for they had yet sustained no damage, but the Carthaginians had rather
indammaged themselves; in violating their faith; they should rather be summoned
to lay down their Arms, to untackle their Ships, and so to keep the peace.
Scipio his judgment was approved, but the Carthaginians contemned the summons;
Whereupon the Senate, and that upon just ground, agreed all in one to take up
Arms against them. Other memorable examples are extant to this purpose:
Charles the 8, of France, a young King, being instigated to take Arms against
Francis Duke of Britain, and ^o lay hold upon the Duchy as his right: the
Chancell our of Rochel told the King; that the right pretended was not well
deceided; and that he should not do well to attempt war but upon a good
ground. Upon this Ambassadors were sent to the Duke, and on both sides it was
referred to learned Counsel, to search out the right: In the mean while the
Duke dyed, the King had the heir to wife, and so the controversy was ended.
Annal. in Ann. 1488
The like course the same King took for resolution of his right to Naples and
Cicily; before he would attempt any thing, he convocated all the Presidents of
his Parliamentary Courts; his Chauncellors, privy Council, and Princes of the
blood, willing them to inform him truly. Where, upon due search of the
Genealogies of the Kings of the aforesaid Kingdoms, Annal. in An. 1493.
they found the true title to be in him. So that upon this ground, he carried
his forces into Italy; not that he meant to intrude upon Italy (as Matchivel
would foolishly charge upon him, bringing this his attempt as an instance of a
just war, without any truth of title at all) but he meant nothing less: for
in suyng out a good ground for Cicilie and Naples, he never pretended any right
to Italy, only he assured himself of some Towns for his safer passage,
which he minded to give up at his departure.

To come to a present instance: Application.
The equity of the cause is an undeniable good ground for the Bohemian war,
undertaken by his Highness Frederick King of Bohemia. Hapily some scoffing
Ismalites, and the railing crew, may flout and make mouths at the Title,
because he is abandoned the possession of that, and all other his right: but
howsoever, truth is truth in despite of the devil, and the Lord will up one
day and restore him to his right. The equity of the Bohemian war on the Kings
part.
As for the equity of the war, it will appear to the view of every indifferent
eye, in these two particulars; First, on his part it was merely Defensive;
secondly, it was undertaken for the maintenance of Civil right, and true
Religion. If war be not just undertaken upon these grounds, I know not any
war at all to be just.

For the former of these two; that the Crown and Kingdom of Bohemia, is his
Right, it is as clear to every impartial minded man, as the Sunshine at noon
day, and that upon these grounds: First, it was freely offered unto him, when
he did not so much as think upon it. Secondly, it is clear, from the state and
condition of their Kings and Dukes, which from the very first beginning of
their state to this present time, Dubrav. Aeno. Silv. Haiccius.
has been merely elective; witness their uninterrupted practice of free
election, recorded by the unanimous consent of all that ever undertook their
Histories; together with the testimonies of Kings and Emperors; and lastly,
the reversall letters of all the Emperors even to this present Ferdinand, will
witness the same. Lib. 30. Haic. fol. 167.
One pregnant instance for all, recorded by Dubravius and Hajecius, when Anno
1458, some seven or eight Competitors, and that no small ones, as the Emperor
himself, and the King of France put in for the Kingdom. The States to manifest
and to maintain, their undoubted, and indisputable free right of election, made
choice of Georgius Podiebrachius. So that you see, without any respect to
treaty or entreaty, or any motion of disposal upon pretense of hereditary
right, that State stood ever fast in their free liberty of election. They that
will be further satisfied, may see this truth from point to point discovered,
and confirmed in the defense of the Bohemian right, with a full answer to one
that calls himself the Informer, who indeed is rather a misinformer, and of
less truth and honesty then the basest sharking Promooter. For as I do not
think but he has perused their Laws and read their Histories; so against the
tenor of the one, and the truth of the other, he has labored to his shame,
by shifting and shuffling, to withold the truth in unrighteousness: but if
the light in him and others be darkness, how great is the darkness? His only
overture is, that foisted-in clause of Charles the 4, to procure and confirm to
his posterity hereditary succession. This is fully answered in the related
answer. Does it stand with reason that a King Elective, shall of his own head
infert a new clause, to the subversion of the fundamental Laws of the State
wherein he is elected? Besides this, No man is a sufficient witness in his
own cause: Yea, the same Charles in another privilege, bearing the date of the
same day and year, shows the approving of the free election of Wenceslaus by
Frederick King of the Romans; so if the clause be his, he is contrary to
himself. As for the right of preelection of Ferdinaend; now Emperor (as the
said answer sufficiently proves,) it was none at all. First, he deprived
himself of all right or title to that Kingdom, by rejecting and contemning the
right elective, and striving to possess it by hereditary right, (as the
adopted son of Matthias,) or by some other right of blood. And that this came
not barely of himself, but was the plot of the whole Imperial faction, is as
clear as the light, in the particular instruments of the pactions and
conditions betwixt Phillip the 3, King of Spain, and Ferdinand Archduke of
Austria, Matthew the Emperor, procuring and confirming the same. The sum of
all which is this; that upon certain conditions amongst themselves agreed upon,
the hereditarie right of Bohemia, and Hungary, should pass from one to another
upon the failing of issues. Where observe that all right of election, and by
consequence all right indeed, is quitted by the Emperor; but because great is
the strength of truth, when hereditary right would not hold water, they
pretended the right of election. A bare pretense indeed, if it be duly
examined. First, it was done the King being alive, and still King, and therefore
of no validity: for in every Election two things are required; a vacant state,
and lawful Electors, the former must precede the latter; both these, in this
pretended election, was wanting: for the full right was by reservation in
Mathias, with a joint inhibition, that Fordinand should not meddle with the
government, and that upon the challenge of intrusion; which notwithstanding he
labored to infringe against law and promise, and by vexation of Arms
endeavored to turn an elective power into an hereditary right; yea, and that
before he was actually possessed, which made his election void if it had been
lawful; for elections being conditional, the conditions broke, the election
is no election. As for the Electors, besides their want of power, the place
being full, as they wronged themselves, so they wrong all those that had any
interest therein. If the same grounds be well sifted, his title to the Empire
and Hungary, will prove but a broken title. This I was forced to clear, as
briefly as I could, that the right of King Frederick might be the clearer;
which being laid in the balance of equity with the former pretended right,
shall show it self of a just weight, which the other wants.

First the place was orderly quitted of all lavvfull challenge. Secondly, he
was called without seeking or intruding. Thirdly, he had an orderly unanimous
and plenarie election, all which, as I have shevved, were vvanting in the
former. Neither did ever the said king infringe any of their liberties. This
being as you see his undoubted right, stood it either with equity or piety,
not to maintain it? Compare his right and maintenance of the same, with the
examples quoted, of the Campani, and the Romans, and out of them you shall
see, as from the minor to the mayor, that his cause and action is as just as
may be. First the Campani were a free people, to make choice at their pleasure
of their Head and Governor; so were the Bohemians, and ever, have been since
their first being. Witness all the Histories of Bohemia, Hungaria, Polonia; the
Annalls of Cilecia, and the examples and monuments of the Bohemians. Aeneas
Silvius in hist;* Bohem.
To the which I may add, for the better clearing of the point, that Embassye
of Charles the seventh of France to the Bohemians, after the death of
Ladislaus, to whom he had contracted his daughter, wherein he requested them,
either to choose one of his sons for their King, or such a one, on whom he
might bestovv his daughter. Secondly, they were unjustly invaded by a mighty
people the Samnites; so did the Bohemians suffer much from the house of
Austria, and no little by the present Emperor. Thirdly, they sought aid from
the Romans, who would not, but on just ground, undertake the war, and
therefore they became their subjects, and so they undertook it; so the
Bohemians made suit to the Prince Elector, in their fear of cruel dealing,
that he would become their King, and take the maintenance of their just cause,
which he did, and that lawfully; not undertaking any thing for them directly,
or indirectly before he was their King. Compare these together, In Nevio licet
quod in Gais non licet.
and except that we will say, that it is lavvful in Nevius, which is not lawful
in Gaius, or a heathen Senate may do for their subjects, what a Christian
King may not do for his, I see not why the one in him, is not as lawful, or
more lawful, then the other was in them. But to conclude this point, If his
success of possession had seconded his right of election, a great many of our
English Imperialists and other drowsy Sybarits, would never have torn his
title, nor exclaimed on his practice, as they now do. To them for the present,
I will say no more, but to judge actions by events, and right of titles by
present possession, is, in these evil and dangerous days, rather to approve
of tyrannous intruders (both in church and common wealth) then of the true
owners.

As for the latter point of the ground, namely truth of religion, the defense
whereof he undertook, It is the truth and none but it, against which the
gates of hell, the dragon, beast and false Prophet, the croaking frogs and
all the drunken Princes of the earth, with the cup of the whore (do what they
can) shall never be able to prevayle.

As hitherto then appears the equity of the war on the Kings part, The
iniquity of our onemies war.
so likewise, from the want of this ground, is laid open to the view, the
iniquity of all the wars, undertaken by the enemies of God against his
people: as the wars of Gog and Magog, and of the heathen Emperors, made upon
Gods inheritance. What ground had the great red Dragon for making war against
the woman, and to stand before her to devour the man child when it was brought
forth? Rev. 12.3.4
As for the greatness of this persecution by the Roman Emperors, and for the
bloody cruelty of it, it may justly be called a wonder; so not unfitly may it
so be called, because there was no cause given them by those whom they
persecuted, but rather by their quiet and holy behavior they deserved to live
in peace. So the Psalmist speaks of the rage of the wicked against Christ and
his Church. Psalm. 2.2.
Why do the people tumulteously rage? Where David marveileth at the tumulteous
hurling together of the wicked, as if they would devour the godly (as they
would indeed). What ground had the scarlet whore to bathe her leprous carcass
in the blood of the Saints? Where observe likewise, Rev. 17.6.
that it is called a great wonder. What equity was there that the Popes
unholinesse, under a pretense of the enlargement of Peter's patrimony, took
arms against Kings and Emperors, as Julius the second against Jews the
twelfth of France? Yea he gave battle on Easter day against the French at
Ravenna. Innocent the second against Roger king of Cicilie. What ground of
stirring up one Prince against another, and giving of Kingdoms from hand to
hand? the French against the English, as Lewis against King John; by Innocent
the third, the English against the French, as Rich: of England an Vrbanist,
made war at the Popes command upon the King of France a Clementine: Paul the
third, sent Cardinal Poole to foreign Princes to stir them up against Henry
the eight, giving him and his people as a prey to their enemies. So, how like
is the Pope to the devil his father, in being prodigal of Kingdoms, which are
none of his to deal. Do we ever read (as a friar Minorite said well) that
Peter did so? Upon what ground do they incite subjects to take arms against
their sovereign Kings and Princes, as Pius quintus, and Sixtus quintus, the
one by his Bull, the other by his Declaration, excited the subjects of England
to take arms, against their sovereign Queen Elizabeth: yea to lay hands on
her and punish her? What just cause had Philip the 2 of Spain, to undertake by
force of Arms, against law and covenant, the establishing of the bloody
Inquisition in the Low countries? The best ground I can find was, Duke de Alva,
his hart-burne against the people, and Cardinal Granvils spleen against the
Gospel. What account in conscience, could the Duke and Red-cap give, to
counsel the King to conquer England, whereto he had no right at all, and to
suppress religion in all other places? For the effecting of this Chiapin
Vitelli, Duke de Alva his Chief Captain, was sent with some feigned message
to the Queen; but indeed his errand was to try the Papists: for immediately
after his departure out of England, the Earls rebelled in the North. And for
fuel for this fire, Duke de Alva had ready in Zealand 10 Regiments to be
imbarkt for England, but God quenched our fire quickly, and found him enough to
do at home for all his forces. But because this succeeded not, the great Armado
in 88, was set out to sink our nation; For both the matter of that war, and
the cruel manner of the execution intended, if the ground be well searched, I
think it will be found no better then the success. As for that Hispaniolized
Popish pamphleter, indevouring with tooth and nail to make good that Spanish
invasion, from provocation given by her Majesty to the Spaniard, he shows
himself a Viper to the honor of his Country, concealing treacherously both the
iniquity of the Spanish ground, and his treachery in the manner of proceeding,
The affairs of Holland. page 53.
under the color of a treaty: But him in his colors I shall have occasion
in some other treatise to discover more largely.

Lastly, for these present wars, maintained with much outrage and cruelty, by
the popish faction, what good ground can be given, I see not, unless their
Trent design be a good ground, which was to root out the Gospel, and to ruin
the Professors thereof throughout all Christendom. If this rule should hold in
every war. No war but just let Magistrates maintayn. Bella magistratus non nisi
justa gerat.
Then I am sure that all the aforesaid Wars of the crew recited are against
this rule; yea a just quarrel in the Popes or Spaniards hand, is a very rate
thing. Witness their practices and possessions, the right whereof now I mean
not to canvasse. I am sure of this, that they contend for much, and keep much,
that they have as much right to as the Devil had to the body of Moses. One
thing I could wish them, that they would follow Charles the 5, in one thing,
who in his retired life, taking account of his actions (which were in number
twenty more remarkable) he viewed them often, and amongst all the rest, when
he looked upon that unjust war, made against the Duke of Saxon, and the rest of
the Protestant Princes, with sighs and words he much regrated the same; But I
fear they must be cloystered up, before they do the like. But if entreaty, or
example cannot move, let the infamy of unjust war, and the issue of it,
terrify all the undertakers of it. It is a shame for a Christian to play the
Matchivilian. Now this is one of his most impious and hellish principles, that
upon any occasion a Prince may undertake-warre, although there be no just
ground for it. Upon which falls ground, he persuaded Laurence de Medicis, to
undertake the conquest of Italy; which he might easily atchieue by the help of
the Church, by the which he meant Leo the 10. He propounds likewise before him
and others, that monstrous abortiue, Caesar Borgia, as a pattern to be
followed: but to follow this pattern, or to usurp another right, is the very
note and work of a tyrant; as the Chancellor of Rochel well observed in the
advice formerly mentioned.

As for the issue; both sacred Writ, and humane Histories, The bitter fruits of
unjust war
do tell us; that remarkable ruin; yea, and sometimes utter extirpation, has
followed upon unjust war. For brevities sake I will only instance with these
two, well known, but yet very memorable examples. The former of Amaleck, Deu.
25.1^
concerning whom the Lord gives a strict charge that he should be rooted out;
yea, his people should do it, and not forget i^; so the Lord is said to have
him in remembrance, till he did see the charge fully executed. Dent. 32.
Another instance observe in Simeon; when Moses before his death blesses all
the Tribes, Simeons name is quite omitted, which is not without matter of note,
especially if we compare this with other passages answerable to this; as when
the blessing was first given he loses his honor; Genesis 49.5.7
his posterity in the wilderness was diminished from 93000 at the first muster
to 22200 at the latter muster: Numb 1.26, and 14.
neither were there Judges of his Tribe as of others; he had no possession by
himself. The ground of all which, as I conceive, was their unjust war and
bloody execution. Yea, the moving of unjust war, argues exceedingly the want
of the fear of God, Deuteronomy. 2^.18: for by the fear of the Lord men depart from
evil. Prove. 16.6.
And what fear of God is there, in those Captains, Colonels or Soldiers, that
never looks to the cause, nor cares not whom they serve, so it be a golden
service?

CHAP. IIII. Of the Authority required in waging War.
THVS much having spoken of the equity of the cause, I come now to the second
circumstance of the description, which requires competency of person. A just
cause of war does not warrant every man to undertake war. Eg^ enim existimo
in summo imperatore quatuor has res esse o ^ortere, scilicet scientiam rei
militaris, virtutem, authoritatem and. foelicitatem. Cic. in orat de laud m^g
Pomp. 1 The necessity of authority.
Things required in war may be reduced to these four heads, authority,
virtue, fitness, and discipline; though others may reduce them to some other
heads, yet all comes to one effect. Tully requires in the supreme Commander
these four things, Knowledge of War, Virtue, Authority and Success. Success
here required by Tully, must of necessity follow the circumstances by me
forementioned.

The first thing then is authority, primarily in the Magistrate, and from him
derived to the Soldiers both Commanders and others. What the meanest soldier
does, he must do it by authority, which does warrant him to do many things,
which otherwise were unlawful; as to kill, sack, and spoil; which without
authority, were murder, robbery, and cruel oppression. Authority then is the
Key of War, without the which war is a mere Aceldema, or field of blood, and
a chaos of confusion. Moses, the great Commander of the Lord, had authority to
fight the battles of the Lord: Like authority did he, at Gods command, Numb.
27.18, and v. 23
put upon Joshua. Take (says the Lord) Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is
the spirit, and put thy hand upon him, etc. which Moses did, as you may see in
Numbers; by the renewing of the same charge, especially for the war, Moses
strengthens and confirms Joshua; And Moses called to Ios^hua, Deuteronomy. 31.7.
and said to him in the eyes of all Israel, be thou strong and courageous, for
thou shall go in with this people, etc. Thus the war against the four Kings
was undertaken at Abraham's command. That rash and heady adventure of the
Israelites against the Canaanites and Amalekites, as it was without Gods
approbation, so it was without authority; for neither Moses, Aaron, nor the
Arc went up with them, and therefore Moses does call their attempt a bofty
presumption: And such was their success; for they were smitten to Hormah,
Numb. 14.45.
a name answerable to the event, namely destruction. Such be the wars made by
the man of sin, and the Locusts of the bottomless pit, against the Lord, and
his anointed. What warrant had they, even by their pretended right, to
undertake war? Did ever Aaron under the Law, or Peter under the Gospel,
levy Arms for the field? But this their practice is agreeable to a rule of
their own, so it be for the good of the Church, they never look for further
authority then the Popes, whom they pretend to have authority, Romish Clergy
no persons authorized for war.
over heaven, Hell and Putgatorie. And what may they not then do on earth? But
if they be pressed to show lawful authority for the taking up of Arms, I think
the best evidence they can give, is, some forged transcript from the back side
of Constantines donation. I may well resemble this Antichristian warfare for
want of authority, unto the war of that false Christ, that arose in the reign
of Traian the Emperor, whose name was Bar Chochab, that is, son of the
Star, falsely alluding to that place of Numbers, Numb. 24.17.
where Christ is truly so called: but for his mocking of the people, and
blaspheming of God, he was slain in the battle, and called afterward, Of him
mention is made in the Talmud.
by the deluded people, Bar Coziba, that is, the son of falsehood. And such
indeed are the Jesuits, the very Incendiaries of unlawful wars; or if you
will, you may compare them in this case, with that rebellious rout of the Jews,
which called themselus, zelators, under color of fighting for religion and
commonwealth; they choosed for their Chiefetains the grand-captains of
wickedness; they committed cruelties, outrages and impieties of all sorts.
Insomuch that Vespasian, Joseph de bell. lud. lib. 4 chapter 5, and lib. 7.
Lieftenant general to Nero, was sent to suppress them: whose terms of
peace, by the mouth of Josephus from him offered, they scorned by their going
on; so that as Josephus; Vespasian was forced to proceed to war; which as it
continued a long time, so it discovered these goodly Zealators, The
Iesuiteslike the Zelators.
who in their extremity set the Temple on fire, and brought utter ruin upon
themselus, with the death of a million of men. Just so; these Babilonish
brattes pretend Religion, as appears especially in their new Psalter, or
sevenfold Psalmody, The gunpowder psalter.
with the hymns whereof they solaced themselves in the expectation of the
Cunpo^^der Iubilee; but their aim indeed is, the racing out of Religion the
ruin of Kingdoms, Psalm. 4.
and the disposing of them at their pleasure. In one of their hellish hymns,
they tell us, that holy King Edward, and gracious Queen Elizabeth, were the
curses of the land, who indeed were great blessings: they show what fire we
have deserved, and what fire in effect they had provided for us; praying
heartily, that the hearts of the laborers therein may be strengthened. Another
of their Hymnns is, all full of triumph, namely, how after the year of
visitation, and Joy of Jubilee, Jerusalem should be built again, and the second
glory thereof should be greater then he first. But what authority had these
fire-work-men in that tempestuous night (as they call it) to blow up a whole
State, and to dispose of our Kingdom at their pleasure? A man would not think
that they had any but from the Pope, and such a devil whose name is Legion;
yet they point in their psalm at a Fabius and Marcellus, both in one person,
whom they call a second Cyrus, stirred up to confirm his Scepter for the good
of his people. Who this should be, except it be the Popes eldest son (whom
the Jesuits hold to be the great Lord of the world) I know not: But this I am
sure of, that Tarquinius Furius, has more fire in his bosom, and more snakes
in his hands to devour us, and to set up their Cyrus, then ever they had. The
heads of Hydra increase, and such a number of Todes come out of the brains of
the Pope, and Serpents out of the raynes of the Jesuits, that they cover the
face of the earth, especially of these Kingdoms. But we had need to awake; for
if we come to the Popes disposing (which the great God forbid) without doubt,
the Jesuits Cyrus should not want his double portion; for the obtaining
whereof Viriatus wants not his own stratagem.

CHAPT. V. Of the Virtue of a Soldier.
THe second personal circumstance is virtue; 2 Virtue.
by which I mean not barely those moral virtues, wherewith the heathens were
rarely gifted, as Caesar, Pompei, etc. (who indeed by these make our age
blush,) but also those cardinal or Theological virtues, 1. Tim. 6.6. Exodus
10. and 21. Non sunt verae virtutes, sed umbrae.
called sometimes by the name of godliness, and sometimes the fear of God: and
that because the fear of God or godliness, is the fountain and foundation of
all other virtues: Where this is not (as one says well) the rest are not true
virtues indeed, but shadows. It is worth the observation, that where God
amongst the rest of his blessings, does promise that their war shall prosper;
Deuteronomy. 28.3.
He first blesses the person: he must be a good man before he be a good and
acceptable souldyer to God. God will not accept or bless the action (at least
to that party) before he bless and accept the person: but the person being
accepted, howsoever it fall out, it is a blessing to him. Such especially
should be the commanders from the highest to the lowest; yea as every one
excels in eminency; so he should labor to excel in true piety; and that
for these reasons.

First, 2. King. 16. Reasons of virtues necesitie. Tanto conspectius in se
crimen habet, quanto qui peccat major babe^ur.
a fault in the face is foul, and the greater person the greater sin. Secondly
the sin of such is exemplarie and therefore a double sin. Let Vitellius play
the riot, Tiberius the drunkard; will the soldiers be sober? Let Sardanapalus
sit down to the distaffe, will his soldiers care for arms? Let Nero play the
Madman, or rather the monster of men; will not his soldiers be as mad and
monstrons as he? Let Jeroboam be an Idolator, all his followers will be of that
fashion. Let Lewis 11, be an egregious dissembler, and his Courteours will be
of that cut. Thirdly, as nothing corrupts more the^ evil example, so nothing is
of more force to correct the^ their good example. When Lewis the 11, of France
scorned learning, all the Court and Nobles thought it but foolery; but Francis
the 1, both being learned himself, and affecting the learned, every state fell
to affect learning. As the Roman Emperors and co^manders were good or bad; so
were the soldiers better, or worse. As valor failed in King John, and he
began to submit to the Pope; so his subjects were content to put their necks
under foreign Government: but as Edward the third, rose up to be the hammer
of popish power, and to challenge and maintain his right, both by Counsel and
Arms, the land became a counsel of war, and an army of valorous counselors.
Fourthly, the success of the war does often follow the virtue of the
commander. To omit other examples, witness the Kings of Judah. While they were
good, they pevayled against their enemies, as David, Ezekiah, etc. 2. King. 16
but by the contrary against the bad Kings, the enemies; prevailed; instance
Achas, branded by the Lord for a bad one, this is that Achas; 2. Chron: 28
and he had as bad success. For evidence whereof, read the places quoted. It
is often noted of that King, and great Commander Moses, that he was the servant
of God; Deuteronomy. 34.5 Rev. 15.3.
and that not only for his authority and fidelity in his place, but also for
his piety. And this indeed is the greatest honor, that any Commander can
attain to, to be Gods servant. So did David esteem it. It is said of
Cornelius, the Centurion, that he was a devout man fearing God. Thus you see
then, that it is not enough for a man to have a good cause, and authority in
his hand, but if he will thrive and have the same to prosper, Application.
he must be good himself. It then condemns to hell, from whence it came,
that hellish principle of, Matchiavell, that a Prince, or great One, should
endeavor rather to be esteemed religious, 2. part. m^x. 1.
then to be so indeed. He has to many apt Scholars, in this especially; but
is not this to extinguish the light of nature, to mock God, and to play the
damnable hypocrite? What gains he by this? First, that which is not in grain
cannot hold. Secondly, when once he comes to dance in a nett, and the color
is cast to the eyes of all men, then he turns from hypocrisy to open
impiety; he takes on the Lions skin when the foxes will not serve; (which is a
main instance of this Matchiavillian rule) and he maintayneth that with open
tyranny, which he could not cover with hypocrisy. Lastly, when the Lord has
made him thus vile, Pompon: (...) Lae. t in Iul:
he makes his grave in a field of shame. All these may be instanced in Julian a
grand hypocrite, while his uncle Constantine lived; but as great in Aposiate,
and as cunning an Atheist after his death. But his end was answereable to his
courses. Such ends made Gaius Caligula that errant Atheist, and Herod Agrippa
that truell murderer; yet, the one dissembled paynim devotion, and the other
the profession of true religion, as might appear by his soliciting Tiberius
for the Jews, when he was incenst against them. Let Christian Princes then
follow Abraham; walk with God and be upright, and in peace and war God shall
bless them.

Now as the Comma^der must be such, such also should the soldiers be, as
Cornelius was a devout man himself; so he called unto him, with his two
servants, a devout soldier also. God himself in Deuteromy, Act. 10.7.
gives laws concerning the purity of a Camp; when the Camp goes forth
against thine enemies, Deuteronomy. 23.9.10. Numb. 5.23
then keep thee from every evil thing; which after he calls uncleannes,
because sin defiles. He here forbids all moral, civil, and legal
uncleannes; the former two concern all camps. So in Numbers, the leper and
unclean were put out of the Camp. Of all Iepers the sinner is the foulest;
and of all sinners the wicked soldier is the greatest. One Achan made the
whole army fare the worse. Ios: 7.
Unholy Armies, although they be for a good cause, and war under lawful
authority; yet through their exorbitant courses, they encourage the hearts,
and inarmes the hands of the enemies. I will produce but one instance, because
I must labor to abridge my self, The Turks advantage by our sins.
having many things to go through. Aventinus relates how they of Rhodes wrote
to Frederick the third, and the Princes Electors, how the great Turk, being
dissuaded by his Nobles from making war against the Christians, especially
against the Germans; his answer was, as he feared no Christians, so least of
all the Germans; and that for 4 reasons. First, their disagreement amongst
themselves, like the five fingers of a man's hand which seldom come together.
Secondly, they are dissolute in their lives, by whooring, drinking and all
manner of riot, delighting more in great plumes of feathers, then martial
arms. Thirdly, they are disorderly in their proceedings. Fourthly, they
neglect all laws of government, not punishing the bad or rewarding the good. As
the Turk puts these imputations upon a nation once second to none (as they
gave good proof to Caesar) so I wish, that they, and all Europes armies, could
quit themselves of these, better then indeed they can: for howsoever the
envious Turk with Lamia his eyes, sees much abroad and nothing at home; yet
our home bred evils, which he thus taxes are more hurtful to us, then all his
forces; De sacro foedere l. 5.
as witnesses Folieta, in a speech to the same effect, upon that victory
obtained by the Christians in a Sea Fight against Assanus Bassa, where he
observerh that they stand not so much by their own forces, as by our sloth,
negligence, and discord.

Oh then that we would make a holy War indeed; that is, to be holy in our
selves; and then neither Gog nor Magog should prevail against us. To this end,
the Lord bids us sanctify a war. By which phrase he wills, Jer. 6.4.
that all that will war for him should be holy. As this serves to direct us
what manner of soldiers in a just war are required; so it discovers the
blasphemy of that Matchiavillian principle of Atheism; wherein with open mouth,
Machiavils blasphemy.
he prefers Paganism in soldiers, to true Religion; because Religion (says
he) makes men humble, pusillanimious, or weak-minded, and more apt to receive
injury then to repel it. Before I come to the answer, let me say thus much of
him once for all; if that Atheistly burn paper, and blind bayard, had lived
amongst the Heathens, and had dealt with their feyned gods, as he has dealt
with the true God, they would have made him an example to the world, and would
have burned his blasphemous papers in the fire; but as they humored exceedingly
his lewd Countrymen, so they flew over the Alps; yea, and the Seas also,
infecting France, and all the rest of Christendom: Insomuch, as the Sybillin
oracles were the refuge of the Painims for their direction; so most Princes,
and their affairs now, are guided by Matchiavel. Are not men now of divilish
pates, and deep reaches to the evil, and such as are acquainted with the depth
of Satan's policy, the only men of service (as they call them?) Yea, say they
be but very beetles and block-heads, yet if their brains will serve to hatch
toades, they will serve the turn as well as can be; if he can swear horribly,
and blaspheme fearfully, with terms not to be named; if he can roar and
quarrel, and outface heaven and earth by his sins, he is fitter to be a
soldier (says the Matchiavillist) then he that will say, surely, and truly,
and so forth: because such a one is a mere Puritan, and so weak and
faint-hearted, that the enemy does not fear him.

To come then to the answer of the point: there is nothing more impious then
the Position; and nothing falser then the reason. For the first, is there any
thing more impious, then to prefer Paganism to Piety? If this had been good, in
vain had John persuaded the doubtful Soldiers to take a holy course. Likewise
the reason (that true Religion makes men cowards) it is against all reason,
against the nature of true magnanimity, the power of Religion, and the
experience of time. Stands it with reason, that he that has the strongest
on his side, should have the least courage? True magnanimity makes a man
courageous to undertake the good, and hate and abhor the evil as a base thing,
unworthy of such a spirit. Who but the religious do so? The power of religion.
Also the power of religion, does tie a man that has it to his God, assuring
him if he loose this life he shall have a better. The soldier thus persuaded
in his conscience, and bearing Arms for a good cause: as for the glory of God,
the defense of Religion, the good of his Country, and credit of his Prince;
will not love his life unto death, in the doing of his service. Caesar tells
us, that the ancient Gauls were a generous and warlike people; whereof he gives
this ground, that they resolutely believed the immortality of the soul. Have
not all the true Worthies of the world bin religious ones? Who more truly
magnanimious? Who more valorous and victorious then David, and yet a man for
zeal and piety, according to Gods own heart? Who more courageous then holy
Constantine, who vanquished Licinius, bringing peace to the Gospel, and
establishing the Gospel of peace? What glorious victories had godly Theodosius,
who was Gods gift to the Church indeed, against the Barbarians, and other
enemies of the Empire? I could bring many other instances, but these will
suffice. The wicked errant Cowards.
And as none more worthy then such; so none more unworthy then irreligious
Athiests, the openly profane, or rotten hypocrite. Was there ever a greater
coward then Gajus Caligula, Sueton. in Calig. ca. 51 Dion. in Calig.
who would hide his head at the Thunder? And marching one time on foot through
a straight, with his Army, was put in mind by one, if the enemy should charge
them, what fear they might be in; like a cowardly Atheist, he mounts himself
in an instant, and fled with all his might, though no man pursued him. Let the
word, a witness beyond all exception, determine this question, The sinners in
Syon are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites, Esa. 33.14. For
how can that man stand, who is pursued by God and an ill conscience? Other
instances I might give of great Tyrants, yet stark Cowards, but I can give but
a touch; only let me commend to you an instance of this kind, worth your
observation. As the Kings of Judah were holy and religious, so they were
valorous and victorious; they were, as God promised they should be, the head
and not the tail; but on the contrary, as they were impious and idolatrous, so
they became degenerous and cowardly; and so they became, as God threatened the
tail and not the head.

And as it is with Commanders, so it is with soldiers, The virtue of a
soldier. Xiphil. apud Dion. in Marc, Anto.
remarkable and miraculous was that blessing that God gave to Marcus Anthonius
the Philosopher, and his Army, and that by means of the Christian companies,
that warred under him in his war against the Marcomans and Quadians: He and his
whole Army were enclosed in a dry country, having no means to come by water,
but through a straight passage which the enemy kept, and were like to be lost
without one strok; the Emperors General, in this distress, told him, that he
had a Legion of Christians in his Army, which could obtain any thing of their
God, that they prayed for: the Emperor hereupon thought himself not too good
to entreat them this office, which they willingly, and heartily performed in
the name of Christ. God, as he is ready to hear, answered their desires with
lightning upon their enemies, and plenty of rain upon themselus, which they
kept in their Targets and Head-peeces, and drunk. Whereupon such fear fell upon
their enemies, that through terror they were vanquished without stroke:
wherefore the Emperor called them, The Thundering Legion, and honored them
ever after, and all Christians for their sakes.

But some will object,

I answer, Ioshu^ had a resolution, that he and his house would serve the Lord;
and as David would have the faithful to serve him: so, let those that will be
Gods warriors, be good warriors. For as the evil carriage of Soldiers, both
Popish and Protestant, have laid Christian Kingdoms open to the Turks
tyranny; so we must confess to our shame, that our unworthy walking; and
walking after the flesh, betrays our good cause into the hand of the man of
sin; whose soldiers do not prevail, because their carriage is better then
their cause, (for both are stark naught) but he cannot endure that in his
own, Numb. 2.31.
which for a time he will in his enemies. The Midianites that caused the
Israelites to sin, were worse then the Israelites; but God first corrected
his own people, and then vexed the Midianites.

Last of all. Thomas Moore his Vtopia, or Tully his Orator, showing rather what
should be, then what possible can be.

I answer, it is true, Valeat qua^tum valere potest. Aut tales inveniant aut
faciant.
Let be done what can be done. And first, let one labor to be such, and if
they cannot find such, let them strive to make them such. And let us all pray
that our Camps may be holy Camps, and our Wars sanctified to the Lord.

CHAPT. VI. Of the Fitness of the Soldier.
THE third personal circumstance is the fitness of the Soldier. It is not
enough in war to be a good man, but he must also be a good Soldier. Ten
Soldiers are better (as the Frenchman says) then twenty Ramesets. Agamemnon
wished but ten such Soldiers as Nestor, to foil all his enemies in Phrigia,
and to make the Greeks return victoriously to their Nation. These were precious
Jewels in the eyes of the worlds Worthies. This was the difference betwixt
Alexander the Great, and Phillip his father; he looked for the best Soldiers;
and his father for the best money: of whom one says prettily, that Phillip wan
all Greece, tanquam Mercator, as a Merchant; but Alexander wan all Asia,
tanquam Victor, as a Conqueror. It is without controversy, as the Wise
observe, that money is the belly of an army, the sinews of war, and the body of
a Soldier; but yet without the animal spirit of cunning, and the vital
spirit of valor; a golden soldier may become a leaden slave; but with these
many times, a moneylesse soldier, may become a commander both of men and
money. An instance of this for many. we have in the Graecians, compared with
the Persians, their delicate fare, glorious furniture, and exceeding great
wealth, with themselves, were a prey to the In omni autem praelio, non tam
mullitudo, and birtus in docta, quam ars, and excercitrum solent praestare
victoriam. Veg. de re militari lib. 1. ca^ 1. " Imo miles inexercitatu^ foemina
Exodus: 15.3
Grecian valor. In every war (says that great and learned soldier) it is not
so much the unskilful and rude multitude, as art and exercise that gets the
victory; which he instanceth in the Romans subduing of the Gauls, Germans,
and Spaniards. It is a groundles conceit, and against all experience, that a
multitude without Art, is enough wherewith to conquer: for an unskilful
souldyer, is not only himself subject to danger, but he indangers others
also. Yea an unskilful soldier is no better then a woman. It is to be
observed, that amongst the rest of Gods excellencies this is reckoned up, that
Jehovah is a man of war; that is, an excellent warrior, who by his policy,
prudence and skill, turns all to the best advantage of his own.

How this skill should be attained unto, it is neither my end, nor my art to
manifest in particular. Military motions, postures, distinction of orders,
distances, marches, countermarches, and such like, I leave to the Tactiks or
masters of arms, Magistri Armoru^. Reading and use requisite for Arms.
(as Vegetius calls them). Only for the generlal, to make an exquisit
soldier, reading and use must concur. Let no good soldier detract from
either. Mere exercise without reading is empyrisme: and mere reading without
exercise is but imagination. Yea a merely read soldier, is like unto a
Shipmaster only by the book. Therefore says Vegetius, an unae^ercised
soldier is always a mere novist; (...).
yet without learning the excercised, is not a complete soldier: because
particu^ars (say they be many) are the object of sense, but universals be the
object of understunding. Our great soldiers, were not only Tacticks, but also
writers of tacticks: As Pyrrhus, Caesar, Aelian, Frontin, Cyrus, Xenophon; yea
the greatest scholars have been the greatest soldiers. The Poet Homer is
observed to be the first (at least that we read of) that was skilled in the
inbat^ing of an army, Epist. Fam: libro 9. Epist. 15.
much admired by that martialist Mnestines Tullie said, he became a great
General, by the reading of Papirius his letters. Cyrus his father could tell
him; the Tactickes would not avail, Xenophon.
without the knowledge of arts invented for the use of war. Yea, General Veres
use of learning in the battle of Nowport.
learning has carried it out in a pinch, when bare practice has been at its
wits end. To omit other instances, take that remarkable one of the battle of
Newport, Anno 1600: where our forces, having got the rize of the sandy hills;
the Spanish forces were betwixt them and Ostend, in a low place. It was
generally thought the best, to charge the enemy by descending to them. But the
English General, wisely, would not condescend to loose the advantage of the
place, citing for his judgment from Caesar's Commentaries, the like practice of
Caesar against the Caules. And it had the very like success. For, the
Spaniard, charging ours against the advantage of the ground, had such hot
entertayment from above, that it brake their forces exceedingly at the first,
and so they lost the day. This military learning made great Pompey so much
admire the Philopher Possidonius, that after the victory over Mithridates, he
came to his house, and honored him much. Caesar, then we see, should be able to
write Commentaries, and Cicero in some measure (if need be) to order an army.
And if you would have the picture of a complete soldier; Let Caesar in
himself give it you, ex utroque Caesar.

CHAP. VII. Of Discipline in General.
THe last personal circumstance, but not the least, is discipline, which is
the key of all. This, in all the passages of war, from the levying of soldiers
till they be dismissed, is duly to be looked unto. On the wings of this, did
the Romans soar from small beginings (as Vegetius observes) Disciplina
parentibus Romany antiquior fuit quam salus quam salus liberorum. Disciplina
optime exercitus munitur.
to be conquerors of the world. This (as a Civilian observes) was dearer to
them then the life of their children. Cassiodorus observes, that it is the
strongest guard that an army can have. By discipline men do not only attain
their ends; but they keep that, The use and neglect of Discipline with the
effects.
by it, whereunto they attain. As in the strict law of discipline, the weal
of Armies and Kingdoms do confist; so from the want of this, or remiss and
loose execution of it, arises the ruin of Arms, and the advancement of the
enemies. Disciplina majorum Remp. tenet, quae si dilabatur and nomen Romanum
and imperium amittemus. In orat. ad milites apud Lamp. In Epitom. Dioni. In
stitut. cap. 8 Josephus de bello Iudaico lib. 3. cap. 5.
This testifies Alexander Severus, as great a soldier as an Emperor, being so
called for his strict exercise of military Discipline; The Discipline of our
ancients (says the Emperor) preserves the commonwealth, which if we let
slip never so little, we loose both our name and Empire. Evagrius in effect
has the same observation. By the wisdom of Commanders, and strict discipline,
with obedience amongst soldiers, how great things are effected! But if either
of these, or both be wanting, then all is undone. Lactantius relates the
looseness of military discipline, as one of the fore-running singes of the
latter day. As Josephus excedingly commends the strictness of military
Discipline, that he observed among the Romans; so the best and greatest
soldiers, amongst Christians, have heavily complained of the want of this
amongst us, and that not without cause: for this appears in the loss of our
renown, and Territories, to the Turk; whose observancie of Discipline to his
advantage, and our loss, may make us blush. Our woe for want of Discipline.
Seidlitzius, a Noble and military man, being captive to the Turk, did admire
(as he writes) the discipline of the Turkish army, the modesty of their
carriage, Historia Peregrinat.
and the security of the country people, by whom they did March. But on the
contrary, with detestation, he vehemently reprehendeth the dissolution, raven,
and more then beastly looseness, of our soldiers, that will be called
Christians. Whence is our fall, and their rize and standing; but from these
contrary courses? The Turks strictness of discipline has got what he has,
and our looseness of living has lost what he has got. Non est mihi (creed)
tantum ab hostibns armatis periculi, etc. Lib. 10. Decad. 3.
I may well take up the complaint in the words of Scipio in Livi, speaking to
Masinissa: we need not so much to fear the forces of our enemies, as we have
cause to fear our own ill conditions. Therefore all Christian Commanders this
day, if they would have Gods war to prosper, honor to themselves, glory to
God, and good to the commonwealth, must go about reformation of this so
absolutely necessary discipline. It is true that great Commanders, as Emperors
and others, have not only exercised discipline strictly, but caused books to
be written; as a book in Greek and Latin of Discipline, set forth by the
command of Justinian. The Imperial sanction for discipline, in the Parliament
of Spier, Anno 1570, But for want of executors of these good laws, we may cry
out with, Horace: Quid leges sine moribus vanae proficiunt.
Laws are in vain where manners are not mended.

All good Commanders of what sort soever, should take that charge to
themselves, that Aurelianus gave to his General in a military Epistle: Si vis
Tribunus esse, (imo si vis vivere) contine manus militum. Recensetur
If thou will be a Tribune (says the Emperor) yea if thou will live, keep
back the soldiers hand from doing evil. In this work, wise Commanders must
begin with themselves; the greatest that is, must not say with Pericles; I am
not subject to order: but for this, he became a proverb and was called by the
people: (...).

a Flavio Vopisco. Commanders must begin with Discipline at themselves.
He that orders others, must first order himself. The discipline of a loose
Commander will do little good upon others. And therefore Adrian is much
commended; not only for his admirable valor, and exquisite experience, but
also for his strictness toward himself. In the wars he fared hard, his
lodging was answerable; he marched many times on foot with his soldiers, he
spared no pains, underwent willingly all labors; insomuch that Florus the
drunken Poet would not have his honor with his pains: His eye was always
over his soldiers, he desired to know them in partiticular; he would visit
them in sickness; and he removed all things from the Camp that might remove
Discipline. So Alexander the Great would desire his Soldiers to undergo no
stricter rules, then he would himself. Such were Severus Scipio, Phirrhus, and
others.

Would to God our Commanders would imitate those, Application.
and do but as much for an eternal weight of glory, as they did for their
Country, and a name upon earth. I have not only read, but mine ears have
heard to my grief, the heavy and true complaints of Soldiers, injuried by
their Captains and higher Commanders; namely, in detayning of their pay, which
is indeed next unto sacrilege. It offers violence to the whole Army, indangers
the cause, be it never so good; it cuts the throat of discipline. And therefore
great Ones, if they love their lives, and the honor of themselves and their
Country, let them with Caesar, and others, take heed that this strange fire be
not in their Armies, for fear they cannot quench it when they would. This is
one main cause, why our Soldiers now a days come short (for the most part) of
the Romans valor; that they are neither so regarded, rewarded, nor justly
dealt with. For besides the punishment, it was an indeleble Character of infamy
to defraud a soldier of his due. Soldiers should not wrong any Dis^^ line ad
duo dividitur, in instructionem, and correctionem, quoru^ primum amore,
secundu^ timore efficitur. De moribus Ecclesia. Minimae negligentiae erant
eapitales lib. 3. de bell. ludaico.


But as they should have no wrong, so they should be kept from wronging their
calling, themselves, or others, and that by the exercise of discipline, whereof
there be two parts, as Austin well observes, though in another kind, namely,
Instruction and Correction; the former of these must be effec^^d with love, and
the latter with fear. Alexander Severus ^^d his name from his watchful eye
that he had over their ^erformances, and his strict punishment of delinquency.
^uch were the Laws of the Romans (as Josephus tells us) that the least
negligence was capital, and the Captains were more terrible then the Laws
themselus. Labienus the Cap^^in, being forbidden by Caesar to fight before he
came; though in likelihood, by an advantage given, he might have defeated the
enemy, yet he would not violate the Laws of Discipline. Yet in the exercise of
discipline, a Commander should be discreet: for as the Commenter upon Vegetius,
well observes, Too too much lenity marreth all; so too too ^uch acerbity
hazardeth all: Therefore the golden mean is to be kept; but always with Tully
his observation, Rigor sal^taris vincere debet inane^ speciem Clementiae. Acer
in rerum gestarum rationibus reposcendis, inexorabilis autem in suppliciis
Dion. in v^ta Pomp.
That ^^saving rigidity, should go beyond a vain show of clemency. ^ucullus,
otherwise a brave Captain, undid himself with ^is too grear severity: He
could command much, but he was ^ot affable; He was severe in the exaction of
service; but ^e was indeprecable in punishment: at length he was forsaken of
his soldiers, who proved as faithful to Pompey, as they were unfaithful to
him; which argued much his indiscretion. Tra^an in his discipline had such a
brave temper, that ^is soldiers were more ashamed, then afraid to be
insolent. Likewise Soldiers must learn to subject their necks to the yoke of
discipline, which is the bond of war: for the Commander bears not the sword
for nothing; and the soldier that does well need not fear. They must not
repine (...) the due inflicted punishment; for as the Commander does ^ot
willingly inflict it, so one must rather perish then unity, Pereat unu^ potius
qu^ unitas.
^especially where it is deserved.) They must know, how ^ardly soldiers are
kept in order, and what a dangerous ^ing disorder is in war. To conclude
this point, I wish from my heart that our soldiers now, may deserve the
commendation that Josephus gave to the Roman soldiers: They so obsequiously
obeyed their Commanders, that in peace the were an ornament, and in war the
whole Army was as on body; so that, with ready ears, and quick eyes, to
receiu^ signs and precepts, they performed their service courageously and
strennuously. How could they then (says he) not conquer?

CHAP. VIII. Of the lawful undertaking of War.
THVS having showed the personal circumstances, 1 Causes to be made known. 2
Reparation demanded. 3 And lastly war to be denounced.
(...) come to the third main circumstance of the description namely, the
lawful undertaking of it. A war may be lawful in it self, and yet unlawfully
undertaken: As for no^ making the causes known: not requiring reparation of the
wrong: and finally for not denouncing of the war. All these were observed by
the Israelites in repairing the wrong done to the Levite and his Concubine.
For, first the Tribe^ sent to Gibeah, to expostulate the wickedness with
Be^jamin; Ludg. 20.
they demanded those children of Belial that were the malefactors; that by
putting them to death evil might be done away. To the which, when the children
of Benjamit would not hearken, Israel makes war against them, which doubtless
was denounced upon the denial; as appears by the Benjamits taking notice of
it, and preparing themselves to intertain the war, Judge. 20.11.12, etc. In
which passage it is not amiss to observe that Marginall note of rebe^ion,
Scripture abuse, by the Doct. of Doway.
of the Doctors of Doway, made upon the place: That omission or contempt to
punish heinous crimes, is a just cause to make war against any people. Their
bloody conclusion falsely observed from the premisse, I shall after have
occasion to han^^e; for the present let this suffice. They force the Text
against the mind of the holy Ghost. For howsoever the people ^^ere divided in
tribes, yet it was one entire politic body, (...) heads whereof might call
any offenders to an account; which they might not have done, if they had been
under ^stinct dominions and policies. But of this more hereafter. (...) To the
present matter, that this proceeding is requisite; Reasons.
it (...) not only clear from the law of nature and nations, but also from
the law of God; and the continued practice both of Gods people, and of the
heathen. In the book of the law the lord commands his people, when they come
to fight against a City, they should proclaim peace, which if they
entertained, then were they to save them, and make them tributaries; But if
they should reject the condition, the^ were they to be^eige the City, to
smite the people, and to take the spoil to themselves, Deuteronomy. 20.10.11.12. So
the tribes, by Ambassadors, examined the Reubenites erecting of the Altar,
before they would war against them, Josh: 22.12. Yea God himself, who for his
dominion and power, both in heaven and earth, is ^alled the Lord of hosts,
keeps this self same course in his proceeding against the rebellious sons
of men. For proof here of the Scripture is copious, I will therefore point out
one place in the prophecy of Hosea. Blow ye the cornet in Giheah, and the
trumpet in Ramah, cry aloud, Chapter 5.8.
or beat up the drum at (...) thave^, after thee O Benjamin. As here the
Prophet describes the treachery and rebellion of the people against God, so
he beingeth in God (as it were) coming in arms, or marching in battle-ray
against the people. But withal he wills the priests, and watchmen upon the
wall, to give them warning; (...) by sound of trumpet, and beating of the
drum, to pro^aime the Lords coming, that they might prepare themselves to
meet the Lord by repentance. And this God does, (...) show the equity of his
ways; that as he gives laws to others, he will be a law to himself. The
heathens that know not God were strict in this course, Belli aequitas
sanctissime feciali populi Romani jure praescripts est, nam nullum bellum
justu^, nisi quod denunciatu^ sit and indictum. lib. 1. de off.
as appears by an in violable rule of war mentioned by Tullie. The equity of
war does religiouily require, that by an herald of arms, from the Roman
Senate, war should be proclaimed. For no war (says he) can be just which is
not before denounced and proclaimed. This form of denouncing war, was first
taken up amongst the heathens by one Rhesis, as witnesses the Author de viris
illustribus. cap. 5.
Author of worthy men brought into Rome, as Livi witnesses by Ancus Marcius
their King; the form whereof we find in sundry Authors of note. us Livi lib.
1. Gell. lib. 10.
A herald of Arms with two sufficient witnesses, was t^ fling a spear into
the Territories of the enemy. Upon the inlargment of their dominions, they had
a Pillar which they called the Pillar of war; from which they flung a bloody
spear (that was kept in the Temple of Mars) toward the enemy, on whom they
were to war. ^ Columna bellica.
This was likewise the custom of the Persians. Ammians Marcellinus lib. 16.


CHAPT. IX. Against whom to War.
THe fourth circumstance following in the description, An enemy must be the
object of war.
concerns the object of war, or the party, against whom we are to war;
namely, an internal or external enemy. So did the Israelites, in their
wars commanded against the seven nations, or in their wars permitted upon
occasion against their enemies. So the Israelits against the Beniamits, for
they were become Gods enemies, and the enemies of the commonwealth. The Lord
will not suffer his people to meddle with the Moabites; because they were
friends in the flesh, (though untovvard ones) permitting (yet by Gods mercy)
his people to pass by them, paying for the necessaries they took of them. So
neither with the Ammonites not theirs did they meddle, Deuteronomy. 2.9.19. Iacobus
Ruardus Comment. de diverse. Reg. jur.
It was a Law amongst the Romans, that upon controversies arising, friendship
should be given up, and deadly enmity openly professed before they made war
upon them.

Hence it appears how unwarrantably against the Law, of Nature and Nations,
the Duke of Bavaria has taken up Arms against his deer and faithful friend,
without just cause, or good occasion given him, by him, or his. Croesus was
demanded by Socrates, what was the preciousest thing he had gained by his
greatness? Max. Sermon. 6.
He answered revenge upon his foes, and advancement of his friends. What a vile
thing is it then, to take vengeance on the friend, and to advance the foe! A
hurtful friend is worser then a foe. (...). Falli: portus and ips. fidem?
Propert.
So that the good Princes may say with the Psalmist, if our enemies bad done
it, we could have born it. A wound from a friend is a double vvound, and
Shipwreck in the Haven is grievous. But what should we say? Though David in
amazement complain, it must be thus; partly, that the trials of those that
stand for God may be the closer; and partly that false friends may be unmasked:
and lastly, that Popery may proclaim to the world (as it ever has done) that
there is no cord so strong, nor bond so strict, but it will either cut it, or
untie it.

CHAP. X. The orderly pursuit of War.
THE fifth circumstance, especially to be observed and insisted on, is the
orderly following of war, or proceeding in it. Preparation
In which we must begin with preparation of all things fitting, as Soldiers,
Arms, Money, Munition, Victuals, and the rest. What circumspection Princes
ought to have in war the book of God teaches us. What King going to war
against another King, Luke 14.13. Longa pre paratio belli celerem facit
victoria^. Chrysostom. Pacis tempore exercitatio lyronum non negligenda. Longa
securitas pacis, etc. Lib. 1. cap. 28.
sits not down first, and consulteth whether he be able, etc. A long
preparation (says one) makes a speedy victory. Yea, in our greatest peace, or
ease, we should be fitting for war. A good note of Theoderic King of the
Goths; Let a soldier learn while he is at ease, that which may stand him in
stead when he is in fight. Long peace (says Vegetius) breeds deep security;
security neglect of Arms; whereon follows (says the same Author) a
dissembled show, or bare flourish of Arms, and last of all the true use of
Arms falls in utter oblivion. The truth hereof by relation of antiquity, and
late experience, is manifest. The twenty years peace of the Romans, after the
first punick war, together with their ease and victories, and disuse of Arms;
did so enervat their skill and courage, that they were not able to stand before
Hannibal, in the second punick war: Insomuch, that till by the loss of many
Captains, and many Armies, they redeemed their use of Arms and skill in fight,
they never got the victory. As for late experience, look upon the Germans, who,
as Isidore says, have their name from their warlike stature; who for their
prowess in Arms have been admired, and extolled highly by the Caesar's of the
world; yea, who have eternized their names by vindicating the Gospel of
Christ, and the professors thereof from that man of the Popes right hand,
Charles the 5; whose forces they did not only foil, but quashed the courage,
and brake the heart of him that was not easily daunted; yet for all this
(without contumely be it spoken) through their long enjoyed peace, their
plenty, disuse of Arms, and want of exercise, they are become the scorn of the
Turk, and are like to be made a prey to him that casts at all.

But to come home to our selves; Application. Quid nos decipimus? non est
extrinsecus nostrum malum intra nos est, ad Lucel. ep. 50.
I may say with Seneca; why deceive we our selves? This evil we speak of, is
not a foreign, but a domestic evil, not without us, but within our bowels.
From use of Arms, we are come to neglect, and to palliate our neglect with
shows. Oblivion is the last degree, in which I fear we are gone too far.
Neither ^ould I go so far in opening of the door, to let the ene^y look in,
but that I know he is already in our bosom. For the Roman Dog, and the Spanish
Linx, have so profited ^n the optic Art, that by the help of Risnerus his
glass, they ^an see into our houses, what Arms we have; and into the Fields,
what skill we want. We are just like unto Seneca his old blind woman, who
was stark blind, but would not believe it: but in this, Coeci ducem q^ae
u^t, nos tamen sine duce erramus.
we are worse then she (as he says) for she would have one to lead her, but
we will not suffer our selves to be led. Our bodily Leaders are like Oysters in
May; and they say to our spiritual Leaders, prophecy not.

But to go on; Provision necessary.
As preparation and fitting of soldiers is necessary; so with Victuals and
Arms, and other necessaries they are to be fitted. An Army without provision,
Piut. Apoth. G^sper Coll^gni Adm^^all of France.
as Quintus Flaminius said of Philopomenes his Army, has legs and arms, but
has no belly. To this effect one said well, That be that will shape this
beast must begin with the belly. Therefore (says Antequae^ iuchoctur bellum de
copii, expe^sisque solert deb^t esse tractatus, lib. 3. cap 3.
Vegetius) diligent care should be had of maintenance. He gives a good
reason, Ferro sevior fames est; hunger is sharper then the sword. It was well
considered of Disci linam no^ potest servare te unus exercitus, C^ssid l: 4.
Theode^ic, that an Army in want cannot observe discipline. Caesar, Adrian, and
other Emperors, and Roman Generals, had a special care that due maintenance
should not be wanting ^o the Soldiers.

And as for Arms they had a special care, that none should come into the hands
of any that might annoy them. And therefore by the constitution of Martian the
Emperor to Aulus; or as some, to Constantine the Treasurer, it was enacted,
that neither Nilprors^^ ^^rrt vel f^^ vel inf^^lt ^^. uit.
Merchant, nor Soldier, upon any pretense whatsoever, should sell, or
exchange, any pecce of Arms, or matter whereof Arms are made, upon pain of
confiscation of his goods, and loss of his head. Yet notwithstanding of this
straight charge, and watchful care, some treacherous fellows and runawayes,
betrayers of the State (such as cur Romanists be) were now and then, conveying
their Arms to their enemies; by the which (as Herodian observes) they
sustained great hurt and damage.

God grant we be not so served with our Ordinance. Applicato^.
What universal hurt and damage brought he to all Christ endome, that taught
the Great Turk the use and making of Ordinance? What evil some of Gods
people; yea, our nearest and dearest friends, have sustained by our conveyed
Ordinance; Or what evils our selves may sustain, we know not. Yet this we know,
that we have as good Laws in that behalf as others have: but the maxim
proves true. Silent leges inter arma. It is not unknown to all, that knows
any thing in State businesses, how the State was gulled, by a great Ones
transporting of Ordinance with a double Bore. Which being complained of in
Parliament, was put off by that little great Statist, that it was a Mysterse of
State. Richard of England was slain with an Arbalist, the use whereof he had
showed to the French. It was a good blunt saying, of Blunt the Master, to the
Kings Majesty at Chatton. That it stood him upon it, to look to his
Ordinance, for they were his walls of brass.

I would I could ring a peal of complaint that might make all your ears tingle;
A peal to the Patliament.
by rubbing up your memories. It is not unknown how Gondomar, that crafty
Merchant, who lay here to buy and sell our State, did by the grand Papists his
factors, get up about some 400 chests of Ordinance, which he sent away in a
fortnight. This he did when he lay in Barbican, in the year of our Lord 1618.
Add to these the 500 Truncks heavy laden, sent from the Ambassadors house; the
many brass pieces of Ordinance; the 30000 Muskets conveyed to Rome. What meant
the Archduke, when a little before the Gunpowder Treason, by his forces at
Dover, he bought up all the gun powder in Kent? Yea, what shall I say of our
home bred Harpies, who have got the most part of our Arms into their hands,
that thereby they might serve the enemy and undo us? What meant he, that some
two months before the powder plot, did beg of his Majesty all the refuse
Armor and Artilery (as he called it) in the Tower, which would have served to
have inarmed some 16 or 17 thousand men? I verily believe that the devil might
have had it for money. That Marshall, or rather Marre-all, that sent away two
ships laden with Artillary, was passed over with a little imprisonment; or,
why did you so my son? If this will not awake you, I fear the clattering of
your own Arms shall awake you. Besides the danger, I appeal to your conscience
if the like was ever suffered in any Nation that meant not to play the
Sybarits, wherein the crowing of a Cock, much less the sound of a trumpet
might not be heard. But the Lord in mercy awake you.

CHAP. XI. Gods presence first of all to be sought.
THVS as you have heard, being fitted with men and means, as they can, they are
to proceed to the war, be it defensive or offensive: but observing this in the
first place, Take God with you, if you mean to prosper.
that if they mean to prosper, they must take God with them; and that not
barely, by his General Providence, as he is with all, both good and bad; but
also by his particular presence: which Moses, the great Commander of Israel,
above all things desired; yea, nothing will content him but this, as appears
by that expostulation that he makes with God. If they presence go not with us,
carry us not up hence. Exo. 33.15
Where he entreats God, that he would not only go before them, by the
presence of his power, as he did to the Heathen when he employed them in his
service, Esa. 45.1.2.
as of Cyrus, I will go before thee, and make the crooked straight. But that
he would be with them by the love of his countenance; or otherwise, it would be
better for them to remiane subject to the greatest danger, then to go on
without this presence. The truth of this, bers. 17. Non solum praeibo. sed
vobiscum Ero. Galat.
plainly appears from Gods answer. I will do this also which thou have
said. That is, I will not only go before you, but with you also. Moses had,
and all others have, great reason for this.

First he teaches his the true Art of war, Reasons.
and instructs them how to fight; he teaches my hands to war, says the
Prophet David, 2 Samuel 22.35.
so that a Bow of steel is broken by my Arms. Where one observes well, that
the art of war is commendable; else God would never teach it. So he taught
Iosuah, Iobosaphat, what to do with their enemies. Secondly, God fights for
his, and gives them victory. The Lord your God (says Moses) that goes before
you shall fight for you. And so he did for them; Deuteronomy. 1.30. 2 Samuel 22.36.
as for David and others: Thou have given me the shield of salvation; By which
he means good success. For these and other respects (as I showed) God is
called an Excellent warrior. Thirdly, without Gods presence, nothing goes
well; yea, victory where this is wanting is no better them the foil, Numb.
14.14.
because it is in judgment. The Israelites went up against the Amalekits, but
how? The Lord was not amongst them; and they prospered accordingly. But by the
contrary, Gods presence was the strong rock of Abiahs confidence against
Jeroboam and his great forces. In reckoning up the mercies of God toward them,
in his ordinances, his priests, and true worship of the true God (all which
Jeroboam wanted) he binds up all with this, 2. Cron. 12.12.
and behold (says he) God himself is with us for our Captain. Where observe,
the note does denotate the excellency of this; that it is all in all to have
God to be their Leader.

I press this point the rather, Application.
because it is the center from whence all the lines of wars prosperity have
their beginning: A truth acknowledged by the most, but by the most little
regarded. For by some it is altogether neglected; and others by their carriage,
declare that in show only they seem to respect it. The
Matchiavillian-blush-coulour of the times, has put the desire of Gods presence
so far ont of request, that it is a counted a color scarce worthy of a great
soldier: Does Liola his brood set God before their eyes in their wars; or
do they not rather fight against God: If things go cross, they are ready
with Julius the second, their father, blasphemously to cast of God, by way of
contempt. In the battle of Ravenna, on Easter day, between him and the French,
as he sat by the fire, reading of his prayers, Sit ergo Gallus in no mine
diabolorum. Ex Annalibus Galli;
and having news of the defeat, he flung away the book saying, that which I
am afraid to relate. Judge how much this monster did esteem Gods presence. I
wish of God, that the mayntainers of the Lords Battles would esteem it more
then they do; for then it should go better with them then it does. They may
say, and that truly with Abijah against Jeroboam, they have Gods own
ordinances, the true Ministers of God, the true worship of God; yea and Gods
own cause in their hand. Why then, as Rebecca said, is it so? What want they
for victory? surely an earnest desire, with an answerable courage, that God
himself would be with us for our Captain. Our failing in this makes him
often forsake his own cause, which if he should not respect, he might quite
leave us.

I presume to speak freely, yet friendly. Infensibile incurabile. Ex. 33.3.4.
The evil must be felt before it be removed. The Israelites did so forfeit
this presence, that he absolutely denied to let them have it any further, I
will not go up in the midst of thee. One reason because they were a
stiffnecked people: But how were they affected when they heard these evil
tidings? They mourned, and no man put on him his ornaments. Where observe. as,
by the force of the reason, the threatening concerns us; so it stands us
upon, to be affected and humbled by the threatening as they were. Though the
Lord had promised to send his Angel to cast out the nations before them, and
to give them the good land; yet all this, without Gods familiar presence,
would not content them. Oh that this mind were in us, and that we could
mourn as they did: and he would be entreated to go with us, as he went
still with them at Moses entreatie. If we will but look upon the practice
of the heathens in this particular, Si dii voluerint. Expeditio in Dei nomine.
Sacra fecere ante egressionem. Herodian. lib. 6.
it may make us ashamed of our neglect. Having prepared their forces, their
Edicts for setting forth, were given out in the name of their gods, to whom
before they went forth, they preformed all religious services: yea, they had
such an esteem of the tutelar gods of nations, that they held them invincible,
except their gods should forsake them; which made all the foolish nations,
exceeding careful to keep and please their foolish gods; and their enemies as
diligent to inveigle them. As it is reported of Diomedes and Ulysses, who
enticed out the Troyan Palladium. So the Talmudists and Cabalists fable of
Moses, that he should overcome Amonino, the God or intelligence (for so they
call national gods) of the Epgytia^s; Beatu^ esse hominem Deo fruentem sicut
oeulus luce. Lib 8. de Civit. Dei.
The Platonists could say (as Austin witnesses) that that man was happy who
inioyed God, as the eye does the light. If thus the blind heathens, did toil
themselves to please their moldy gods, or rather devils, heaping sorrow on
their own souls; and if Rome yet, take so much pains with her Bellona, for
the success of war; how should we labor, to have his presence with us, who
is the God of all the world, who needs not our keeping (save only by faith)
but he will keep us, and make the hearts of the Caneanits to melt; yea the
joints of every Balshazzer, that is drunk with the whoores cup to tremble and
shake? Therefore let us never cease nor give the Lord rest, till we have his
familiar presence with us.

CHAP. XII. Of depriving the Enemy of all Means.
THVS an Army having got his presence, may go on with Iosuah and be courageous;
yet vvithall no secondary mean must be neglected. And first of all, a people
must look to maintain what they have already in possession; Omnem alumoniam
virtus intra muros debent studiosissime conlocare. Veget. lib. 4. cap. 7. Qui
frume^tum no^ habet vincitur sine far. Caesar sexto bello gallice.
and that especially by fortifying all places of strength, whereunto they may
bring all their victuals and other substance. And that for two causes, as
Vegetius well observes. The first, that if they be beseiged they may want no
necessaries. The second, that the beseiger may either be forced to fight with
disadvantage, or to return home with disgrace. This the Romans gave in charge
to their subjects, and appointed officers to see it done. Caesar gave the like
charge upon the same grounds to the Vbij. G. Marius, as Plutarch reports, put
this also in practice The Walls of Bisantium and Saguntum were very strong,
as we read in Dio: and Livi: yet the Lacedomians, held it a point of vvorth
to have no vvalls but the citticens valor, and so they did inhabit unvvalled
cities, as Plutarch in Apotheg. Diverse are the judgments of Philosophers in
this point. Aristoile refuteth this opinion of the Lacedomians with Plato his
defense of the same, Lib. 7. de optima reip.
as very incommodious to a commonwealth. And so it is indeed: for why should
men expose themselves and theirs to more danger then needs, or presume so much
upon their own valor, as to neglect so good means, which indeed saves
often a great deal of blood that otherwise should be shed? Yet this much I
will say, except valor maintayn the Walls, and sin be cast over the Walls,
and God watch the city, a wall of brass is but a vain thing. To this effect
speaks the Comic. Plaut.
Si incolae been sint morati, pulchre munitam arbitror, at nisi invidia
avaritia, ambitio, etc. Exulent, centuplex murus parum est. Et quae opportari
nequierint exurenda. Veget.
Yea, whatsoever cannot be got, or contained within the strength, is to be
consumed with fire, that it may not serve the enemy. Such was Sampsons practice
in burning of the corn, Yea the towns themselves, as warriors relate, have
been, by the defendents set on fire. As for instance, twenty of the Bituriges,
that they should not come into the enemies hands. As for the raising of the
trenches, with their dimensions of depth and breadth, together with other
works, for holding themselves, and annoyance of the enemy, I leave them to
their present occasions, and the particular Masters in that Art.

CHAP. XIII. War must be as well Offensive as Defensive.
FVrther when they have thus fitted themselves for defense, they must always
know, that the nature of war requires, that it be as well offensive as
defensive, and that diversion of forces does often help, where direct
opposition prevayleth not. A war merely defensive, where they may offend, is
worse then yielding at the first; for it inureth the assailant to cunning and
courage, and it drives the defendant, from good opportunities, to desperate
conditions. Neither does it a whit abate the cruelty of the enemy, in whose
heart is the root of bitterness, and in whose ear the trumpet of destruction
is ever sounding this: (...). Revenge thy self upon thine enemies. Yea barely
to defend, without laying hold on every opportunity of offense, is against the
rules of the Art military, the nature of war, and the practice of good
soldiers. It is a main rule in war, whatsoever does advantage the enemy, it
hurts thee. Quod illu^ luvat, tibi semper officit. Veget. lib. 3. cap. 26
Therefore thou should do all that may advantage thy self and hurt him.
Again, the body of war, requires as much offense, to accompany defense; as
the natural body requires for its actions, a right hand and a left; or, as
the right hand and the left, require in sight, a sword and buckler: To the
which Tully alludeth, speaking of Marcus Coelius, Bona^ dextram inquit. sed
malam sinistram babet.
who could accuse well, but defend meanly. He has a good right hand, (says
he) but a naughty left hand. So he that fails in offending of his enemy, and
cleaves close to his own defense, has a good left hand, and a naughty right
hand. Yea, the very words of Military Art, does join these two inseparably
together; with them the word defend, Defendere pro arcere l^tinissime dicitur.
does not barely signify to resist, but also to abandon the enemy by all
means they can from further assayling: So Vegetius, Caesar, Tully, and others,
uses the word. So from this signification, the armed horse were called
Cataphracti; equites defensores; not only for defending of the rest, but also
for breaking of the enemies forces: Virgil uses the word in the same sense,
Solsticium pecori defe^dite, id est depellite.
though in another case; Yo drive away, or to put far off. He that would
defend well at home, must learn to offend abroad. A good Warrior in this kind
must be like the Amphibena, having a head on each side; (...).
for devising as well how to offend, as defend; and with every part of his
body, on the right hand, and on the left, he must lay about him to make good
his designs.

Lastly, that i^ has been the constant practice of the best and skillful est
soldiers, it is undeniable. Abraham did not only reskue his Nephew, and his
neighbors, with their goods and children, but also pursued the Kings and
smote them, and took the spoil: which the Lord did well approve on; Genesis 14.1^
as appears by the words of Melchizedeck in the blessing of him. I might
cite the examples of Moses, Joshua, and the rest of the Judges, and of the
Israelites war against their enemies; but this were to light a candle at
noonday, to men of learning and experience: For it is more then manifest, that
this has been the design and practice of all the worlds great Generals.

As for the diverting of the enemies forces, observe that example of Scipio,
whose counsel prevailed with the Romans against Cato, to send forces into
Aphrick: which proved exceedingly to the Romans good; for hereby the
Carthaginians were forced to call back Hannibal out of Italy, and of an
offensive war to make a defensive.

As this principle is well known; Application.
so I would our worthy Warriors, in the beginning of these Christian vvarres
had answered their knowledge with their practice. For the Lord made the hearts
of their enemies to melt, and their souls to faint at the hearing of them; but
perceiving they kept their right hand in the bosom, and held only forth the
left, they took them time for mature deliberation, in the which they got up
forces and courage regether, knowing well, that the bucklars in their enemies
left hands, might well receive blows for a time, but they could give none.
This was the very beginning of our evil, Hinc origo mali.
our of which, much dishonor to God, trouble to his Church, and peril to his
Saints has risen. Of whom this left-handed-counsell came, I leave to those
that know it; but this we all know, it proved a left-handed-counsell. God give
us grace hereby to prove Epimethei, if we could not prove Promethei.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the safe leading of the Forces.
BUT to proceed with the rest of the warlike proceedings. As Generals must
lead on their forces, at their appointed times, for their service; so they
must look well to the safety of the ways by the which they lead them.

The learned, and experienced in Arms, do well observe, Plura in itineribus
qua^ in ipsa acie pericula.
that there be more dangers in the ways, through which they March, then in
the very front of the battle. The same Author quoted gives a reason: While they
are in conflict they are fitly armed, prepared, and appointed to fight; they
see their enemies before them: but in the way, they are subject to the
concontrary of all these. Therefore the Romans, besides their Geographicall
tables, Perlustratores.
they had their Viewers and Tryers of the ways, which went before to clear
all the passages, that by the enemies they might not at unawares be surprised.
Julius Caesar would never lead his forces, nor suffer them to be led through
any dangerous ways, Sueton.
without exact discovery of the danger. Livius Florus.
The neglect of this gave Sp. Posthumous the Consul, with all his forces, an
ignonimious foil by the Caudini.

CHAP. XV. The manner of safe Incamping.
AS the ways for safe passage are to be secured, so a care must be had of
incamping the forces. The Camp is the City of the soldier, be he never so
great. The Israelits being numbered, had their charge to incamp about the
Sanctuary; that is, to place themselves in a warlike order and government.
Numb. 2.2
The sons of Israel shall incamp every man by his standard, etc.

The Israelites had indeed two sorts of Camps, one for the managing of their
wars, and another when they pitched about the Arc. The form of the former
was ^ound, as appears by the phrase of speech, expressing David's coming up
to the Camp of the Israelites, ready to join battle with the Philistims. 1 Samuel 17.20. Mabagalah (...).
The word by diverse, is diversely taken; yet amongst all, it does properly
signify the round compass or circuit environed, with the carts and carriage.
And so the Septuaginta, in another place do well express it, by a word that
signifies rotunditie, called by some, pilata acies, Within the compass
whereof, the King, in the middle of his Host did lie, for his better security.
The form of the latter was four square, as you may see by the description of
it in the second of Numbers; but in both they were placed in a military order.
And it is likewise clear, that both the General and the Soldiers kept the
Camp. Saul was always in the Camp, and so was Moses and Iosuah, and the rest
of Isreal's Generals. Epaminondas that great Captain is much magnified by
Aemilius Probus, for that speech to the Ephori, worthy of a noble General
indeed: If you will be Princes of Greece indeed, Si principes Graecie esse
vultis, castris est vobis utendu^ non palaestra.
you must be in your Camps, and not seeing sports and recreation. All should be
of this mind, that war for the Lord of Hosts. The Camp is the fittest place,
the safest place, and the place of greatest honor. Vriah renders this reason
to David, of his not going home to his own house: That Ioab his Lord General
was in the field with the Host of Israel, 2 Samuel 11.11.
and the Ark of God, and shall I then go to mine house, to eat, drink, etc.
No: as thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing. All
this he might have done, but in regard of the common danger, it was more time
to think on God, and his service, then to take his ease and liberty in things
otherwise lawful. It had also been better for David himself to have been
there, then upon the top of his house; for thereby he might have been
preserved from a multitude of sins, saved a multitude of souls from death,
and Gods name from a great deal of blasphemy.

It follows in incamping, what things are to be looked into. And first, for
the forms of the Camps, which with the Israelites, I have showed to be round,
which of all is the most perfect, and therefore the most capacious form. This
is fittest for them that would obscure their forces, and have them seem
lesser. But there be other forms or figures used, as quadrangular to make them
seem bigg; Prout loc^ qualitas, aut necessitas postulaverit. Veget. lib. 1
cap. 23.
triangular for a bigger show; and half round for the biggest show of all. But
to a be brief; according to the nature of the place, the quality of the
service, the show they would make, and the necessity of occurrences, they may
fashion, or change the fashion of their Camps to their best advantage.

It is likewise meet that a camp be fortified; witness the practice of the
Israelites with their Carts and baggage. Amongst the heathens Pirrhus is said
to be the first that devised the fortifying of a Camp, whom the Romans
overcomming, they possessed his Camp, Frontin. lib. 4. cap. 1.
and seeing the order of it, they were content to imitate the same: As Frontine
witnesses.

As for the place it self; the sweetness of the air, the fertility of the
soil, and the advantage of the ground, should be sought for as much as may be.
At least this must be looked to, that they leave not a better place to the
enemy, Primum auxilium ex loco, qui tanto utilior quanto superior. Veget. lib.
3. cap. 13.
then they have chosen for themselves. The advantage of the ground is holden a
main help for commodions encamping; which, how much the higher, so much the
better. As it is better for encamping, so likewise for joining battle; witness
the testimony of Livi, Frontine, Caesar's victories, and others by this means.
Praeter virtutem locus adjuvat. Plini. lib. 7
Take for instance that remarkable victory against Pharnaces, Mithridates his
son; who notwithstanding of inequality of place, put Caesar and his forces
so to their valor, that all was little enough: with Caesar's own experience and
testimony, we have his continual care, to take and keep this advantage; the
great moment whereof does manifest it self by this, that both the Armies
contending for it, have begun their fight for the possessing of it. Of the
further ordering of those things spoken of, or any other particular for the
weal of encamping, Praefecti castrorum.
I will say no more, but refer them to the careful industry, and industrous
skill of the Camp Masters.

CHAPT. XVI. The Fixing of the Colors.
THE Camp thus being fitly seated, Et signa constituunt lib. 1. cap. 23.
the ensigns or colors are therein to be fixed. The word used by Stuchius
well expresses the action: for the Ensigne-staffe being sharp at the lower
end was fixed fast into the ground. And this must needs be material in war;
because God gave this in particular in charge to his people. The Sons of
Israel incampe every man by his standard. Numb. 2.
Again in the colors a great deal of majesty, matter of command and
conservation of order is always employed. Thus much is well expressed in the
Chaldee word Tekes, a Standard, alluding to the Greek word Taxis, which as
it signifies any order, so ^athexochen, or by way of excellency, that
excellent ordering of war. Nii venerabilius est eorum majestate militibus.
Coelius lib. 3
As for the Majesty begetting due regard in the eyes of the soldiers; there is
nothing more venerable (says one) in the eyes of soldiers then the Majesty of
the colors. Yea it appears most in this, that our blessed Savior is called
by the name of an Ensign. In that day the root of Iesse shall stand for an
Ensign of the people. Esa. 11.10
The which prophesy the Apostle to the Romans, expounds by that commanding
power that is in the Ensign. Chap. 15.12
The root of Iesse shall rise to reign over the gentiles. Does not the Army
march or stand as their colors Command them? Further, the noble soldier,
loves not his life unto death, in regard of the colors. A memorable insta^ce
we have of this, in that battle of Tarquinius king of the Romans, against the
Sabines. Where Servius Tullius a gallant spark, perceiving the Ensigns to
grow cold in the fight, he snatcheth the colors out of the Ensigns hand, and
flings them in the middle of the enemies, for the recovery whereof both the
Ensign himself, and the whole forces, did so charge the enemy, Frontin:
Strat. lib. 2. cap. 8.
that they gained both their colors and the victory. You may read many other
examples in the place quoted. In the last place, I may ad, that as the colors
are stately to their Armies, so they are terrible to the enemy, as appears by
that metaphore, used by the spirit in that spiritual battle of the Church
against the devil, and all her other enemies, Christ says, Cant. 6.4.
his Spouse is terrible as an Army of banwers. And so much for the general.

Now to give a touch of the particular colors. Every Company had their own
particular colors, with some significant sign in them, for distinction and
instruction. As amongst the Romans, the Legionarie, Auxilliarie and Pretorian
companies had diverse colors. So the 12 tribes, had their twelve distinct
colors, with significant signs in them; But the particularities of their
colors, were left to their choice, and what they were the scripture does not
express. The Rabbis tell us that Reuben had a man, Judah a Lion, Ephraeim an
Ox, and Dan an Eagle, together with their distinct colors and empresses. The
chief amongst the Romans was the Eagle, but they had others, to the number of
thirty. The same liberty of choice is left now to the discretion of the
Commander General; who in his choice is to take heed to 3 things. First, that
his colors be void of cruelty. The Angels carry in their colors, the most
excellent creatures, but the persecuters of the Church, described by Daniel,
have their colors embellished with cruelty, Chapter 7.67.
as the Bear having 3 ribs in his mouth, the Leopard with 4 heads. The
fourth monster with Iron teeth, tearing all the rest in pieces. The Dragon was
one of ancient Romes chiefest colors, and the Company draconarij milites,
were under the same. As Rome has, and does make war with Christ in his
members: So the Frogs of Egypt, march under the same colors, and they may be
called Draconarij milites, or Dragons themselves. First for their original,
for as the Dragon is a kind of Serpent, (...).
which must eat up another Serpent, before it be a Dragon; and the original of
the Dragon in the Roman coulors was from the death of the Serpent Pithon; so
the Jesuits must in their trayning up in Ignatius his Conclaue, be fed with
nothing but Serpents (as that Indian maid sent to Alexander, was fed with
nothing but poison) while they come to be flying, fiery and bloody dragons.
Secondly, for their preying they are never satisfied, Julian and Valence, both
Roman Emperors, caused the Priests and religious persons to be bookt, and to
serve in war: which company they called sacram cohortem, the holy band; so
these be the Popes holy band, who having the Dragon for their colors, have
spread themselves in Mountains and Valleys. And as they have devoured others
even at their doors; so through our own default, Plin. lib. 8.14.
they are like to make us as much a do, as that monstrous Dragon made Attilius
Regulus at the river Bagrada in the punick war, who hardly with his whole
Army could overcome it. But would to God that the Kings Majesty would do as
he did, for the safety of himself and us, that is, either send themselves, or
their skins to Rome. A second thing to be observed, that no idol, nor badge of
superstition be inblased in the Colors. The Babylonish Banners, sent to the
Popes bewitched Vassals for waging war with the Turk, has made Gods
inheritance a prey to him, and the name of God to be blasphemed by the
uncircumcised. Can God and idols join together? And howsoever, for our sins,
God for a time has forsaken his inheritance, and the Babylonians are got into
it; yea, they display their banners in his own inheritance, and roar in the
midst of the Sanctuary: yet God will return, and set his feet upon the Dragon,
and require, with vengeance, the blood of his Saints.

The last thing in the colors to be looked to is this, Application
that the significatiue sign in the coulors may give some good instruction,
without superstition. It is a foul fault in us professing Christ, to give the
badge of the beast in our coulors, and to use the name of a Chimera Saint in
our joining battle.

CHAP. XVII. The Matter of the Camp.
BUT now it is time to come to speak of the persons, that must make up and
manage this Camp. In every Army there must be a chief General to command, and
Soldiers to obey. And first for the General, his personal qualities, and
official indowments, should always answer the greatness of his place: Such
God gave to his people, as Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Sampson, David; yea, when he
gave them Saul for a King, and a Leader, though it was in his wrath, yet he
fitted him for the place with excellency of gifts: take view of this in the
first of Sam. 15. chapter, comparing the first, sixth and ninth verses. In the
first verse, the Lord anointed him to be Captain over his inheritance, for
then the people of God had war with their enemies: In the sixth verse, the
spirit of the Lord should be upon him, and he should be turned to another man:
In the ninth verse see this accomplished, God gave him another heart; not for
all this, that he had one spark of saving grace, for he was a reprobate. But
God by these, shows what excellent common gifts he affoorded him for so
great a calling, as magnanimity, depth of judgment, Princely behavior. And in
this sense, in the sixth verse, the Lord is said to be with him. I press this
point the rather; because as from the head, as from a fountain, the body has
life and action: so in the sufficiency of a Leader consists the safety of the
Army, the gayning of the victory, the glory of the Nation, and the honor of
himself.

To this purpose, The necessity of a good General.
history is so plentiful, that instead of a taste, I could afford a whole
Treatise, but the draught of my knot requires such variety, that it will admit
but a few flowers of every kind. Vnius viri virtus interdum exerci tum servavit
and duce^ Dialog. 62. Imperare didici Plutarch. in Apotheg.
Petrarch well observes that the valor of one man (meaning the Leader) has
often saved both himself and the Army. Commanding is an excellent Art, of
which Iphycrates, and that deservedly, did glory much; I have learned (says
he) to command. Pausanias, being asked how they might vanquish the Thracians;
If you (says he) make choice of a good General. And such indeed was himself,
whose last words to this effect, I thought good to commend to your memory.
Having received his deaths wound in the Mantinean fight, being brought into his
Tent, he called for Diaphantus and Iollida, two brave Captains, whom when he
understood to be slain in the battle, he councelled them to leave of war,
because they had never a General: Plutarch. in Apotheg.
which counsel, as they did not follow, so they felt the smart of it. The
inequality of the Leader casts the balance of the service. When Pompey was
young, and a raw Captain; Sertorius made havoc of his forces, and esteemed
himself but a boy to be whipped, but when the old wife Metellus came, Idem in
Sertor. vita.
(for so he called him) he gave him enough to do. It was a pretty, and a
witty answer, that a young Numantine gave the Senate, reviling them for flying
before the Romans, whom they had so often put to flight: The case is altered
(quoth he) for though they be the same sheep, yet they have got them a new
Pastor (meaning Scipio.) Caesar made no account of Afranius, his forces,
because (says he) they want a Leader. That politic General Phillip would
say; That he had rather have an Army of Hearts, with a Lion to their Leader,
then an Army of Lions with a Heart to their Leader. To shut up all these with
the censure of Alexander, who for his excellency in this Art, might be called,
the Great; Discoursing of Homers verses esteemed this above all the rest.
(...). Iliad. (...)
That it is required in a good king, that he be also a worthy war^our. And this
made kings account it no small dignity to ^ade their forces themselves,
putting life and courage to their subjects and soldiers. Yea, as it quickens
valor so it ^aketh cowardice to be ashamed. Thus did the good kings ^f Judah:
Gajus Fabricius, when he heard of the overthrow of ^he Romans given by
Pirrhus, he turned him to Labienus, Pir^^us says he, has got the vistory, and
not the Epirots, meaning that the worth of the Leader carried the victory. To
omit other instances look but on this practice in our Brittaigne kings, our
Edwards, Henry's, Richards, Malcomes, Robert, James; the fame of whose
victories, and heroic prowess is ronowned through the world.

The time puts us on to cry to God for worthy Leaders; Reasons.
for first they are the diamond of the State; and such a blessing as for their
sakes many times the State was delivered. And when the Lord raised them up
Judges, Iud. 2.18
then the Lord was with the Judge. Secondly, the want of such laid the people
open to ^^l impiety, and the rage of the enemies, Judge. 2.19. Besides that, it
was a manifest token of Gods wrath against them. Judges 17.6. Thirdly, this is
the height of all peoples ambition, except they be given up to a Sybaritical
security: Yea, Gods greatest enemies are careful and circumspect in this, to
the damage and disgrace of Gods people, being not so careful and circumspect
in this point. Our defect is rather in want of care, then in want of able
persons. Let the Phili^tim brag of his Goliath, and the Spaniard of his
Viriatus; yet they shall well know ere they have done, that Gods people have
both a courageous Pompey, and a Grave Metellus, that will ^eate them home to
their own doors. Me think they should either blush or tremble, to think
upon the name of that ever victorious Sisca. Charles the fifth, was as a great
soul^ier as any they had, and yet he was so mated by the valor of Germany,
that his heart failed him clear, from setting up for another game. The evil
of an ill leader.
Lastly, as the want of a good is the wo^ of a commonwealth; so the having of
an ill one the^^ greatest unhapines. It may be said of an ill leader, as it is
sai^ of an ill Lawyer, (...).

Alium deteriorem inveniri posse nullum, at hunc meruisse
Constantinopolitanorum vitia.

One chife Commander in war.


he is a plague to the commonwealth, such a on^ is an ill Leader. Yea, the
very stamp and seal of Gods wrat^ So God gave the Israelites Saul in his
wrath. Cedrenus written how a religious man in the raging of Phocas, did
expostula^^ the matter with God by way of complaint, why he would set such a
wicked tyrant over Christians. It is said he heard (...) voice answering (but
saw nothing) They had him because never a worse could be found; and this they
had deserved for their sins Concerning this point, it is further to be
observed, that as^ chief Commander is necessary, so there must be but one* It
is an axiom of very good use. Plurimum imperium bello semper in^tile est.
Stach. page 113. lib. 4.5.
The chief command of m^^^ then one in war is ever hurtful. Upon this
ground when any consul being General did leave a Legate in his place, he had
his full power to his return, which the Consul (...) turning did resume, and
the Legates place was altogether void, Livi discovers the evil that comes
upon the joint command of more, from that example of more Tribunes jointly in
command, and authorized with popular power. The same Author relates the like
of two Consulls, Paulus, and Varro, whose contrariety of judgeme^t, in a
matter of weight, made great dissension in the Army. Paulus, for his time, at
no hand would have the^ pass the river, Varro the next day without consulting
with his colleague, Commanded the colors to be advanced. Lib. 31. Lib. 30.
adversat:
Turnebus also observes from Livi and Polibius, that in one Legion there were
six Tribunes, whereof each commanded by turns for two months. But the Romans
perceiving the evil that did ensue, from this emulation of this joint command,
did ordain that the command of all their forces in one place should be in one
supreme Commander, from whom all subordinate officers, should hold a
subordinate command, and to him be accomptable in their places. The soldier
was under the Centurion, he under the Tribune, the Tribune under the Legate,
Dictat^r a perpetua via ad imperium.
the Legate under the ^onsull, the Consul under the Master the Horse, and all
^der the Dictator, who was the highest Officer, and the ^^xt stepped to an
Emperor. Corrupti^ boni pessima.
And questionless as a Mo^^rchy in peace is the Head and Chief of all
governments. ^owsoever accidentally, or through abuse it may become ^e worst.)
So it is likewise in war. And for my own part ^thinke (saving the judgment of
the judicious) that the ^wer of a worthly General, though he be subordinate;
Legati cum libero mandato.
^ould be like in commission to the Roman Legates, that is, with freedom to
deal, as they did, upon occasion, but with ^ese cautions, that they should
have a sound and judicious ^ouncell, and strictly observe the laws of Arms.
For what serves the head and heart of a General, if his hands be tied. ^e may
loose occasion, being the life of action, which for (...) heart blood again,
he cannot redeem. As I have often (...) thought, much regrated the bad
requital of the Grecia^ Generals, the particulars whereof I shall hereafter
touch: so I ^^ue thought it the highest point of their unhappines, to be
^ver-topt in their doings by a various and unruly multitude. What glory they
got abroad, it was not only eclipsed but ex^^nguished at home, had Aristides,
Themistocles, Pausanias and ^paminondas, with (whom I will join Haniball) been
free from the countermands and controulments of their heady and harebraind
States, they had every one been likely (...) have proved a Monarch. And on the
contrary, here I must ^^ke occasion to commend the good temper, and the due
re^ect of the Romans to their Generals, that howsoever their government was
mixed, yet they were, not of a coalting ^umor toward their Commanders; in this
they are seco^ded ^y the States of Holla^d, whose due respect to that well
deserving Youthy, the Prince of Orange, has made their Armies terrible (...)
the enemies of God, and their flourishing state, a nursery ^f Arms, But so
much for this point, wherein I have taken ^eaue to be somewhat large, because
it is the head piece.

The rest of the parties that make up the Camp are soldiers and subordinat
Commanders. Subordinat Commanders, and soldiers.
As an army without (...) Leader is like Poliphemus, without his eyes, or a
great be^ without a head; so a General without fit soldiers, is like (...)
head without a body, or a Lion over a company of Hearts. (...) fit Commanders a
special care is to be had, because they are the eyes of the General. Caesar,
Alexander and Philip, were ve^^ happy in their Commanders; so Edward the third,
the black^ Prince, Henry the 5. and Henry the 8. Neither was Gener^ Vere
unhappy in this, at the battle of Newport. Philip having slept longer then he
used to do in the camp, put it off with this that he slept in saftie, when
Antipater was awake, showing thereby that the saftie of a General and army
consists much in the skill and vigillancie of the Captains.

The like necessity there is of good soldiers. The integrall parts of an
Army.
Iphycrates giving the integrall parts of an Army, It must have, says he, the
Phalaux, or body, for the breast, the wings for the arms, the horse (...) the
feet, Bruc. lib. 4. cap. 33.
and the General for the head. Caesar made no reckoning of going against
Pompey, because he was a General without an Army: It was Pyrrhus his ill lot
to want good soldiers, which if he had had, as he was the greatest soldier,
both for skill and valor in the world by repute; so he might have been the
greatest Monarch for possession: Lib. 25.
for besides that testimony of Gajus Fabius, quoted before of him, Iustine
erects to him an encomie of never dying praise. His own speech of the Roman
soldiers slain in the field is worth the marking; O si tales haberem milites,
qui omnia vulnera adversa baberent.
seeing all their wounds in their fore-parts, O, says he, that I had such
soldiers, receiving all their wounds with their faces to the enemies.

It comes in the next place to inquire what soldiers they should be, to which
I answer as before, the best that can be had. In the Roman wars at first,
they were very choice; as Vlpian, Nec Crimi^esi, etc.
and Flavius Vopiscus, two great Lawyers do testifie^ no criminous parties, no
adulterers, no condemned persons: yea (...) bondslaues, nor contentious
braulers: but for want of men, or rather through iniquity of times, as
Vopiscus observes, Ad ultimu^ prope desperatae reip. auxilium cum, honesta
uttlihus cedunt. Lib. 32.
^hey took of all sorts: As Sheepheards, sword players, wicked ^ersons, but as
Livi observes, it was in the very pinch of despair of the commonwealth, when
honesty must give way to uti^itie. But now to our shame, sin so abounds, and
the good are so scarce, that we must do that in ordinary, which they did but
sometimes on necessity: But that which follows in ^he treatise, and should
follow in this service, would mend much, namely Discipline.

One thing more the Romans did observe by their rules of war concerning the
soldier; namely, Two sorts of soldiers with the Romans. Movet tumultum ex
diversis locis collectus exercitus. lib. 3. cap. 4.
what kind they were, whether forreignes or natives: for those two sorts they
had which they called Auxiliarii and Legionarij. Vegetius has a maxim, that a
mixed company from diverse places moves a tumult. But Alexander found the
contrary: for finding the Macedonians daily to incline to sedition, he made
mixed Compaines, setting Persia^ Captains, over them, which made the
Macedonians leave of sedicion, Diodor sicul: lib. 17
and fall to a generous emu^ation; yet is this to be done as Polybius well
observes with great wariness and watchfulness: for if such an Army fall at
variance it is impossible to reconcile them. But the Romans themselves had such
mixed forces, Cautions for mixture of soldiers
and used their auxiliaries with great respect, in giving them gold chains,
when they gave the legionarie, or their own but silver chains. Yet in this
mixture there be cautions to be observed. The first by Flavius and Livi, Ne
unqua^ amplior multitudo sociorum. Lib. 3. cap. 1
agreeable to the rule of Vegetius, that there be not more forrayne forces then
domestic. Which rule they could not keep as their own histories report. For
both in the war against the Vos^i, and Carthaginians, the Auxiliarij were far
more then the Legionarij. Another caution I add which is the chief indeed,
that the Auxiliarie forces be not such as come merely upon self respects, who
many times like mowls so undermin the ground, that they cannot be got out
again; and so such vermin prove worse then the former adversary. A black
brood of such you see has over spread the world, whom never a nation will
entertain if they can choose, except it be such a Nation that God has blinded.
The torments of those on whom they are fallen, and the heavy oppression of
those that have sought their protection, can tell what dogged helpers they are.
As for the Auxilian forces of the States, it has been their good hap to have
such as not so much for worldly gain, as for their indeered love to religion
and affection toward their Christian brethren, have advanced their State and
Religion, with their dearest blood: for which I think they will acknowledge (or
at least they should) that in mutual requital they owe themselves. As for
time to come, only let them beware of the Popes bratts, and they may presume
of ours as of their own, upon good usage. Let the battle of Newport and
Barganupsoan witness their undaunted valor and fidelity: and as they shall
have occasion further to use them, I hope their actions shall proclaim what the
Athenians said in the like case; (...).
We are all Hollanders.

CHAP. XVIII. Camp Discipline.
THVS having spoken of the body of a Camp, I come to that which is the very
soul of a Camp, namely, Camp Discipline: For as the body without a soul, be
the portrature never so goodly, is but a carcass; or as a goodly body animated
and activated with the soul, yet the souls faculties are either obfuscated
with dark and cold melancholy, or set on fire with black burnt choler; so that
either nothing is done, or that which is worse then nothing. Such is a goodly
Army, except this reasonable soul of discipline do organize the body. Nullus
est usus fortitudinis nisi adsit iusticia.
Agisilaus that great King of the Lacedaemonians, having the question put,
whether fortitude, or righteousness were the better, answered gravely, that
there was no use of fortitude, except it were governed with righteousness. It
may well be compared to the first ^eece of armor, namely, to the girdle of
truth; Ephesians. 6.14.
for it ty^eth all the Arms, and all the services in Arms, fast unto the
soldiers loins, in a comely order. In war it self, it is the bond of
peace: yea, as that which drives a stake into the ground, or a piece of wood
into another is called the Commmander; so Discipline drives the nail in the
Tent, and is the chief Commandresse in Martial affairs; yea, it is the best
Physician for peccant humors; Chyrurgion for wounds and sores; and the only
best bone-setter for fracture or laxation. This is a main key in Church, or
Commonwealth, that shuts out enemies, and intertaineth friends. Cassiodor
tells us, that it is the only fort, and best guard that an Army possibly can
have: Non al^unde robustius quam disciplina, armatur exercitus lib. 12.
and as I said of Cities and towns, so may I say again of a Camp; fortify it
with all the strength and Art that nature can afford; without discipline it
will be but as a paper wall. For, as I have showed, the ruin of discipline is
the racing out of Arms, and the destruction of a Nation. The learned observe,
Dicta aute^ castra quasi casta, eo quod ibi castraretur libid^. Etymolog. lib.
9. Annal. 14, in quo vide Lipsium.
that the very name of a Camp implies Discipline. A Camp, says Isidor, is
called Castrum; because it should be chaste, and all lewdness and lust should
be cashiered from it. Yea, as Tacitus writes, the Roman soldiers were
interdicted Matrimony, which is the best ground (I take) that the Romish
Priests have against their Marriage; that though it be a Sacrament (as they
say) yet the Sacrament of orders barreth them of it, as the military sacrament
did bar the soldier. But Severus more wisely, Herodian lib. 3.
and upon better warrant, gave them free liberty to have their wives at home:
but Alexander permitted them to have them in their Camps, with their families,
after the Persian manner, and so to live and breed in Camps, as the Hollander
does at Sea. Though this proved well for Alexander, as every thing did; and
though a great many loving wives, willing to live and die with their husbands,
would be of his mind; yet upon mature judgment the middle rule shall prove the
best; but I leave it to the scanning of the judicious, and I come again to
Discipline Sejanus, as Tacitus reports, would have Camps remote from Cities,
except they did beleagre them, that by the evils of the Cities they might not
be corrupted. Yea, the lascivious and disordered youths were brought into the
Camps, Iuvene^ urbano luxu lascivientem melius est in castris haberi lib. 2.
Annal.
that by the force of Discipline they might be reclaimed. For as the Synagogue
of Rome, and all the lymmes of that confused Babel, likes nothing worse then
the Discipline of Christ's Camp: so to the loose Atacticks of these evil
times, there is nothing more contrary, then the medicine of Discipline: A great
many therefore had need to be in Camps, if Camps were as they should be, the
schools of Discipline.

As the necessity of this Discipline is evident, from the exorbitancy of
corrupt nature, and the evils incident to a military life: so it is more then
manifest; from Gods own command, concerning the government of the Israelites
Camp; whereunto Moses and Ios hua had a great respect; namely, that Discipline
should be exactly exercised, as appears in the censure of Achan, and others.
Yea, the Romans, whose glory was their God, and their Commonwealth their best
inheritance, made this the inlarger and maintainer of their Dominions. It was
said of Scipio, to his great commendation, that he was the restorer of
Discipline, not only failing, but also neglected among the Romans; insomuch
that he held it a greater labor to reduce his own forces to Discipline, then
to give battle to the Numantines his enemies; therefore he abandoned all Bauds,
Whoores, Coseners, Coggers, Diviners, and Figure-flingers. And to give our
enemies their due (for the wicked are wise in their own generation) how
admirable has the Turks been in the ^ictnesse of Discipline, I formerly
showed, Pandect. Turc. cap. 24.
whereof you ^ay see more at large in Leunclavius, Hypolitus, Busbequius, ^^d
others: Yea, to come to a latter instance, in one of ^e greatest of Gods
enemies that this age affoorded, name^^ the Duke de Maine, for excellency in
discipline he was ^^cond to none. For the ruin of this, The causes of the decay
of Discipline
I may again with ^^e learned renew my complaint, but I have handled that
before: only the causes would be observed, which I take. First, to be want of
piety: the duties of the second Table, wise from the duties of the first. Other
causes we may gather from the words of Appian; Lib. 4. de bello civili.
These are the things (says he) that lays millitary Discipline in the dust,
every one forgets his place; namely, that he is a soldier; he prefers
the serving of a private humor, or his own lust, to the public good; great
Ones, or Princes, abuse the service of Inferiors to their own only gain. In
sua orat. apud Dionys. Ha^^carnas.
Appius Clau^^us gives another cause, namely, man's palliating foul sins with
abused names, as haughtiness and contempt with the name of gravity; filthy
ribauldry with the name of merriment; palpable foolery with the name of
simplicity, stark staring madness, with the name of fortitude; bloody oaths,
with the name of big souldier-like words; drunkenness, with the name of good
fellowship; the Idolmaker of a Cup, with the name of a good subject: and
lastly, the loose carriage of great Ones, with the names of refreshing
themselves. And by the contrary, the best things are branded, with the worst
and foulest names; as piety by the name of Puritanism; humility, with the name
of pusillanimity; simplicity of speech is called hypocrisy; and sobriety,
singularity; and reproof of sin, too much holiness; due execution of
discipline, cruelty; but remissness of discipline, gentleness.

As the evil is manifest, with the causes thereof; so of necessity there must
be a medicine, else all is mard; and with this, as I showed, the great Ones, in
themselves must begin Moses and Joshua, if they will lead the Lords forces,
must disciplinate themselves before they direct others. If a King (...) in the
Camp, Discipline should rule him. It is very base flattery, and meat and drink
to many, to suggest to Kings, that they may rule others by Laws, and themselves
by their our wills. The very Heathen Emperors, who had no mo^ knowledge then
the books of Nature; or at most, such (...) Moral Philosophy could afford,
and no more glory b^^ transitory command; yet they would subject themselves t^^
the selfsame Laws that they willed others to obey. A notable instance in
this, we have in Adrian the Emperor, the first after Octavius Caesar, that
revived Discipline, and therefore much magnified by Aelian in his Tackticks;
Sparlian in vita Hadrian. Lib. 5. eb 6. (...).
it was the manner, in creating of a Tribune of war, to put a sword into his
hand, as an Ensign of command, which the Emperor holding out to the Tribune:
Behold (says he) recei^^ this sword, which if I command and rule in reason, as
a Prine should do, draw it out and use it for me: but if I do otherwise use
it against me. Crinitus has words to the same effect, spoken by the Emperor
to Sura, when he set him over the Pretorian forces. So Dio. But Suidas has
the words in Greek.

Secondly, if Commanders would have Discipline, the must not disdain to show
them the way; And that, great Generals have not denied to do, in things even
inferior to their place: As I showed you before in Adrian, so by a whole Jury
of the learned, the like is testified of Scipio, the restorer of Discipline. He
would have no beds; and to show them an example, he used himself to much
hardness, lying no better then on a bed filled with Hay; he abandoned all
dainties and delicacies, Ign^viam, aliaque mi litum vitta exercendo potius in
castris velut in scholis quam puniendo sustulit. Appian: de bell. Hispa^. 1.
and alij.
so that ease had no intertainment; and by these pains he obtained his end: As
it is said of him to his great praise; That he took away sloth, and other
vices of the soldiers, rather by his exercise in the Camp as in a school,
then by inflicting of punishment. ^et Christian Kings and Commanders learn
this of ^od, the great Commander of all the world, who often ^eth words and
under them expresses actions, more suta^^e to our shallow capacity, then
befitting so glorious a ^ajestie. There is one manner of majesty for the
field, and another for the chair of State, or the Presence. The lovver ^^e
looks in the field, the higher he is; and the lesser he is to himself in the
camp, the greater he is to his soldiers. Alexander the great, thought it no
disparagement to his greatness, as he sat by the fire to take a soldier
almost ^^arved with cold, and set him in his own seat, telling him, that if
he had been a Persian borne, the sitting in the kings seat would have cost
him his head; but as he was a Macedonian borne, he might safely do it. You
see how this great king, in this one act, shevved both great humanirie and
humility. Front. Strat. lib. 4 cap. 6.
The like is observed of the Noble and learned Xenophon; who being on his
horse, and commanding his ^ouldiers as they marched along, to take a narrovv
passage, ^^lazie fellovv, amongst the rest, fell a murmuring, and said, it was
an easy matter for him to sit on his horse and command; which he over
hearing, leapes from his horse, and causes the common soldier to get up in
his place, and marched a long on foot a great pace to the taking of the
passage, the rest of the soldiers flouting and hissing at lazy ^^ones their
new General: He came down with shame enough, and hardly could they persuade
Xenophon to take ^orse again, and to reserve him self for a better use.

A third mean to advance discipline, is to be very ^hoyse in the choosing of
Officers. This was Adrians ^are in the choice of Tribunes of war, that he
admitted none but men of prudence, learning, courage, good report, and ver^uous
conversation. As discipline has advanced the Turk, so this has been a means
with him to preserve discipline; for neither, birth, wealth, friends, or any by
respect, prevails with them in the choice of Officers; but according to hi^
desert and carriage he is advanced to place: where, on the contrary, our
making, or admitting of Commanders for money or entreaty of great Ones, makes
us miss such a point o^ our Compass as may mar all the course: when desert
loosed place who will strive to deserve? All the Turks care is, wh^ he is, not,
what he has, or of whom he is come.

The fourth and last means to preserve discipline, is exercise of discipline;
wherein, as I have showed, there must be a due temperature, wherein mercy and
Justice must meet together. Temp eramentum sit ad justicia^.
That example of Manlius upon his own son, (...) pure unmixed Justice, is not
unknown to those that read: who, fighting against the commandment of his
father, notwithstanding of his success, was first beaten with rods in the face
of the Army, and after had his head chopped off with an axe: After which act he
was ever called by the name of Manlius the Imperious. Front. lib. 4. cap. 4.
In this kind the Germans were very strict; traitors and fugitives, they
hanged up; base and idle fellows, Cornel: Tacit. de moribus Germanorum.
and all infamous persons, they stifled in mire and clay, and cast a heap of
stones upon them. You may read at large in the Roman historyes for diverse
crimes, diverse punishments; as for adultery, drunkenesse, etc. Maximus the
Emperor, Julius Capitolinus.
caused put two soldiers for abusing of a maid in the bellies of two slit
oxen, with the oxens heads cut off, that the one might speak to the other.
But not to insist in examples, this rule will do well, that according to the
nature of the sin, the circumstances of the quality, and place of the
offender, the punishment be inflicted. And to shut up the point, let it be ever
holden a great part of Discipline, to keep the soldiers from unlawful
spoils, which is indced robbery. The Turk is exceeding strict in this,
wherein her glories much. Many examples there be in histories. A Ianizarie
drunk off a milk vvomans milk in the market, and being accused before the
Judge, he denied the thing; but he caused to hang him up by the feet, and tie
him strait with acord about the middle, by which means he vomitted out ^e
milk; and was presently after that strangled for the of^^nce. Lysander the
Lacedoman beat a soldier, only for ^^e stepping out of the way, who
pleading for himself ^^at he meant not to ravin, the General ansvvered, he
would ^^ue him to give no appearance of evil.

CHAPT. XIX. The Motions and Actions of War.
HAving thus laid out, as you see, a Symeter of the parts of war, I proceed
in order to the handling of the actions of war: for as war consists as it
were of a body and soul; so the motions and actions of war are the fruits and
effects of that subsistence But as a body and a soul, are ^ot both enough to
make sound and valid actions, either saturall or animal, except they be united
in a good tempe^^ment, which may well be called a harmony of the four first
qualities rising from a due mixture of the four Elements; just so it is in
war, whose (...). or active motion requires the due temperature of counsel,
that it may leave remaining (...), a perfect work. And as from natural heat
the spirits has their agilitie to inact; but the primogenious humor or
radical moisture, both tempers and maintayneth that natural heat; so that
magnanimious heat of courage puts spirit and life into warlike actions: but
the radical humide or pure oil of counsel, maintayneth and increases the
^eate of courage therefore counsel is compared to a deep water) And as by
heat and humide we live, Prover. 20.5
they being the two ^^tiue qualites; so war is to be managed with courage and
counsel. The proof of this positio^ is plentiful, both from Scripture and
other writers. Pro. 20.18.
Every purpose is established by counsel says Solomon, and with good advice
make war: So in another place: Ch: 24.6.
By wise counsel shall thou make war, and in multitude of counsels there is
saftie. 2. King. 18.
That vile Blasphemous Rabshakeh knew the truth of this, that strength and
counsel were for the war. So in the 10. of Judges and 19. we may see how the
Princes, and the people of the Tribes, do assemble themselves together in
counsel, how to undertake and manage war against their enemies. It is a main
principle with Vegetius; that of wise men, and choice warriors there be a
Counsel picked out and appointed, Vtilius dueis est ut adhibitis ex universo
exercitu scientibus belli, and sapientibus viris, qui de suis and bostium
copiis tracte^t. lib. 3. cap. 9.
who may consult, and determine of all things necessary for forces and
affairs, both concerning themselves and the enemies; and especially what will
hurt the enemies and help themselves. This has been the practice not only of
good saints, but of all great warryours. David asks of God before concerning
his war with Saul, 1 Samuel 23.2.4. So a Sam. 5.19. where though he had the
ground of his counsel from God, with a promised success; yet did he not
neglect to consult with men, for the accomplishing of Gods counsel. The Jews
had two sorts of Magistrates, the one for peace called Togati, the other for war
called Sagati or Bellici. So they had two sorts of Counsels, the one for peace
and the other for war. So Quintus, Fabius, Severus, Alexander, Pyrrhus,
effected all by counsel.

As this truth is of exceeding great weight, Reasons.
so there be weighty reasons to enforce the practice of it; as from the nature
and excellency of it, the necessity of it, the particular object in hand;
namely war, the good effects of it, and the great evils ensuyng upon the want
of it. First then to the Excellency of counsel, A description of counsel.
which manifests the nature of it, counsel is not only an indagation, or
searching out of things expedient, nor yet a bare discourse or discerning of
things so sought out; but it is also an application of the will to that which
is fittest, therefore is counsel called Election, or (...), inregard of making
choice of one thing rather then another, persupposing always a well informed
judgment by mature deliberation. So that I may say of Counsel, as it is said
of Conscience, it meddles directly with particulars, according to that
definition of Damascen; Appetitus inquisitivus de rebus utilibus. lib. 3. ca.
33. Est subtilis animi prospectus etc. 2 Rhetor.
Council is an inquisitiue appetite of things profitable: or as Tully, It is
the elective power of a pure mind; examining the causes and principalls that
are to be applied: The excellency of it appears in this; that it is a
special gift of God. Pro. 8.14.
Counsel is mine (says the Lord.) Yea, Christ is named by the name of Esa. 9.
Counsel. The Heathen could say, that counsel is truly (...).
an holy thing. It is well compared to a deep fountain of water, Prove. 20.6, for
the fresh springing thereof, refreshes and makes fruitful all the plots and
plantations of policy, both in peace and war. It is like unto the head, which
as it is the fountain of life and function, and so it transfuseth the faculty
of all these through the whole body; so counsel contains the life of war,
and is all, as the soul is virtually in every part.

Counsel is very significantly enblemed by Lodovicus Sfortia, Duke of Millain,
by Morus, or the Mulbery tree; which name the said Duke took unto himself as
his surname, not for the blackness of his visage; but because he would bear
the world in hand, that in his actions he was like this tree; for as it does
not bud nor flourish, till it has past over the injury of the Winter, and
presently after brings forth buds and fruits, and therefore called the wisest
of trees. By this he would make show, giving this in his Arms, that it was
naturally given to him, to dispose of all his actions maturely and deliberately
by counsel. But it was but a show indeed, for he did nothing less, as you
shall hear hereafter.

It were well with Nations, if it had been his fault alone, Application
but these evil times has too many too like him; who would seem to carry all
by counsel; but their actions proclaim to the world, that they are at deadly
enmity both with counsel and wisdom. Such dumb shows of council, with
contrary actions, are well enblemed by the Centaur; Whose upper part gives a
semblance of care for the peoples good, Estque bomo dum simulit se populo esse
pium. Militis est robur consiliumque ducis. Cic. de off. lib. 1. The necessity
of counsel.
but the lower part which is the beast, devours the people under coulor of
humanity. The excellency of counsel appears likewise in this, that it is a
singular gift given to men fitted to command in war.

As this is the excellency of it, so it is of an absolute necessity. What good
will forces do (says Tully) if counsel be wanting in managing of war. There
is a necessity of counsel, says Quintus Curtius, and not of rash violence.
What good will the wall of strength do, except it have conncell for the
foundation? Yea, the more strength, without moderation by council, the more
speedy and greater ruin. Yea (as Ambrose says) what avayleth wisdom without
counsel? Quid tibi prodest habere sapientiam si consilium desit lib. 2. de off.
It is but as a sealed fountain, it neither does good to a man's self, nor to
another: And, as one says pithily, As is a City (the walls whereof are
ruined and raced to the ground) such is a man that undertaketh not all his
actions with counsel. Caesar held, and that truly, Counsel to be as
necessary in war, as Physicians in time of sickness. Idem est consilium
adversus bostes etc.
It is the only thing (says Vegetius) and the Generals greatest advantage, to
have a wise Council.

CHAP. XX. War especially requires Council.
OBSERVE in the third place, the object of war, which is the subject of
Council, and reason will enforce us to walk by council. Must not the General
know his own forces, and his enemies; both for nature, power, furniture, and
number, as near as he can? Should he not know how to dispose of his own,
whether horse or foot; to take the advantage of the ground, to disadvantage his
enemy all that he can, and by all lawful Stra agems, to conquer his enemies
at the lowest rate that is possible? Besides all these to be considered, there
is a further end, namely, the averting of all evil, and the procuring of all
good that can be thought on. Does not goods, liberty, wives, children, lands,
lives, countries, Crowns, Religion, and Gods glory, (which is worth all the
rest) lie at the stake? yea, and on such a hazard often, that if the first be
lost, there is little or no hope of playing a second game. All these cry for
counsel; which, under God, is the only wise disposer of the aforesaid means,
and obtainer of the end. If for other things of less moment, we do not cast
the dice (as we say) but with great care, watchful forecast, and deliberate
counsel, we labor to effect them, what should be done in this, where the
adventure is so great, the issue so doubtful, and the least error may cast all
away?

As the spiritual warfare of a Christian is the matter of greatest moment
under the heaven; so next unto it, in my judgment, is the bodily war. If men
of all sorts that professes the name of Christ, would but take this to their
consideration, it would make them in the first place, take up the controversy
that is betwixt them and God, that he might be on their side; secondly, the
weight of the subject, and worth of the object, would make them look to the
laying of every stone, for making sure the building; lastly, having got a stout
resolution, from advice well grounded, and the object well thought upon, they
would stand fast, quit themselves like men, and esteem so high a prize worthy
of their dearest blood, desiring rather to die with honor, then to live with
disgrace.

Fourthly, I come to the utility, The utility of counsel. Prove 2.11. Lib 8.
Apotheg.
or good of counsel that enfues upon it. Discretion, or counsel (says the
Wiseman.) shall preserve thee. Erasmus citing that saying of Furipides, that
one good counsel may overcome many forces, gives this comment upon it. It is
not of so much weight to carry many forces into the field, as to have the
Commanders of forces, men of counsel; because wise counsel, and witty skill
is of far greater moment, then strength void of counsel. As war without
counsel, is as a City without walls; so counsel in war, is both walls and
munition, it affoordeth both invasiue and defensive Arms. Counsel (says
Caesar) is the same to me against mine enemy, Fame potuis quam ferro
superandum bostes.
that the Physician is against sickness; which he haed rather overcome with
fasting, then with physic; so had I rather overcome with famine, then with
sword. As this Counsel has often more prevailed then the sword; so is it
grounded upon good reason. First, Fames intrinsecus pugnat, and vincit saepius
quam ferrum. li. 3 cap. 9.
famine fights within, as Vegetius well observes, and therefore it
prevails oftener then the sword. Secondly, if the Defendant have to do with a
humane enemy, he may save himself by capitulation. Lastly, the forces of the
assaylant are without hazard. If you look but on the good success of counsel;
yea, even then when forces have failed, the utility of it shall further appear.
Was not Romes Commonwealth advanced by the counsel of Q. Fabius? Cato in his
Oration against Catiline said, that their Ancestors made themselves great,
especially by good Counsel. Was not the State of Hungaria, and Bohemia
advanced and maintained, to the dishonor and damage of their enemies; the one
by the counsel and dexterity of that renounmed Hunniades; the other by the
counsel and prowess of that admirable Sisca, against the two most potent
adversaries of the world? Amongst all instances of this kind, there is none
more remarkable then that of the State of France, under the government of
Charles the Wise, who coming to the Crown, found a ruinous State full of
confusion and calamity: for all Guyan, part of Normandy and Picardie were
possessed by the English, through the great overthrow of Phillip of Valois,
with eleven Princes, and twelve hundred Knights and Gentlemen, given by King
Edward himself at the battle of Crecy, and by another given by Prince Edward
at the battle of Poiteiurs, wherein King John was taken, and his son Philip,
with many Princes and great Lords sent prisoners into England, besides those
two sore defeates, one on the neck of another, whereby the foundation of France
was shaken, and nothing left but the ruins of a Kingdom. These relics were
all on fire by civil dissentions. Notwithstanding all these, the aforesaid
Charles Lesage (so called for his gravitie and wisdom) coming to the
government, did with such prudencie and counsel compose and order the affairs
of that troublesome state, that he first quenched the civil discord, and
after, in time, recovered a great part of that, which the two former Kings had
lost, and that not without wonder: for he was not so brave a warrior as his
father King John, nor his grandfather Philip. Again he had to do with as
wise a Prince and as great warrior, as happy and valliant a General, as ever
Europe had; yet for all these, necessity made him wise, and he took a
contrary course to the former, undertaking and managing Arms with great advice
and counsel, without which he would not move one foot; it had indeed an
answerable success, beyond the expectation of his adversary; who seeing and
admiring his wise courses, whereby he dulled the edge of the English forces,
(loosing ground they could not well tell how) King Edward gave this testimony
of him, Froysord lib. 1. cap. 132.
that he never knew king that used arms so little, and yet made him so much
ado. For as by missives he effected much business (so said he) he makes me
more a do with his Pen, then his father, or grand father did with their forces
and Arms. By this his Counsel he brought his Kingdom from being a field of
war, a triumph of spoil, a map of miserable poverty, to be peaceable,
plentiful and rich. In these instances I could be larger then the treatise
will suffer, but I will shut up all with one, not unknowen, namely, of the
state of Spain. What I pray you is the root of his over spreading in Europe
and other parts? Is it his prowess and valor? No, the few Spanish warriors
of note upon record shows the contrary. It is then their counsel and slight,
(especially since it has been fed with a fountain running under the ground.)
In this their crafty disposing of themselves, they are not unlike the
Hedghogge running with the Hare. Let the race be through the hedge, the
Hedghogge is too good for the Hare (for what side soever he be on, he is
always before.) But that the Spaniard should not be proud of this, let Alva
his Trophies stay his boasting. If he had been a man of as much counsel as
cruelty; he might have saved a sea of blood, his Master a mass of money, and
prevented Spaines greatest loss, which I hope he shall never reedeeme. What is
it but the wisdom and counsel of a Prince, assisted by his privy Council,
that commends himself, and commands others? It is not any personal
indowment, nor the Princely perogative of place without this, that ever will
advance his glory, or his subjects good, neither can he without this, procure
his subjects continuance of obedience in love, nor cause his name to smell like
a precious oin^ment. What made Severus to be beloved, feared and obeyed but his
prudent counsel? Witness that exemplary act of his, when his soldiers mutined;
because he was carried lame of he gout in his Horse litter, the^ would have his
son Bassianus to govern. He called the Commanders together, and after a
grave and wise remonstrance made to the Army, he caused the chief mutiniers to
be beheaded, giving this item to the rest, that they should know, that it was
the head and ^ot the feet that commanded; meaning, thereby, that it is counsel
and wisdom in the Superior that commands, and not any gift of the body.

CHAP. XXI. The evil of evil Counsel, or want of good Counsel.
THe last ground for use of counsel is taken from the evil that does
accompany the want of Counsel. Because I have many things to handle, I would
be as brief in every thing as I could. God himself tells us what an unhappy
state that people is in (whether in peace or war) that want counsel. When
Israel had provoked God so highly, that he had resolved to make their
remembrance cease, Deuteronomy. 32.26. What was the cause of this wrath of God and
fearful desolation? furely their sins as you may see in the Chapt; which the
Spirit of God reduces to two heads, waxing fat in the abuse of Gods blessings,
and fo^saking of the living God to follow Idols. The ground of this their
fearful condition the Lord lays down in the 28. verse, namly, want of
Counsel, They are a nation, says he, void of Counsels in the plural
number, that is, there is never a whit at all amongst them, and there is no
understanding in them. Where you see what a vvoefull case that people is in,
that is void of counsel.

And if effects demonstrate causes, Application.
and poysonable springs show corruption of the fountains head; then let us
behold our nation, overgrowen with fatness, in the abuse of Gods blessings, our
kicking with the heel against him, and provoking him to jelousie, with the
abhominatio^ of strange Gods, and these shall cry aloud to the shame of our
faces, that we are void of counsel, let some talk what they will to the
contrary. Though this be by the way; yet it is not beside the way. For to our
hearts grief, you may see, what ground I go upon. But I proceed. Tully
(though speaking like a heathen) has for the matter a divine position; Lib 3.
Rhetor.
that a man that runs and rusheth upon attempts, he cannot expect any help
from God. Belluae and pueri non sunt participes consilij. lib. 3. Eth. cap. 2.
(...). 'Chap. 28.28.
Yea without counsel what better is a man, be he never so great, then a child
or a beast, which as Aristotle says; do not partake of counsel. It is
observed both by divines and humanists, that it is a fearful token of Gods
indignation, when a man loses his counsel. Yea, it is the very finger of God
taking counsel from him; because he has a purpose to bring some great
mischief upon him, or to destroy him. God (says Appianus) hurting his mind,
or taking counsel from him, calamiti^ is not far of. The Lord does threaten
the same to the disobedient in Deuteronomy: 'The Lord shall smite thee with
madness, and with blindness, with astonishment of heart, and thou shall be
groping at noone day; which as it is one of the heaviest punishments, as
Flaminius well observes, that God lays upon man; So it is just that it should
be so; God sending them strong delusions, that they may believe lies, because
they would not believe the truth. 2. These. 2.11.12.
Because they would not be ruled by counsel (says the same Author) God gives
them up to their own lusts, and to follow their own counsels, which proves
their bane in the end, even then when they least look for it. The man thus
groping for counsel where there is none, but destruction instead of counsel,
is well compared by Plini unto the Polypus or manie-feet, which thinking to
catch the Oyster, is often caught in the Trap; so the Blindman is often caught
in his own snare.

CHAP. XXII. That great Ones must use Counsel.
THVS having laid down the grounds why, both in peace and war we must walk
and work by counsel, I come now to lay down what kind of counsel this must
be, and of whom it must be taken: All men will seem to agree, that all must be
disposed by counsel; but by what counsel, and from what counselors, there
they disagree. The better sort love not to do all of their own head; but, be
they never so great, in peace and war they use the counsel of others. Julius
Capitolinus delivers this, to the commendation of Authonius Pius, That he
would never do any thing in Civil, or Military affairs, which he had not
first consulted of, with grave and wise Counselors: Aequius est ut ego tot
taliumque amicorum consilium sequar, qua^ ut tot tal^sque am ci meam unius
sequantur voluntatem. D^onis H^lic. lib. 2.
giving this good reason (allowed by all that love counsel) It is greater
reason (says he) that I alone should follow the counsel of so many of my
faithful friends, then that they being so many should follow my will being but
one. Dionisius gives a particular instance of this Emperors practice, in a
case controverted betwixt him and his Council, of which was Scoevola that
great Lawyer, and many others of good note. To whose advice after much debating
of the matter, he yielded willingly. I see, quoth he, (Masters) it must be thus
as you would have it, giving the same reason already alleged. This course did
not Solomon despise. This course did Caesar, Alexander, Severus, and all good
Warriors and Magistrates follow, both in peace and war. Neither is this any
disparagement to the Prince or General (as though he had no wit or counsel
but from others brains) but it rather adds to their dignity: because a
Prince is always holden so much the wiser, the less he is addicted to his own
opinion. Gostorum suorum theatrum sublatum esse dixit. Pl^tarch in Apoth.
When Zeno the great Philosopher dyed (of whose judgment and advice Antigonus
that wise King, made use in all his actions) he was not ashamed to say, That
the theater of his actions was removed.

But there be another sort of great Ones, with whom it is nothing so, they
like no counsel but of Matchiavi^ his cutting out, that a Prince must have no
counsel but of his own coining: What fair coulors he draws upon this false
principle, I have now no time to discover, I referr you therefore to his first
and second maxim of Counsel. But to learn the lesson it self, without
further scanning of the truth; Many have been too apt, to their own overthrow:
Princes are naturally addicted, Natura laena suae Sauctu^ est quod volu mus.
to admire what is their own, and to presume of an absolute perfection in
themselves, as though they were Gods, and needed no more. And so it was with
Dioclesian, Caligula, and Nero, who scorned to hearken to any thing but their
own wills, and what pleased their humor. This was the fault, and wrought
the overthrow of Lantrechius the Frenchman; whom Guicciardine doubts not to
call the chief Chieftain of France; but being of a lofty nature and high
spirit, through his experience in Arms, and authority in the Army; he was so
ravished with the conceit of self sufficiency, that he contemned every thing
that came not from himself. He thought it a disgrace not to be reputed a
domine fa^-totum; neglecting many times better counsel then his own; as for
instance in the wars of Naples, which turned to the undoing of himself, and
of the business.

Another notable instance we have in the aforesaid Lewis Sforcia, a Prince (as
Histories report) highly adorned with all endowments of nature, Non tutor at
crudelis hostis, proripit imperium nepoti. lov. l. 4, de El.
and ornaments of the mind, a quick wit, eloquence at will, but that the
blood of his Nephew did stain all these excellencies; ( for of a Tutor he
proved a Traitor, like Richard the third) he might well have deserved the name
of a meek and benign Prince; but as his haughtiness and arrogancy was such
that he thought to dispose of Italy at his pleasure, so he was puffed up with
such a false-conception of his own selfe-sufficiency, that he contemned and
rejected all counsel. For though he made a show thereof in his coulors, as I
showed you; yet indeed he made use of nothing less; he carried all by the
compass of his own opinion, whereunto he was so much addicted, that nothing
relished with him that came not from himself. But this selfe-confidence, and
despising of counsel, brought him to a tragical end, as witnesses
Guicciar^ne: For being foiled by the French, Lib. 4. Hist. Ital.
he betook himself ^ong the Switzers to the habit of an ordinary soldier;
^t he was discovered, and taken by the French, and in an ^ominious manner was
conducted to Lions, where in the ^ew of a great concourse of people, he was
tossed betwixt ^vie and pity for a time; and being denied the Kings pre^nce
(which he did exceedingly desire) was shut up in ^ison; which served both to
limit his ambitious thoughts; ^ which all Italy could not contain;) and
likewise to put a ^riod to his disgraceful and disdained life, after ten
years ^prisonment.

One instance more let me give you in James the 4, King ^f Scots, as brave a
man, as vvitie a King; so benign and ^acious a Prince to his subjects, as
Europe had not so great ^usticiarie; so that he seemed to be composed of
clemency and equity; and which surpast all the rest; he was so guar^ed with
the tranquillity of a good conscience, arising from ^he innocence of his
princely carriage; that he counted ^ot the aspertions of the wicked worthy of
requital, with so much as an angry word. In a word, he did so ravish with
^oue the hearts of his subjects, that as he was deerer to them ^hile they had
him, then their very lives; so the remem^rance of his death did so gall their
souls with sorrow, that ^ever a Prince in the world lived more desired; and
dyed more ^mented. Yet this one Coliquintida put death in the pot; name^y,
neglect of counsel, both in undertaking and managing ^he war against the
English, which put an untimely end, Jncertum est peiore concilio an eventu, B.
R. Scotie lib. 13.
^oth to his being, and his princely virtues: Insomuch, that ^t is well
observed by the learned author. It is uncertain, whether the counsel, or
event was worse.

These examples, and many others of the same nature, makes good that position
of Plato, That a proud man, carried altogether on the wings of his own conceit;
scorning the advice both of the wise and warrior, is left at length by God to
be his own destruction. To this effect Comineus, a Statesman inf^riour to none,
lays this down as an infallible prognostio^ of future ruin, both of King and
Kingdom, when a Pr^^ neglecting counsel, cleaves only to his own wit. Yea,
he she^ eth it plainly to be a fearful forerunner of Gods judgment, when God
does infatuate the heart, so that it (...) not hearken to counsel.

The instance that we had last in hand makes it plai^^ For the wise Council,
of that good King, did earnestly (...) swade him from war: Besides that
strange monitor the appeared to him at prayer (as a man of credit with the
Kin^ informed the Historian, David Lin desius eques Montanus.
that he saw him with his eyes) y^ for all this, by the instigation of Lamote,
the French Em^^ sador, he would to it. The English forces being gathered (...)
gether under the conduct of the Earl of Surry; and Hera^^^ being sent to the
King, desiring that he would design the day and place of battle; his wise and
warlike council diss^ded him from it, and that upon substantial grounds; first
they had already the better, and so much as they could we desire; secondly, the
English were twice so many, and th^^ fresh soldiers, against them, being
wearyed with taking i^ of Castles: thirdly, by delaying fight, they might
vvear^ the English out; or at least draw them to such a disadvantage of place,
that they might carry the victory rather by Coursell then by Arms, Victoria
magis consilio quam Armis maximi ducis proprium.
which (as the Earl of Angui^^ said well) is the property of a good
Commander. The sai^ Earl likewise refuted all the allegations of the French,
wh^^ put the King on, only for their own ends. But all this would not work
upon the King, who in great indignation against the noble Earl, willed him
to depart if he were afraid; for I will fight (says he) against the English
if the^ were a hundred thousand. Which he did, but to his ovv^ undoing, and
the grief and damage of his Nation. The which I rather relate, for
confirmation of the former position; That when God hardens the heart against
council in judgment, he makes way for ruin.

Foolish then is that forgery of those, who attribute this ^^ngs fall, to the
taking sacrilegious Arms (as they call them) against Pope I^lius the second,
Englands holy Lord. It was ^e Lord of heaven that gave him this defeat, neglect
of ^unsell being the secondarie cause. I might instance this ^^t further in
Richard the second, a stout Prince, and gover^ng well for the time that he was
counseled by his three ^od uncles, the Dukes of Lancaster, York and
Gloucester; ^ut the rejecting of them, and their counsel, made way to the
^sse of his Crown, dignity and life. Iratus ad paena^ Deus si quis trahit
auferre mentem talibus primu solet.
Poets and other writers ^e plentiful to this purpose, whereof I give you but a
taste: When God in wrath will men to judgment bring,
The souls clear light from such, he first removes.


So another to the same effect: A supreme power void of council good,
Falls of it self; as though it never stood.


And there is great reason why ruin should follow neg^ct of counsel, not
only from the equity of Gods judgment; but also from the dangerous
disposition of a Princes ^ounsell, without the mixture of advice. For as the
^imple or pure element would not feed or nourish, but ^ill or starve; so the
counsel of a compound body, The necessite of a mixed Counsel.
had ^eed to be a compound counsel. Plato and others, explane ^his well by
comparison, taken from the twofold course of ^he Sun. The Counsel of the
sovereign power (say they) is like ^he diurnall course of the Sun compassing
the earth in one day: which course is swift, rapid, awful, and violent; but
this is tempe^ed by the indirect opposition of the annual course, in the
oblique ^ircle of the Zodiac, which also distinguishes the seasons,
main^ayneth, rerfresheth, and nourishes all the creatures which otherwise
could not endure. So the Counsel of Princes, though endued with prudence, yet
through the moving intelligence of supreme authority, becomes so fierce,
redoubtable, yea and often so devious, that like Phaetons misguided chariot
setting all on fire. To be plain it degenerateth from calm counsel to stern
will, and from advised government to cruel tyranny; but by the sweet and
temperate mixture of choice counsel from the religious and wis^ Senate, it
becomes pleasant and sweet, full of grace to the Prince, and goodness to the
people. For indeed it is no grace to a Prince in peace or in war (howsoever
Sycophants suggest) when he and his counsel rides all on one horse.

Where this mixture is waning there be ever mad doing for Princes, for want of
this, involve themselves, and their sta^^ in such an inextricable laborinth,
that when they would (...) wind themselves, they go the further in their
evils; beconming like Hidraes heads more then they can deal with. It i^ an
easy matter for a Prince, especially neglecting counsel, (...) put all out of
frame, as a Master-of a ship, may run her upon the rocks; but the shipwreck
of himself and all the re^^ follows. The aberrations of Princes (says
Agiselaus) (...) the greatest evils of all; because they undo themselves and
others. Princes mounted upon their will, are compared pretrily to one got up,
on a wild horse, who being Asked by one that met him, whether he went, even
whether (says he) this horse will carry me. So some are carried so far on
their own lusts, or their own wit, and some on their own fears, that when
they would, it may be they cannot, or dare not alight, but over ride all in
their way, and run themselves against a wall, or over a rock.

These are also wittily compared by a learned man, to Eucrates, in Lucian, who
lighting on Pancrates the Aegiptian, learned many secrets of him; amongst the
rest, they being by themselves, and wanting one to attend them, Pancrates
takes a piece of wood, makes it up with clothes, murmurred some words over
it, and it began to walk like a man. It went and drew water; made ready their
supper; served in their meat, and attended the table. Of all things Eucrates
longed most to learn this, but his Master kept this to himself as his chief
secret; yet Eucrates got the word by heart: And his Master being one day
abroad, he would fall to, and make up a serving-man, which by the words
pronounced was done: but being sent to draw water, he could not make him leave
off, but he was like to drown up all. Eucrates falls to him with an axe,
thinking to make a short cut, and cleaves him in two, but he made himself
more work, and brought himself in greater danger. For they both fell to draw
water; and had not his Master come he had been undone. The Moral is no more
but this, make work and have work; There be a great many water dravvers,
worse then the Gibeonites, that will not leave when they are bidden. To
conclude this point with Comineus, such Princes, of all men are the most
miserable, not only in bringing ruin upon themselves, and others, but also in
making their cases void of pity, and their names liable to an everlasting
distaste. And though (says the same Author) their Sovereignty carry them
through, without controulment; (...).
because there is nothing but tears, sighs, and plaints of the vvronged
against them: yet let the^ know the Almighty has a tvvofold tribunal, he
makes their own doings plague them here, and and plagues them eternally
hereafter. Then as Princes would shun these plagues, let them be content to
entertain counsel, according to Menander. "Let Council be thy guide in every
thing:
Nothing as Council does such saftie bring.


Or if you will that of Iovius in his Elogie of Sfortia. Ergo inso^entem po^e
superbi^m, qui fidis alti viribus i^geni^.
Therefore lay down they pride and insolence,
Who in thy wit puts all thy confidence.


CHAP. XXIII. The Qualification of Councillors.
BUT as there is necessity of counsel, so there must be choice of
counselors. In the choice of counselors four things must be observed,
Number
there must be number equality, ability and honesty. For the first, it is a
good rule of Comineus, Lib. 1. cap 1
that a King should have many Councillors, and that he should never commit the
helm of affairs, unto one man's hand: for as many eyes see more then one; so
one man may put out his Masters eyes, and become Master in effect. Among many
instances take this one of Sejanus. Coruel Tacit. Annal. lib. 5.
whom Tiberius advanced so highly with great offices, and the marriage of his
daughter. He ruled all as he would; he was honored of all, and followed of all,
more then the Emperor; to his image they offered sacrifice, and they were in
no small esteem, to whom he gave any respect. His brith day, with Cesars, was
celebrated. But like a monstrous paracide, he went about to subvert his Master,
who, (how vile soever he was) had deserved well of him. But his great fall and
ignominious death, together with the death of his, did fully parallel the
height of his rize. The like may be seen in Dancres rize and fall.

As there must be a number, Equality of power.
so there should be an equality of power amongst them: for to commit more to
one then another, or, it may be then to all the rest; that one will go near to
be Master, and the rest to be but bare voices to serve his desire. One is no
number, and where many sit, and one swayeth all, there is a number in name, but
none in effect.

Thirdly for their ability; Ability
they must be men of judgment and experience. The Roman Senate were picked out
as men of sufficiency for counsel; who for their wisdom and gravitie were
called Senators, and for their care of the common good, Fathers; whose names
were written in letters of gold, and so called Conscripti. It is a question
amongst Humanists and Statesmen, Whether a weak Prince, and a wise Council; or
a weak Council, and a wise King be better. Both reason and experience do prove
the former to be the better. For many wise, can guide one vveak one better,
then one wise many weak ones. Secondly, the wise King takes no care of giving
account; and therefore passes them at his pleasure: But the wise Council, the
weaker the King is, looks the better to give account of their actions.
Severus had as many in Council of War, as the Senate had: but what were they?
Ancient soldiers experienced in Arms, Milites veteres, literatos etiam, etc.
ut Lamprid.
and in Military matters, such as by their service and carriage had deserved
well their places. Also scholars such as were well versed in Histories,
desiring them to unfold what they knew from the Roman histories, or any other,
concerning any matter they had in hand. Pirrhus said of Cyneas; he had got
more Cities by his eloquence, then by his own forces. I knew a very raw boned
youth of a mere Scholar, proved an excellent and much honored Soldier.

The Ancients do Hyerogliph a wise and able Council by a little fish, that
goes before the great Whale; which as an ancient Naturalist records, (how
truly I will not now dispute) does seek and find out every necessary for the
Whales maintenance, discovers all shallows and dangerous passages,
demonstrating the way by the motion of it self. As long as this lives the
Whale is safe, this being dead, the Whale knows not what to do. Just so, a
learned and wise Council provideth how the Throne of the Prince may be
established, looks out every thing that may make him happy in his government,
and his subjects happy in him: they foresee likewise the shallows, and the
shelfes of base indignity, vvhereupon a Prince may run himself at unawares; by
good counsels, motions and admonitions, they avert him from every thing that
may dishonor himself, vex his subjects, or bring his Kingdom into contempt.
In a word, a wise Council, is the glory of his Majesty, and the Theater of his
actions; as Antigonus said of Zeno; which being removed by death, or dislike,
the pillars of State are removed, and so the edifice must fall. Princes then
are not well advised, in making choice of insufficient men for the government
of State, that there own sufficiency may appear the more. Will the Sun darken
the Stars, that it may shine the brighter? Will the fountain have but dripping
conduits, that all may come to the Conduits head? Or would a man be lame in
his hands or feet, that the wit of his head might the better appear? God
indeed does great things by vveak and foolish means, yet that is his
prerogative. Again, they are strong and wise in him and through him.

Now I come to the last, Honesty.
but not the least; namely, the honesty required in Councillors. Which we
must not take strictly, only for outward decency with the Apostle; or for
that Economick, Romans 12.17 (...).
Ethick, or Politic honesty; which we call by the name of Civil honesty, by
which it is possible, (as the Car-men of this age assure,) for some to go to
heaven: But we must take it so as it comprehends piety, equity and honesty;
called by the Evangelist, good and fair honesty. Luke 18.15 (...).
Iethro gave Moses counsel to make choice of such Councillors, Exodus 18.20,
compare it with Deuteronomy. 1.13, and you shall see 7 properties required; Wisdom,
Understanding, knowledge, fear of God, ability, truth, and hatred of
coveteousnesse: The like choice was to be observed for that great Shanhedrion,
consisting of 70 with Moses; Numb. 11.16. These were interressed in the highest
matters, and sat with Moses himself. The spirit directs what men they
should be, namely, known men, that is, such as have approved themselves by
their wisdom and good carriage, worthy of so great a place. One describing the
properties of a good Counselor, comes close to this mark: They should have
experimental wit in their brains, words of truth in their mouths, zeal in
their justice, and sanctity in their life. Tully gives a reason from the
weight of their charge. De Sense. lib. 3.
Councillors of State should be better then other men, because they have the
custody of the Commonwealth. He illustrateth the same by a Master of a Ship
sitting at the Helm. Ambrose gives another reason from the quality of counsel,
either good or bad, according to the Counselor. Who will seek fair water out
of a puddle, or a pearl amongst dirt and Mire? Where lust, avarice, Atheism,
or Idolatry remains, shall a King, State or General, look for good counsel?
Can a man gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? (...).
The counsel is as the counselor; witness Solomon, Prove. 12.5, The counsels
of the wicked are deceit; the words are very emphaticall in the original; the
crafty counsels of the ungodly are deceit: where he calls them not deceitful
but deceit, as all composed of deceit, and no other thing in them. Anne eum
idoneum putabo qui mihi det consilium, qui non dedit sibi? lib. 2. de offi.
The Septuagint Translation is a good paraphrast; They coin out (in steed of
counsel) ungodly deceit. Shall I think him a fit man (says he) to give me
counsel, that never took any good counsel to himself? No; where any sin
reigns there is no room for good counsel: There may well be counsel for
Rome.

A third reason may be given from the diverse effects that follows from good and
evil counselors. Forreignes use to inform themselves of two things
especially in the State; Of the Council of State, and of the Kings fool; if
the Council be wise and virtuous; and the fool simply plain and honest, there
they gather evidences of a well governed State: But if the Council be shallow,
and corrupt; and the fool more knave then fool, thence they collect the
weakness of the State. And indeed as the Counselors be good or bade, so
falls, or flourishes the State. A remarkable instance of this we have in
Ioash King of Judah, who under the counsel of Iehoiada his uncle governed
exceeding well; he was zealous of Gods service; he razed out all the High
places, purged the Church, rooted out Baals Priests, caused money to be
collected for the repairing of Gods house. In a word, He did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, all the days that Iehoiada lived, all which
time he prospered. But Iehoiada being dead, the Princes of Judah, Baals old
friends comes to the King with cap and knee (like dissembling traitors as they
were) and tells him, The Mar-Kings Oration.
no doubt, a fair tale, that liberty of conscience would do well, and he might
honor himself and please his subjects much, to restore to them again their
old service; he had too too long been awed by an old hot-spur; who, it might
be had showed more fury then zeal in the harsh handling of his grandmother;
and that, happily, for some end of his own; and howsoever he had saved his
life, and brought him to the Kingdom; yet all this time he had been but his
King, restreyned of those pleasures and delights, that otherwise he might have
had: For as for their parts, they had no delight to come at Court, where, for
such a precise fellow, they could not be merry: besides, he had quitted him of
all his regal authority, in matters of religious worship; wherefore it should
be greater for the honor of his Majesty, to take the power into his own hand,
and to quit himself of that young fellow Zachary, who would be as saucily
peremptory as his father. As for the people it would be meat and drink to them,
to have their Groves and Gods in pomp; and his Majesty should find more
obedience from them, and more love amongst themselves, then ever he found under
all Iehoiada his preaching; and as for a few precise fellows that would grumble
at it (that would be but for a time) an act of Parliament would fright them,
and make them as mute as fishes. Lastly, their conformity with isreal's worship,
and others, might gain their love and good liking; yea, who knows but it might
bring again the ten Tribes.

To these, or the like speeches of the corrupt Courtiers, the unhappy King is
said to hearken, with whom presently the case is altered, he becomes an
apostata from God, a plague to his people (and that deservedly both in their
bodies and souls,) an ungtate full and a cruel tyrant, in murdering of the
priests. But mark what was the end, even such as the proceedings, The wrath of
the Lord came upon him and his, and a small company of the Assirians routed
their great host; he spoiled the land in giving all to the enemies; The Lord
smote his heart which cowardyse, and his body with diseases, his servants
conspiring against him, slew him, and he wanted the honor of a kingly buryall.
2. Chro: 24.
The special cause of his death is set down to be the shedding of the
innocent blood of Iehoiadaes son. The like example we have in Rehoboam, who
forsaking the good counsel of the wise and ancient, and following the
counsel of young and heady Courtiers, set himself besides the throne.

Not to take up time with instances, I will but touch some of our own nation.
Sigibert King of the West Saxons, hated good counsel so much, that he killed
Combranus his faithful Concellor; the rest taking indignation at that,
conspired against him, and thrust him from the throne, who seeking shelter in a
wood was found by Combranus his swineheard, who killed him because he slew his
Master. Edward the second, not hearkening to the counsel of his dying Father,
P^hil lib. 4.
namely, that he should take heed of loose counsel; but following the
Counsel of the Spensers and Gaveston, lost his Crown, and his life. So
Richard the second, rejecting the counsel of the three noble Dukes, as I
shevved you, and follovving the will of the two Earl Marshalls, one after
another, brought not only himself to disgrace and ruin, but also, by his
fall, that fire of civil war was kindled, which was not quenched but by an
ocean of English blood. One instance more in James the third, King of Scotts;
who being of an ingenuous disposition, and a Prince of much hope; yet, through
custom and evil counsel being corrupted, became a very unhappy Prince, for
casting of his Nobility, and addicting himself to the beastly humors of a few
base fellows, as Preston, Cocheran, English Roger, and Andrew a Physician, he
spared not his own blood. So he run from one evil to another, till in the
midway, that overtook him, Vt Leo a catulis extingueretur.
which Magitians told him, and he feared (for he was much addicted to
divination) namely, that the Lion should be torn of his own whelps.

One reason more, which might make Princes to be choice in their counsel, may
be this. In my reading I have observed great ones, miscarryed by corrupt
counselors, to have cried out when it was too late. An example we have in
Theodorick Marquies of Brandenburgh; who being of a haughty spirit, not
hearkening to the counsel of the wise, but to the counsel of the vicious and
proud, he ran unto all kind of tyranny, and insolency. At last, abusing one
Mistovius a Vandalian king, provoked him by his railing speeches to forsake
Christianity (for he was christened and married to the Duke of Sax his
sister;) Theoderick rashly adventured with his own forces, to give him fight:
who being defeated, was banished from his dominions for ever, hated of all,
forsaken of his friends, and lived extremely poor in Madburgh upon the Alms
of the Monks. Being thus brought low, with many tears, he confessed his
outrages in particular, and that by them he had justly provoked the wrath of
God against him. Excitavi ego iram Dei adversus me. George Sabin: in vita
Theodor:
This he regrated much, that he could never endure sound counsel, but followed
such wicked and corrupt counselors, as soothed his humor, and were bellows to
all his bloody designs.

So you see, how mislead Princes, in the midst of their misery, can see the
evil of evil counsel. I could bring more examples, but let this suffice.

Notwithstanding of all these weighty reasons, Elige tibi conciliarios Deum
timentes and veritatem amantes, sepe enim adulatores blanda facie decipiunt
animas audientiu^, and intcrimunt. Epist. ad Julian. Comitem.
this rule is not regarded. Augustine gives excellent counsel, if Princes and
Generals would hearken to it. Choose to thy self (says he) counselors
fearing God, loving the truth: for flatterers with a fair show deceive, and
kill the souls of those that hearken to them. But alas, few or none look to
this. A form changing Pro^eus; a treacherous Seianus, a time-serving Abiathar;
a stati^ing Architophel; a calumniating Doeg, are the only coun^ellers. Is not
civil honesty the most, that by most is ^^oked for? who looks for religious
piety, or truth of re^igion? Qui suo numini fidi non sunt, nec mihi Eusebius.
lib. 1. cap. 11. de vita Constant.
Constantine tried his courtyers fidelity to him, ^y their piety toward God;
but now a man truly religious, (...) thought unfittest of all for State
affairs. They cannot say it may be) but that he is an honest man, but with
this con^itionall, if he were not a rank Puritan. Bonus vir G. Sejus, sed in
hoc tantu^ malus quia Christianus Tertull. lib. 3. Apolog. Tu haec pateris? tu
hoc times? ignoras te Caesarem esse, teque illorum potestatem habere non ill^s
tuis? Xiphilim in Nerone.
Men show what they are by their practice. Many Councellers of this age are
like those of Cesars. They make Kings believe what they list, and do what
themselves list. Nero was bade ^^ough of himself, yet wicked counselors made
him worse. They were always buzzing in his ear; What Sir, will ^ou suffer
this? what need you to fear? know you not that you are ^esar, and that you
have power over all, but none has power over ^ou? I will conclude this point
with that speech of Comineus (...) man of much experience, out of which, all
Princes and people, may pick a lesson. Where wise counsel is rejected and
novists and noddies, and arrant assentators, are set up in their place, the
^uine of that realm and Prince is nigh at hand.

Thus you see I have gone a long in these circumstances of ^^uncell, making a
mixed application of them as occasion was given, both to civil and martial
affairs.

CHAPT. XXIIII. Of the particularities of the Counsel of War.
NOW I come more close to my proper subject of war, Of the object of war
wherein I briefly mean to show what is the object of this counsel; what is
the ground of it, and how (...) should be carried.

The object of the counsel of war is, whatsoever man accommodate themselves,
and incommodate the enemy* Yea they are to be acquainted as much as may be,
with the enemies affairs, forces and counsel; As what number they be; what
kind of forces they be, whether horse or foot what disposition they are of;
what be their Arms, defenfive and offensive; Difficile vincitur qui vere
potest de suis, and de adversarii copiis judicare. Lib. 3. cap. 26. Stratag.
lib. 1. cap. 2.
and what Arms they are best at. Vegeti^ gives a good reason for this, he is
hardly overcome that (...) truly judge or discern of his own and his
adversaries force^ For the discovery of the adversaries counsel, as it is of
greause; so some Generals have not only been careful in the discovery; but
have made great attempts for the effecting of it. As Cato in the Spanish war,
being very defirous to discover the enemies counsel, and seeing no ordinary
means to effect it; caused 300 soldiers break in upon the enemies camp, who
brought one of the said camp safe away to the General, out of whom he
extorted the secrets of the enemy. The discovery of the King of Arams council
by the Prophet Elisha, was great advantage to the King of Israel. Beware (says
the Prophet) thou pass not suth a place; King. 6.29.
for thither the Sirians are come down. Even in this respect as for others,
the Lord is called an excellent man of war, because he knovveth the forces, the
counsel, and Arms of the adversary. In this, the diligence of the common
enemy does both blame us and shame us. The devil is a busy Bishop. They
want no spies; they spare no pains, nor charges, whereby they may discover
and frustrate, all the attempts of Gods force^ for his own cause. That
serpentine brood (of the devil, o^ rather devils themselves, as one calls
them) affoordeth al^ kinds of counselors, some dormient, some couchant, some
rampant, some vvalking, yea creeping and flying abroad for discoveryes. The
Duke of Bavariaes letter to Richard Blond, Vice-Provincial in England (wherein
he thanks him for his pains and diligence for the Romish See, and Catholic
Cause) does directly discover what weekly intercourse is between the said Blond
and the Pope, notwithstanding of Romes distance from England. As for Blonds
interest in some of the Bedchamber, mentioned in that letter, I will not meddle
with it. It were good then they were encountered with the ^ike diligence and
industry. Paulus Aemilius discovered the ambushment of the Boians, by the
flying of Birds in the Truscan war. For the fowls being affrighted from the
wood, the council sent out a scout-watch, and discovered ten thousand in
ambushment. So by the flying of these black-birds of Rome, their subtilties in
war, and infidelity in peace, with carefulneffe might be discovered. The
Doctors of Doway observe from Nubrigensis; Lib. 2. cap. 21. rer. Anglic. 2
King. 6.17.
upon the opening of Elishaes servants eyes, that a husbandman in York^hire,
named Ketle, had the gift to see evil spirits, whereby he often detected and
hindered their bad purposes. As by this lie, they would make footing for their
feigned miracles; so indeed the Lords Armies had need of scaled eyes, wherewith
to discern those Legionary spirits, who are digging through the wall to raze
down the foundation.

But some with Gallio care not for these things; Application.
some see them but will not see; some underhand do countenance them; and some
with the faint-hearted spies, dare say little or nothing to them. But it is to
be feared, that these evil spirits will prove like a Hecticke, once openly
discovered, ne^ver cured but by a miracle.

CHAP. XXV. Gods word the ground of Counsel.
IT follows in the next proper place to show when^^ this council should
come, the ground whereof should b^ the word of God. For although the Scripture
be not an Encyclopedia of all the particulars of every Science; yet in it the^^
may be found a Systeme of all sciences; it being the Mistress^ to whom all
Sciences are handmaids. Yea, this directs the^ ordering of all true principles
and conclusions. No better Philosophy, Logic, or Metaphysick, then in the book
o^ God. No better counsel or direction for war or peace, the^ there is to be
found. Hence the Word is called by the nam^ of Council. Act. 20.27
I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God: Thy
Testimonies are my delight (says the Prophet David) my councillors, Psa.
119.24
or the men of my council. Tha^ charge given to the King of Israel, concerns
all King^ in the world, and they that will thrive in peace or war, mus^ obey
it; namely, that they have Gods Law-book continually with them, that they
should read it, that they may learn to fear God, to avoid sin; yea, by this
rule all their doings should be so ordered, that they should not decline from i^
to the left hand, Deu. 17.18
or to the right. So the like direction was given to Joshua, who was to fight
the battles of the Lords. The book of the Law shall not depart out of thy
mouth, Ios. 1.8.
but thou sha^^ meditate therein day and night.

Both reason and experience confirms this position, a^ what work can teach a
man so well to war as the book (...) God, who is the excellent man of War.
Again, has eve^ any Warriors paralelled those who have had their rules and
directions from God? Witness Moses, Joshua, David, and the rest, Have all the
Worthies come nigh one of these? Add to these reasons the nature of the Word,
whose proper encomy it is, to make a man perfect to every good work. Since
lawful war is a good work, and that of a high nature, the word must not
only fit men for the undertaking of it, but also for the happy managing of it,
to Gods glory, and the and ertakers good. It is a sure Canon in Theology, That
the word of God is not only the Canon of our faith and life, but also of our
Calling, whatsoever it be, from the King to the Porter. Would to God we would
all observe it. This may very well be said to be that Tower of David, built for
an Armory, wherein a thousand shields do hang, Cant. 4.4.
even all the Targets of the mighty men: for whether we understand thereby the
Tropies of Christ's triumph, hung upon the necks of the ^aithfull; or that
Panopli, or complete armor spoken of in ^he Ephesians; yet all this we attain
unto by the Word. Alexander carried Homers works ever with him, (...).
as the furniture of his journey: and Cyprian used ever and anon, to call for
Tertullian his Master.

Oh that those that fight the Lords battles, Application. Psa. 119.98
or has interest in them; would take this course with the Word, that they
might say with the Prophet David, Thy Commandments ^re with me; and that they
would cast away profane Pamphlets, plaguie play-bookes, and froathy
complements of ^le love; for as these become not Christian warfare; so I ^m
sure that Homer, and all the Tacktick Writers, and rules of Military Discipline
in the world; are not able, without ^his, to teach a man the Art of War. And
therefore David gives a good reason of his foresaid resolution, that the Word
should ever be with him; Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser
then mine enemies. If it be objected that many great Warriors, and victorious
Conquerours, ^ever knew what this Word was. I answer, Great they were ^deed,
but not good. And what gain they by their greatness, but the greater
torments? especially they who live in the light of the Word, and yet will not
be guided by it? This Word does stretch it self through the world as an
infallible rule to walk by; but, Who believes the report of it? Who walks
by the rule of it? Wisdom stands without and cries; without indeed, for
she cannot come in. Counsel for the Popes war is brought by the froggs from the
bottomless pit, where Ignatius lies Leager for the State. Professedly, they
do disclaim the Word, and the Popes unwritten Villainies, must be both the
ground and guide of all his War.

As for the Atheist; Matchiavils rules, or worse, are his chief guide, with
whom the Papists do willingly joy^ hands. As for the hypocrite and carnal
professors, what the Papist speaks blasphemously of the Word, he makes good
in his profession; namely, he uses it like a Nose of Wax; it must be stamped
and cast in what mould he vvil have it: but he will not be cast by it, as in
a mould; it shall not square his conscience, nor his actions; but he must square
and pare it at his pleasure: yea, such will have nothing to command in all
actions, but the great canon of Prosopolatria, or humane authority. In a word,
in effect they say, The word shall not reign over them, but they vvil reign
over it and the conscience too, though it be Gods Cabonet, not sit for man to
sit in.

Gods forces must likewise acknowledge their guilt herein: with this Armorie
they are not so acquainted as they should be and must be indeed, before things
go well. This would clear the judgment, reform the life, overcome passions,
kindle zeal, temper with discretion, encourage the heart, strengthen the
spirits. In a word, it would make a truly valiant man. If we would but take
this sting of David, we should not want a stone to beat out Goliahs brains.
But every piece of this is like Saul's armor, too heavy for flesh and blood to
bear, further then in bare discourse. But there must be a denial of flesh and
blood, before in our courses we can be happy here, or hereafter. It is
reported of a king of Aragon (to his no small praise) that besides his other
literature, (wherein even in the time of war he much delighted) and besides his
love to the learned (whom he honored and used as his special councillors,
both in peace and in war) that notwithstanding of his many weighty affairs, he
read the Bible over fourteen several times, with the special comments upon
it. I wish heartily, that all Gods warriors would make this word the treasure
of their study, and that as I have said it might always be with them, for
therein is the fullness of counsel.

Neither will a superficial look, or a bare taste thereof, (...). Col. 3.16.
serve to make the persons happy or the affairs prosperous: but as the Apostle
says, it must dwell plentifully or richly; the word does significantly press,
that it must always be with us. We must be the house, and it the furniture.
It is not a lapping of this word as the dogs do of Nilus; nor a talking with
it, and of it, while it is without doors; but there must be a diligent
searching into it, as a man would dig for the finding of the richest treasure,
John. 5.39. So did those truly noble men of Thessalonica, they searched duly
for the truth, Acts. 17. There be too too many now of Leo the tenth, stamp,
that say in effect, they find no profit in the fable of the word, for so
called, that blasphemer, the doctrine of Christ. And some are, like Agrippa:
they are almost persuaded by it, but it is, but almost: but it must dwell
richly in us, that is, as our only treasure, as David, did wisely esteem of
it, as you may see through all the 119. Psalm, as his richest treasure.

CHAP. XXVI. Gods Ministers the disposers of this sacred Counsel.
But as the word of God must dwell plenteously, so it must be used wisely; So
says the Apostle, in all wisdom. As this word is Gods special treasure,
whereby he dispose^^ all his mercies toward his; so he has ordained dispose^^
and dispensers of his sacred wisdom, namely, his Ministers, who are to stand
between him and his people in things appertayning to God. Hence it follows
that such stewards must dispose this counsel, as well in war as in peace. As
Kings have their Counselors, and Courts have their learned Counsel, to give
them the law: so God makes choice of these, and calls them from amongst the
sons of men to be his Counselors and Ambassadors, to deliver his will, and
counsel to their brethren. The necessity of such dispo^ets, and the reasons.


The necessity of such in war arises from these grounds. First, from the
depth of the mystery, which they are to dispose, and the greatness of the work
they do undertake: for who is sufficient for these things? Secondly, from the
indisposition of man to understand, or teach, this mystery, except a man be
sent from God to inform him: how can I (says the Enuuch) understand, except I
have a guide? Ananias must be sent to Paul, and Peter to Cornelius, that they
may be instructed. It is a mad conceit of many in this age, that they know as
much as the Minister can do; yea, some will say they can teach as well as he,
though they be not called of God; which indeed is to despise the gift of
prophesy. I speak now of such an one as is called of God; for otherwise, many
private men, are better to advise with. But it is not learning barely, or an
aptness to discourse, but there must be a set^ing a part of the man, with an
endowement of power and authority, with a holy skill, to wound, to heal, to
cast down, to raise up, to instruct, rebuke, correct. In a word, to cast down
every strange thought that sets it self against God. God calls not every
man to this; he gave some to be Pastors, and some to be Teachers, not all.
Thirdly, great are the enormites, that do accompany war (as I have showed)
both in Commanders and in ordinary soldiers; Bello nulla salus.
and therefore, they had need to be hedged in by the Lords husbandmen, with
the pale of the word. Fourthly, from their excellency, they are the greatest
gift; save Christ that ever was given to man, A Prophet will I raise up from
among their brethren, D^ut. 18.18
like unto thee. In which words, though Christ be especially meant as S. Luke
applies them, Acts 3.22.23. Yet they necessarily imply the giving of others,
though Christ be the chief. God by the Prophet Jeremy; speaking of the
desolation of his people, whereunto they were fallen by their own sins, and
wickedness of their for-lorn Priests, tells them of a great blessing, Jerem.
23.4.
That he will set up sheepheards over them, that shall feed them. Such are
called Gods in the book of God. I have made thee a God to Pharao, Exodus 7.1.
(says the Lord of Moses) namely, in bringing judgments, and removing of
them. They are said by God himself in Jeremy, to stand in his counsel. Ier.
23.
And for their service with God, piety and holiness toward him, they are
called Angels,

Fifthly, for their industry and fidelity, they are called Seers, Watchmen.
Elisha kept Centinall against the King of Aram, over the King of Israel, when
he slept. So the men of God in the armies of God, whether they sleep or wake,
they are always at Centinall. For though they sleep as Solomon says, yet the
heart is awake; In this respect Ministers may well be called the four beasts
full of eyes, before and behind, Rev. 4.
being round about the throne to watch and discover. As for their industry and
watchfulnes, they are the surest guard; so for their fidelity and plainness
they are the safest counsel. Kings with Antigonus, and warriors with Severus,
may all in those days go out of the Court, out of the Counsel, and out of
the Camp to seek truth because they cannot find it; but they shall find it
with the watchmen of Israel. There were never indeed more vile and wicked
flatterers; both in Courts and Camps: for as flesh-flies and other Vermin, are
bred out of the putrefaction of some humid matter, by unnatural heat; so this
kind of vile vermin is bred and fed out of the corruption of the times. What a
swarm of Munkies, and Marmozets and Ianglers, and Gnatoes are every where^^ It
is not my purpose to particularize their differences, but this may be said of
them all, they are the corrupters and ruin of King^ and Kingdoms. To busy the
reader with instances of this nature, were but to prove that which no body
denies: for Dioclesian one of the worst men that ever was, was so pestered
with those flies, that from an Emperor he turned a Gardener; and having
observed (as Flavius Vopiscus observes) of him, all their villainies, he
concludes thus; A good wise and virtuous Prince is bought and sold by this
people; 2. Sam. 15.
Yea David, a man after Gods own heart, holding out against the cursing of
Shemei was overcome with the flattery of Zyba. Yet this one thing, is no less
lamentable then remarkcable, that though they be such ravenous vipers, and have
eat out the bellies of so many great Ones; yet still they creep into their
bosoms, and are nourished by the self same heat which they do extinguish;
Yea, they cast King, and Court, and good counsel, and State, first in a
Marasmos, or deadly Hectic, and then out at doors; yet for all this, who but
they? Comineus gives one cause of this, because such do best please the
humors of Princes. Princes love better those that are of Placentia, then those
that are of Verona. They love the things that please, better then those that
profit. ^^b. 1. c. 21
Plutarch rendereth another cause, namely, they are often touching that string
that Princes much affect, namely, their own praises, in things many times not
praiseable, which flatterers can cunningly effect, by palliating their vices,
with the seeming vicinity of some virtues: As the despising of his people, they
will term it a Princely inawing of them; the imposing of what he pleases upon
them, an improuement of his prerogative Royal; the doing of all out of his own
devise, the singularity of wit, or quintessence of policy. Secondly, they will
make them believe, they are affected and praised of others, and then it is as
well as can be, when indeed there is nothing less.

But to leave their shifts, and the great Ones evils that accreweth upon them;
my purpose is to point out the remedy, and the Physician; namely, that
plain-dealing Word, from the mouth of the man of God; against the venom of
those Aspes, and the poison of all the sins which they love to palliate; I
know no better Physician then a good Minister. That saying of Gordianus is most
true, and worthy the memory, That miserably is that Prince from whom the truth
is concealed. And Lewis the 11, complained that this one thing wanted in his
Court. Yea, sundry great Princes have gone in private manner amongst their
subjects to un-boult the truth. But this is the way for Court and Camp, to have
the Trumpet of truth in it, that dare not, nor will not lie, or flatter. This
impartial dealing and plain course, is set forth at large in Deuteronomy,
where Moses, by the spirit of prophecy declares the excellency of the Tribes,
and the blessings that should be upon them; upon Levi (as he shows) should be
Vrim. and Thummim; yea, he should say of his father and his mother; I respect
him not* Chapter 33.1.9.10.
and his brethren he acknowledges not, and his sons he knows not. Where,
as there is an allusion, both to the commandment, Lev. 21.11.12, and to the
execution of the idolaters, Exodus 32: so the morality of it, is his, that Gods
Ministers, gifted with light and perfection; shall give every one his portion
from the Word without partiality; yea, neither Highness, nor nighnesse, shall
make him play the Huckster with the word. Papinian the Lawyer was never so
plain with Caracalla, nor Ephestion, so free with Alexander; nor Mecenas, so
faithful to Augustus; as Eliah was plain with Ahab; John Eaptist free with
Herod, and Nathan faithful to David.

One instance amongst many is worth the noting. When the Gospel of God in the
Northern parts of this Island began to be set on foot, the devil bestirred him
exceedingly in the enemies of the Gospel; Queen mother, of the house of Guies,
with the Scottish Papists, and her French Forces, did so overtop the Lords, and
others of the Congregation, that with grief enough they were compelled to quit
Edinburgh; and to go to Sterueling: where a man of God made a worthy Sermon,
in his application much lamenting the confusion that was come upon them, but
more their sins which were the cause. And as he had the Duke; and other
Nobles for his Hearers, so he gave him and all the rest their portion, showing
their particular faylings in that business, which they all entertained as from
God; and acknowledging their sins, they were mightily encouraged, and began to
wax strong, so that by Gods mercy in the end they prevailed, as hereafter you
shall hear.

Last of all, the necessity of such does appear, in the happy success of such
Wars, as have made use of them. Was not Elisha better to the King of Israel^,
then all his strength and counsel beside? Eleazar was joined with Joshua, the
Priests bare the Arc and blew the Trumpets in the Lords war; for that was
the Lords appointment, Numb. 1.10. and 31.6. One instance may serve for many,
namely, of that great battle betwixt Abijah King of Judah, and Jeroboam King of
Israel: Where Jeroboam had the odds in forces, to the number of three hundred
thousand men; yet Abijah by his oration, shows that he was confident he had
the better: And why? 2 Chro. 13.12.
Because (says he) God is with us for our Captain; and his Priests with
sounding Trumpets, to cry alarm against you. Where you see that Abijah
conceived and that truly ^^at he had great odds of Jeroboam, even in this
particular, ^at he had the Priests of the Lord, and they the Priests of ^ols.
We may see how much the Priests and Prophets are ^steemed in war, even of the
wicked, by Bala^ms desiring ^f Balak to come and curse the people of God. The
ho^ourable esteem that Bala^m had of Ba^a^k, Number. 22.36.
appeare^h in this ^at he went out to meet him: Yea, the Jews in their
rebelli^n against Adrian, the Emperor, had their Bar Cochab, that (...), the
son of the Star. And so has the Romish Iebusites. And as to the Jews final
undoing, he proved Bar Cozibae, the ^nne of falsehood; so shall the Jesuits
prove in the end, when their seduced Crew shall see themselves deceived. Who
^ught Ioash the King of Israel, to smite his enemies, but ^e Prophet Elisha, 2
King. 13.14? I will add but one instance more very memorable and admirable. In
the wars (...) Scotland, for the establishing of the Gospel, the Protes^nt
Army being nigh S. Andrews, resolved upon ^eliberation not to go thither, by
reason of the Queens ^reat forces in and about it: that godly Minister spoken
of before (being with them in all their troubles) told the Ar^^y that he was
resolved to preach there the next day, being ^e Lords day. According to which
resolution he takes his ^ible, and goes on. When he came to the City, the
Queen and her forces were fled for fear. That night, and the next ^ay, he
taught; laying open the haynonsnesse of the sin of ^dolatry, pressing the
Magistrates with the ejecting of it, ^d erecting of Gods true worship; which
so wrought upon their hearts that the effect followed. Yea, that very act by
Gods blessing, was the very break-neck of Babel in those ^arts.

Thus you see the grounds cleared for the necessity of such ^cred Councillors
in Gods Wars; wherein I have been ^^e larger, because (howsoever this is
universally slighted ^ver, as a matter of least moment) yet if it be
judiciously and religiously weighed, it shall prove a point of (...) greatest
importance.

Does reason direct men to provide good soldiers, a go^ General, good
Officers, a good Physician, a good Chi^gian, and shall they neglect the
providing of a good Minister, of whom I may say truly, that in an Army he is
bo^ Fabius and Marcellus, a sword and a bucklar?

But by how much the necessity of such is the greater, Application.
(...) much the more is the neglect and contempt of such to b^ regrated.
Neither in peace nor war are the Watchmen (...) God in their deserved esteem.
The counsel and comma^ of such, by men of all sorts (as it is from God) should
b^ obeyed and followed. God commands us to obey s^^ as have the oversight of
us, and to have them in singular estee^ for the works sake. They that murmur
against such, the^ murmur against God; and they that reject such they reje^^
God. If Eliah be found out, he is charged to be the en^my of the State, because
he speaks the truth. They th^^ be indeed the troublers of Israel, do falsely
charge it upon the Watchmen of Israel. Time-serving Amaziah will conju^ Amos
from the Court, and the Kings Chapel. Lyi^ Hananiah will not stand to contest
against God himse^^ speaking by Jeremiah. If Micaiah will not sooth with a h^
to destruction, he must be hated and beaten for the truth, Zedekiah gives him
a bok on the ear, and (...) there sets him packing, or fast by the heels.

In a word, if the man of God with the Apostle Paul, de^ver painefully,
faithfully and freely, the whole counsel of God, he (...) presently charged
with conspiracy, against the State, and the land cannot bear the words of
such an one. God indee^ has given such counselors, but the rebellious of this
time cannot brook them; either they choke them, or chop them on the cheek.
Our case and Israells is much alike, I raised up your sons for prophets
(says God by Amos) and you ^ong men for Nazarits, but how do they use them?
They gave their Nazarites wine to drink, Amos 2.11
and commanded their Pr^^bets saying prophecy not. It is holden a great
policy now for Micaiah, that his word be like one of the rest, and that he
speak ^ood, whatsoever come of it: but a Micaiah indeed dare not ^ally for a
world, but whatsoever the Lord says that he will beak: Men had best look to
it, for whosoever he be that ^eepeth back one jot of Gods counsel, for fear
of the ^ce of a mortal man, shall never be able with Paul to make a
^omfortable account of his Embassye to God, which is far ^etter for a Minister
then life it self. Yea, this huckstering of Gods counsel, is the very way to
bring the Minister to a ^earfull, visible and exemplarie confusion. The speech
of God to Jeremy, should be the word in the Ministers Banner: ^ird up thy
loins and arise, and speak unto them all that I command ^ee, be not dismayed
at their faces, lest I consume thee before them. Ier. 1.17.


Indeed the faces of Kings and great Ones, especially Generals in a field, are
full of fear and terror to weak ^llie men, that carry no Arms but the Word.
To this pur^ose the Sermon of one Gregory, Preacher to Frederick, Duke ^f
Saxon, (a man much approved by Luther) is not unworthie your view. This man
dealing roundly in the Dukes ^udience against the sins of the time, being
somewhat ^fraid to smite at the Princes sins in a public place, he ^ame
home to him very handsomely, with this similitude. A Preacher (says he) is not
unlike to one that uncaseth a Hare; it is an easy matter to uncase or take the
skin of all the body; but when he comes to the head, there is all the
difficulty, there it takes him tugging: even so, a Preacher may freely
reprove the sins of the people, for in that there is no matter of fear; but
when he comes to the head (pointing his hand to the Prince) there is the
difficulty, there matter of fear presents it self, and yet it must be done
as well as the rest. The like freedom of speech; did Frederick Bishop of
Vtricke, use by way of parable, to Lodovi^us Pius the Emperor, as he sat at
dinner with him, being newly consecrated Bishop, the Emperor willed him (...)
remember his office, without respect of persons: for whi^^ admonition, the
Bishop humbly thanked him, and aske^ him forthwith whither he should begin with
the head (...) that fish that was before him or with the tail; the Emperor
replied with the head, as the chiefest member. It is we^ said the Bishop, then
break you of your incestuous Match with Judith: Raunlph. in Polychronic lib.
5. cap. 29. Anno 1363
which the Emperor did for a time, but the Pope upon a penitenciary mulct of
some thousands of Crowne^ made up the Match again, and Iesabel caused the
Bishop for his freedom of speech to be slain in the Church These were
honester me^, though the one a Dominick Mon^e and the other a Bishop, then that
Protean Bandog Spalato, whose Dalmatian Pal has proved but a P^, Lib. 1. de
rep. Euch: page 28. Sect. 13.
to the English Church. Amongst the rest of his Sicophantish knaveri^s he has
this flat against the Word, That the faults of Princes may not at any hand be
taxed in public, by whatsoever authority: wherein, sure he showed him self
a greater friend to his own f^guts, then to the states and souls of Princes.
And yet we^ want not such Black-birdes in our own Purpits, who under the name
of White, Sermon. in Rom 13 page 18.
vent this black position, that Ministers are not to enforce Gods command upon
Princes. Judge you by this what fearful times we live in, indeed the high
Creast of authority thinks much to stoop to the word of a weak man (as
they conceve it). What saucie fellows did Pharao esteeme^ Moses and Aaron, that
they should will him from God to let his people go. Shall the worlds Minions
deified with flattery; or Mars his favorites, adorned with trophies, and
attended with triumphs, submit and render at the blast of a trumpet? yes
indeed, that word that can make the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to
go, yea the dead to rise, can command the greatest Commander in the world.
Yea, if a man were commander of the whole world, he must either by this word
be Commanded, or condemned. See the proof of this in that powerful discourse
of Paul before Felix. As he reasoned of rightousnes, temperance, and judgment
to come, Act. 24 25
Felix trembled. Tertullus, and all the smooth-tounged pick thanks under his
government, could not have kept him out of this fit.

These Counselors are not to be slighted, because the contempt of them, is
not only a fearful prognostic of fu^ure ruin, but also a main moving cause,
why the Lord vvil ^estroy both Prince and people.

Amongst many others, Cha: 36.15 16.
there is a pregnant place for this in ^he second book of the Chronicles, And
the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes
and fending them, because he had compassion on his people, and on his (...)
welling place: but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised ^his words
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord ^arose against his
people till there was no remedy.

The worth of a worthy Minister, is not known but in time of distress, and
not then, but to those whom the Lord has taught how to esteem of him,
heathens, Pagans and papists, may challenge us of our neglect of this. Were ten
Nestors so much worth to Agamemno^, one Sopirus to Darius, one Cineas to
Pirrhus, what is Gods Aaron to his people? what is Nathan to David, and Elisha
to Ioash? The Grecians would not part with their Orators on no condition. The
Romans had a great care of their Dogs that kept their Walls. Sagacissimos
caves in turribus nutriebant. Viget. lib. 2 cap. 26. Anscribus cebaria public
lo antur in Capitolio. Cic: pro sex^o Rossio
So the Geese that with their cry did awake the watch, when the enemies were
about to surprise the Capitol, were in great esteem with the Romans, insomuch
that their food was allotted by a public decree, wherewith they were to be
fed in the Capitol. Yea in great scarsitie of food, they would not touch them.
Will you see what honor Balac the King of Moab, did to Balaam the false
prophet; he goes out to meet him, even to the outmost border of his land.
Deuteronomy. 22.36. What honor were Baals priests in, that eat bread at the Kings
table? The papists glory much, and give us often in the teeth, with that honor
they give to their shavellings. Gondomar, (for an instance) made great bragges
of this, that though he were the Ambassador of the great King; and beside^ that
he had a breech that was not very bowable; yet he mist not an inch of his
manners to Blackwell in the tower. False Prophets are with the wicked always
most in request, because they serve their lusts and please their humors. Balac^
would not let Aaron have so much as a bit of bread, or (...) draught of water;
but Balaam I warrant you wanted no dainties. Ioash King of Israel was no good
man, and yet how did he honor, and love, with the best love he had, Elisha the
Prophet. 2. King. 13 14.
When the man of God was a dying he comes to him, and weeping over him,
cries out, Oh my father, my father; the chariot and the Horsemen of Israel.
Alexander the great came down from his horse and entertained Iaddo the high
Priest of Jerusalem with all reverent respect.

All these and many more examples, may condemn the neglect of this in the
Professors of Christ. Application.
But we had best look to it: for neglect or contempt of Gods Messengers in
time of peace, makes a vvoefull want of them in time of war, especially
when the good spirit of God has left the soul. Saul in his peace would have
no Prophet, but such as were of his own stamp, and pleased his humor;
therefore instead of Samuel, he had none but the devil to answer him in the
day of his distress: could all Baals Prophets, and his full-fed
trencher-chaplaines, say nothing to him? No never a word, they were all to
seek. A false deceiving Hananiah with his horns; a Doeg or doglike Amaziah
accusing the brethren; a furious boxing Zedekiah smiting Gods Ministers on the
mouth, will prove but miserable comforters in the day of danger. Therefore
they must be Gods Ministers indeed; and not barely in name, of the Lords own
sending, that are Counselors in war. As of all the heavenly creatures, that
ever God made, a good Angel is the best, but a bad Angel is become the
vvorst; so of all the sons of men, a good Minister is the best, and therefore
called an Angel; but a bad Minister the vvorst and therefore may be called a
Devil. As all Gods Saints are his peculiar Jewels; so his Messengers are the
Starshining-Diamonds amongst the Jewels. A man's state is but weak when he
pawneth or puts away his Jewels. But it is a note of ignominy for a Prince
to pawn his Crown. Gods faithful Ministers are the Crowns and Jewels of the
Kingdom. All the Iewelrie of Venice is not worth one of them.

A question was put once, what Forreignes had received the richest gifts out of
the Tower. One answered, the Spaniard, another answered not so; for the Duke of
Bulloin had carried the richest Jewel out of the Tower, that ever was in it:
yea, such an one as was worth all the rest, and the Archduchesses inventory
besides. Those Princes wrong themselves much (says a learned Author) that send
such Jewels out of the land; because they may stand in need of them, when they
cannot be had. I have known some of the black crew, on their death bed, to
have cried out and roared for comfort, from such Ministers, whose presence in
their health they have hated, and whose persons they have persecuted; besides
others, instance that Maule of the Ministry, and arch-persecutor; the first
letters of whose name were Sir P. M. having persecuted in his life, with cruel
persecution, that holy Father, M. R. B. in despair at his death, he sent sundry
to seek him, but neither the man of God, nor the favor of God could be found
God give others of his stamp to look to it in time; for as there be many haters
and persecutors of Gods Ministers against the light, so I see, or read, but of
a very few reconciled to God. Of all the gifts that ever God gave to a people,
such a Jewel as I showed is the very best. Witness that saying of God by the
Prophet Jeremy: Amongst many blessings promised upon repentance, he promises
to give them a good Pastor, as the Crown of all the rest. Ier. 3.18.
And I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed them
with knowledge and understanding. But of all the plagues that ever God
threatened against a people, or brought upon a people, a Counterfeit Jewel is
the very worst. Witness likewise the Lord, Chap. 2.11.
by the Prophet Micah. If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood, do lie
saying; I will prophecy unto thee of wine and of strong drink, he shall even
be the Prophet of this people.

Let Gods Warriors then take heed of such as God has not sent; of Wolves in
Sheeps clothing, beware of vile pontifical Jason, who for gain will betray
the City and the Sanctuary to abominable Antiochus, Let Nehemiah beware of
couzening Shemaiah, who under a color of saving his life, would earn the hire
of iniquity; from Tobiah and Samballet, by suggesting false fears to disgrace
him, and to bring an evil report upon Gods General. So man-pleasing Vriah is
also to be looked to, with whom change is no robbery; namely, to chop out the
Altar of God, and in the Altar of Damascus. Take heed likewise of the Turn-coat
Levite, at the rate, of who will give most. And likewise of the belly-god
Chop-church, the Bisteepled, or Tristeepled metaphisicall ubiquitatiue; the
enemy to the cross of Christ, the maker of merchandise of Gods word. Never
one of this crew will do good, but hurt. These cannot make up the breach, nor
rise up in the gap, Ezech. 13.5
nor stand in the battle of the day of the Lord; Hosea 9.8.
yea, the Lord calls such snares, and fowlers, in the way of the people, and
hatred in the house of God.

In the name of God then, let Gods Lieftenants get such as are of God, such as
are the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, and they will teach them to smite
their enemies, as Flisha did Ioash. The ordering of the Lords Army by his own
appointment, is an excellent pattern for all others in this point. Moses and
Aaron, with the Priests and Levites, were quartered about the Tabernacle,
between the Sanctuary and the Tribes of Israel, and as they were next unto the
holy place, and kept Centinal there continually, so they were the first that
moved in the March, Numb. 2. Neither was it only so in the Camp of Israel,
but also in the Camp of the new Jerusalem, (where God has his Throne,) You
may see the like, namely between Gods Throne, and the 24 Elders compassing it;
There are four living creatures full of eyes, glorifying God night and day,
Rev. 4.5.10.
after whom the 24 Elders fall down and worship God. This me thinks should be
a strong motive to all Gods forces, to take this course, since none can give
better order for incamping then God himself. Until the time such Centinall be
set, such Watch be kept, such Counselors be followed, and such Commanders in
the first place be obeyed: give me leave to be plain: the Lord will not be with
us. But if this couse be taken, as I hope it shall, I durst pawn my life for
it, that Gods enemies should flee before us with shame enough to their faces.

As the croaking froggs, the Jesuits, are the incendiaries of war; so it
must be undertaken and continued at their pleasure. What war by the Papists
has been undertaken, since they began to flourish, but they have had a
special hand in it? It is true, as Remigius Nantelius, a Dane, does discover,
that the Jesuits went not personally to war, before the Prince of Parmes
going into France, about the year, 1595, because they thought it a disgrace to
their Clergy, and a breach of a Law made against it, so to do, but with a non
obslante, sundry ensigns of them followed the said Prince, with their
Chariots, and all furniture; yea, with their banners, after the manner of
Princes, thereunto ambitiously annexed: they gaped (as the Author says) for
honor and spoil; whereof they did assure themselves, if the Prince had subdued
the French: In rationali Iesuitarum.
For it should have been their prayers only, that moved God to give the
overthrow to their enemies. But they counted before their Host,, and so they
were deceived in the reckoning. Yet for all this they cease not to ply it,
assuring all that fight for the beast that it shall go well with them. Their
large promises of heaven, of victory, of pardon, of freeing of their friends
out of Purgatory, and foyling and rooting out of their enemies, makes me call
to mind a blasphemous brag of that curse^ Heretic Nestorius, made Prelate of
Constantinople by The^dosius, to whom he speaks thus in a Sermon. O Caesar
pur^ me the land of Heretics (meaning the true worshippers o^ God) and I shall
give thee heaven; Tripartit. hist lib. 12. cap. 1.
help thou me to root (...) them, and I shall help thee to overcome thine
enemies. For th^^ he was called, (...), or fling-fire, in French, Bon te feu.
Just so, the frogs of the bottomless p^ do croak and call together the
Kings of the eari^ to the battle of Armageddon, with this encouragement; Root
out those pestilent Heretics, quit your Dominions of them, and besides the
peace and prosperity with plenty and obedience from your loyal Catholic
subjects, you shall have heaven hereafter, as sure as the Pope himself, who
has the disposing of it. But how they have sped and prospered that have
followed their counsel I shall have occasion to show hereafter. And as they
are of their father the Devil, and with lying words deceive men; so (...) will
assure you upon the word of God, who cannot lie, that if you will procure such
Ministers as are of God, warranting their Call by their life and doctrine, and
hearken to such and obey them, as from the Lord; the Lord has said it; Deuteronomy.
28.7.
He shall curse thine enemies that rise up against thee, to be smitten before
thy face; they shall come against thee one way, Esa. 1.19.
and flee seven ways before thee. If you will be willing and obedient, you
shall eat the good of the land. Where observe especially, that there must be a
willing obedience, otherwise both the Minister and the means can do no good.

It is a vain thing, and the grossest point of Popery, to presume upon the
ordinances, Obadiah 1.
or the work done. This is to make the Nest in the Clift of the rock, out of
which the Lord will bring every one down that so does, for God thereby is
robbed of his glory, and the soul cozened when it comes to reckon. The
Trojans trusted foolishly to their Pa^^adium, the Asiatickes to their
Pessimuntius, the Romans to their Ancilia, the Papists to the Cross and
holy water; and the Israel of God, to the Ark of God. As the idolatrous Papist
in any common calamity calls for the pax, and the host; so the Israelites caused
bring the Arc, and putting carnal confidence in that, without any counsel
asked of Samuel, or commandment from the Lord, it must be carried out to
battle. They were no better here then the uncircumcised Philistim, or rather
worse; for they feared the Arc more then God; and his people trusted to the
Arc more then to God; but the Arc was so far from saving them, that God gave
both them and it into the hands of the enemies. Yea, for their wickedness, and
vain confidence, the Lord so abhorred his own Ordinances, that he suffered them
to be polluted with the foul hand of the uncircumcised Philistim, who had
nothing to do with them. In the very same predicament be our carnal
Gospellers, who being confident upon the profession of the outward badges of
Christian profession, as the Word and Sacraments, think all shall be well
enough: they are baptized, they have the Word and receive the Sacraments, and
they have an excellent Teacher, and they frequent the house of God, and sit
before the preacher, and commend both him and the Sermon; the Word is as a
lovely song, and they show much love to him with their mouths, Ezech. 33.31,
etc.
but there is one thing wanting which marreth all; They hear the words (says
God) but they will not do them.

If the distressed people in the Palatinate, Bohemia, and Switzerland, examine
the cause of their captivity in their own land; I believe they shall find
their presuming on the means, with unanswerable walking, to have deprived them
of the means, and made Ashur to lie heavy upon them; their exemplary punishment
gives an alarm from the Lord to England and Holland, who presuming on some
Watchmen upon the walls, and some manna about their tents, thinks the Lord
will never come against them, nor remove the Candlestick: but let them know,
that except the deadness of Sardis, and the lukewarmnesse of Laodicea be
really repented of; the Lord will pull them out of the (...) of that rock. Yea,
and rather pollute his own Ordinances then endure their mockery. The Provinces
may happi^^ presume upon some purer reformation, and expulsion (...) the
Antichristian Hierarchy; but I protest upon my knowledge, from the grief of
my soul, that they carry a name that they live, but they are dead, both to the
power of the the Word and Discipline: for besides the infection of all plaguie
heresies, that they keep warm among^ them; where is the power of the Word in
Saboath keeping, family duties, gracious words, and holy walking? Where is the
Pastor that can say, here am I, and they who^ God has given me? Where is the
power of the Ministry, in shaking, of the hearts of great Ones? Who will not,
like the Nobles of the Tekoits, N^b. 3.5.
put their necks to the work of the Lord: Yea, their great ones in a manner,
overtop both Word and Ministry; and (as their enemies speak) like (...) many
petty Popes, they make the power of both swords, serve only humane policy;
which as it is a justling out of Gods honor, in putting the Cart before the
Horse; so it is a thing that God cannot bear; for he is very jealous of his
glory, and of the Scepter of his Kingdom. If the calamity of the aforesaid
people cannot work; let them and us take a veiw of Scotland, the very paragon
of true reformation, where there was not so much as one hoof of the beast
left; yea, where their tallest Cedars were made to stoup at the foot of Gods
Ordinances: yet for want of fruits worthy of so great a mercy, the Lord cast
them in the furnace of affliction, as famine, sickness, dearth, and death;
yea, which is worst of all, he has suffered the stinking carcass of the
interred whore, to be raked out of the grave, and the froggs of Aegipt to swarm
in Goshen, which is a great and fearful wonder. What think you? Is Israel a
servant? Is he a home-born slave? Why is he spoiled? Ier. 2.14.
etc. Have not thou procured or deserved the like unto thy self, v. 17. My
counsel is, that Princes, States and people, both with us and them, might be
humbled for this particular; for God does threaten us if we do not, Ier. 2.37.
that we shall go forth from him, with our hands upon our head; yea, he will
reject our confidences and we shall not prosper in them.

The enjoying of the means, without the holy use of them, makes men but the
more liable to the wrath of God. The word and works that were taught and
wrought in Bethsaida, made their case more woeful, then the case of Tyrus and
Sydon. By how much higher Capernaaum was lifted up to heaven in the plenty of
the means; by so much lower was it pressed down to hell in the abuse of the
means. Take notice then, it is not the Temple of the Lord, nor the word of the
Lord, nor the Prophets of the Lord, that will serve the turn, but labor to be
Temples for the Lord to dwell in; Let the word dwell plenteously in you; yield
obedience to all Gods comandements, and especially look to the keeping of the
Saboth; hate all superstition, turn away your eyes from beholding vanity,
especially from stageplaies, the very theater of vanity, the chair of the
Devil, and the other masse-book of the Jesuit. Labor as much to do as to
hear, and make much of him that brings the message for the messages sake, and
then be sure the Lord will bless you: He shall bless all those that bless
you, and curse all those that curse you; and the Viols of odours, which are the
prayers of the Saints, shall one day descend upon the head of you and yours,
like a precious ointment.

CHAP. XXVII. The wise carriage of Counsel.
NOW I come to the last thing in Counsel, which is the wise carriage of it,
namely, it must be kept secret, no^ only from the enemy, but also from all
that are not o^ the Council of War. The discovery of the enemies counsel.
I showed the discovery of the enemies counsel to be no small advantage; so
the secrecy (...) our own counsel, is the lock and key to good success. For
the discovery of the former, not only common soldiers, or ordinary
Commanders, have adventured their lives; but even great Generals and Princes
themselves, as Fabius Case, brother to Fabius Maximus, in an Hetrussian habit,
discovered their forces and intent. Saladine, Sultain of Egypt hearing of the
preparation and expedition of the Christian for the recovery of Jerusalem;
Egnat. l. 9. cap. 8.
himself in the habit of a private man, went through France, Germany and
Spain; and discovering what he could returned to his Kingdom i^ safety. So
Athertus Brandoline, in the habit of a Labourer, under the pretense of selling
Grapes, entered the Camp o^ Francis Sforcia, Duke of Millain, and discovered his
forces. But to clear those attempts in such personages of temerity, The
secrecy of their own counsel. Nulla concilia m^^iora sunt, qua^ illa quae
ignoraverit adversarius antequam fac^as.
(...) will not stand.

For the latter, namely, the keeping of their own counsel secret, it
concerns the greatest and the best. It is the plain position of Vegetius;
That there is no counsel better the^ that which is concealed from the enemy
before it be put in execution. The same Author in another place, gives a
reason of the said position: It is the safest (says he) that all the things we
do in preparations, or expeditions, be hid from the knowledge of the enemies
Hence it is (as the same Author and others report,) lib. 3. c. 26. Tutissimum
namque in expeditionibus, etc.
that the ancients gave the Minotaur in their ensigns, that as he was placed
by Dedalus in an inaccessable aborinth, so the counsel of war should be
wonderful secret. Hereupon One has made a pretty Emblem, the application
whereof is this, unfolding the reason: Nosque monent debere ducum secreta latere
Consilia: authori cognita techna nocet.
This teaches Captains to keep secrets closse,
For these reveald turns to the Authors loss.


For keeping of secrecy in war, Vegetius has a marveylous good rule; of that
which seems fit to be done consult with many; Quid fieri debet tractato cum
multis quid vero facturus sis, etc.
of that which you intend to do, indeed, consult with a few, and that
faithful ones; yea rather with your felfe (meaning the General) so that from
the common soldier, or ordinary Commanders, the courses intended are to be
concealed.

There be many notable instances of well concealed counsel, and the ensuing
good in military writers; amongst the rest, none more common, and yet none
more remarkable then that of Q. Metellus Pius proconsull in the Spanish War,
against the Ce^iberi or French-Spanish: as he beleagred Contrebia the chief
city of that precinct; with all his forces he could not overcome it. After
long deliberation with himself what to do, he withdraws his forces on a
sudden, and marches a pace to other parts, and encamping sometimes here, and
sometimes there, the cause of his so doing wa not only hid from his enemies,
who did not regard it; but also from his own soldiers; who wondering at his
strange courses, one amongst the rest being very inward with him, demanded what
he meant by these removals, Valerius M^x lib 7. cap. 4 Front lib. 1. cap. 1.
Let alone (says he) further to inquire, for if my shirt knew what I meant to
do, I would cause it to be burned: thus seeming to direct his course another
way, he brings his forces before the city; he give^h the assault unexpected,
wherein they were surprised with such a sudden fear, that without more a do
he took it. Caesar C. Nero attending Hanibal, desired exceedingly to prevent
Asdrubal his brothers forces, from joining with him* but how to hold Hanibal in
hand by concealing the matter^ from him there was the cunning. He draws out
of hi^ forces ten thousand of the best, and commands his Legates whom he
left, to keep the same station, to make s^ many fires as they used to do, to
give the same face, or show, of an entire Camp, and Hanibal indeed did take it
so to be. In the mean time he joins with Livius Salinator his coleague, who
was too weak of himself to join battle with Asdrubal; but the forces being
joined, and yet concealed from show (least Asdrubal should detract fight) they
join battle; Asdrubal is defeated and Nero returns to the Camp ere Hanibal
knew any thing. So that of two of the wittiest Captains that ever Carthage
had, the one was defeared, and the other was deluded, and that by well
conceased counsel: for if Hanibal had had but the least suspicion, they might
have lost their whole forces. One example more in Jason, who going to besiege a
Town in Thessalia, he caused his soldiers to Arm, and led them out, being
ignorant whether to go, or what to do. As they were marching, he causes a
message to be brought that the enemy was marching toward them, and that he had
spoiled the fields all about: whereat the soldiers being incensed, the
General leads them on to the very walls, which they assaulted so fiercely
and unexpectedly, that the Town was taken (as the Author says) before either
the conquered or the conqueror knew. ^olyan. lib. 5.
Antigonus was so wary in keeping his counsel, that when his son Phillip asked
him, in the hearing of diverse, when he meant to remove the Camp, he gave him
no other answer but this; Are you afraid (says he) that you shall not hear
when the trumpet sounds; taxing thereby, partly the unadvisednes of the
Prince, C^lins Rhod^. lib. 13. c. 5.
who would ask his father such a question in the hearing of others, and partly
intimating, that Princes counsel (especially in war) is to be concealed.
Alexander, having suffered Ephestion to look upon a very ^ecret letter, sealed
his lips with his ring, inioyning him ther^^y secrecy. If some of our
counselors hearts had been sealed with fidelity, and their lips with
secrecy, the soul of Gondomar ^ad not so easily entered into the cabinat of
our secrets, where ^e lay so long like an old rat, feeding on a parmisan; That
all ^e ratsbane in the city will scarce serve to kill the theevish ^rood of
his up-bringing: these have eat the heart out of ^ur counsel, the Romish
night-crowes were his discoverers, ^t the leaking she-counsellers convayed all
the waters of our ^ounsell to Holburn conduit; but what remedy for this? In my
^pinion it were best to cleanse the house of the old Spanish ^ts, make them pay
for what they have eat, and spoiled, and ^aue no more to do with them: ferrit
out that corroding ^rood, with their leaders, clip the wings of the
night-crowes, (...) for the grand-couzeners of State, whose lips are not sealed
with the ring, of state-secrecie, Two Courts of guard for secrecy. The out
ward Court of guard for secrecy. Ne exploratores inter nostros versentur
impune. Vegetius lib. 3. cap. 5. Direction for the discovery of Spies.
it is a pity but their lips should ^e seared with a hot Iron, and their
foreheads with indignity. (...) For the custody of secrecy in counsel their
be two Courts of guard, the one an outward Court for the attaching of spies
from the enemies winding themselves into the Camp for the discovery of forces or
counsel, or to get the word. The second is an inward Court, with Argos eyes,
attending the carriage of their own, that none bewray their counsel to the
enemy: against the former, namely, spies from the enemies. There is a rule in
war, that spies in the Camp go not unpunished. It is the approved use and
custom (says a Civilian) though not a written law, that spies from the
enemies shall loose their heads.

Directions for the discovery of Spies, out of the actions of the greatest
warriors are reduced to these three particulars; as to cause every one to
attach his fellow, to give an account what he is, and whence he is, to cause
them march through some strayt, which the Spies will labor to shun, finally to
cause every one to retire to his tent: But variety of occasions and dexterity
of wit will afford more directions then rules can contain. Notwithstanding of
all this it is true that your greatest Captains, have taken the Spies of the
enemies into their Camps, showed them their forces, munition and order, and
sent them away untouched. And thi^ they have done, either to terrify the
enemy, or to keep correspondency with the Spy in his kind, under a semblance
of giving credit to serve their own ends. An instance of the former, Lib.
belloru^ punicorum.
we have in Scipio, of whom Appian reports that he caused the apprehended
Spies of Haniball, which he had sent three several times into the Roman Camp,
to be carried about the Camp, and through the Camp, and showed them all the
Armory, munition, the order of incamping, and the course of their discipline.
Which being done, Preter morem castrensem (as the Author observes) not giving
them the course of Camp law, he sends them safe away, that they might tell
their General what they had seen, and withal extol Scipio his generous
disposition. For the latter, we have an instance of that witty use that the
General Ventidius in the Parthian war, A witty Stratagem
made of King Pacorus his Spy, named Pharneus, who made show to Ventidius of
discovery of the Parthian affairs, and intent, but directly intending to
discover Ventidius to the Parthians. The witty General served him in his own
kind, and made him against his intent, to serve his purpose. And to bring this
about, he used this general, whatsoever he desired that the Parthians should
do indeed, he told the Spy that he feared they should do the same. According
to which (being the direct rule) Pharneus gave the Parthians intelligence, but
being ignorant of the cross rule by which Ventidius walked, he brought them to
the pit of destruction, by this trick put upon him. Ventidius of all things
feared most, It is required that a General be a good Geographer.
that the Parthians should pass Euphrates, before the Legionary forces that
were beyond Taurus in Capadocia should come and join with his: Wherefore he
deals earnestly with the Spy; that he would persuade the Parthians to cross
Euphrates at Zuma, where the river was narrowest and the cut shortest, where
that by the straightness of the passage, and advantage of the adjacent hills,
he might offend them, and delude the force of their Archers: for his only
fear, as he feigned, was that they should fet a compass, and cross the river
against the plain fields, where he should never be able to defend himself,
nor to bid them battle. The Spy taking the General, as he spoke, and not as
he meant (for what he seemed to desire he feared most, and what he seemed to
fear, he desired most) persuades the Parthians to do what he seemed to
fear. They bring their forces about, and through the many impediments they
found, and the great deal a do in making and joining bridges and other
engines, they spent 40 days ere they could pass the river, by which time
Ventidius, and his other forces were come together, Front. lib. 1 Cap. 1.
and set in order three days before the enemies approached, to whom they gave
battle, and therein gave them a sore overthrow.

Now to come to the latter, namely, intestine perfidie, The inward Court of
guard for secrecy.
in the discoveries of counsel; as it is the more dangerous; so it requires
the more watchfulnes, and the narrower search. For it is an evil shut door,
when the thief is left in the house. When the King of Syria his counsel was
discovered to the King of Israel, it is said, that his heart for that was fore
troubled, and he called his servants and said unto them, will you not show,
which of us is for the King of Israel? Where first observe, what a heavy
trouble it is to have a counsell-carryer within; And secondly, by the search it
is employed, that if there had been such an one indeed, what should have been
his portion if he had been found out? Egnatius lib. 7. cap. 4
Shameful and fearful was the end of Robert Recatensis, a special commander
of Venice. This man, being much affected by the soldiers, and desirous to be
great, he bewrayes their counsel of Venice to Genua, with whom they were at
war. But his perfidious dealiug was discovered by Carolus Zenus, another
Camillus; yea the restorer and conservator of the Venetian commonwealth. He
suffered the said Robert to enter Clodia, but with a watchful attendant of his
own appointment, by who^ his treachery being discovered, he had in Justice his
deserved punishment. It shall then be the part of every wise warrior to look
well to his counsel, and whom he makes his counselors. Counsel concealed
can do no hurt, bu^ once revealed it cannot be called back again. I have
rea^ of a man that was in the mouths of many, and of excellent parts if he
could have used them. He had cunned by heart, the lesson of Q. Metellus, and
had it often in his mouth, That if his shirt were privy to his counsel, and
could speak, he would burn it. But like a bad hearer, he said and did not:
for had his practice answered his theorick, he might happily, as yet, have
known where to have found his head, and all the cunning of the proiecting
Spaniard had not served to pick the Elixir out of it.

It shall not be amiss for Gods people to learn this of their enemies. Simeon
and Levi diggs deeply and closely through the wall, into whose secrets the
soul of Israel does not enter. To these secret and deep diggers, that
Hierogliph of counsel, set out by the learned, does very well agree. They
picture Pluto with an helmet on his head, and Proscerpi^na ravishing. By which
they would signify the subterranea^ secrecy of counsel, so their deep
counsels, are hellish indeed, closely covered, having Pluto and Proserpina for
their President. Yea the Cabala is kept no closer by the Jews, nor the Sibills
by the Romans, nor the Druides verses by the ancient Gauls; then they keep
their secrets. It is good to cast a counter-Mine against this counsel, and
though you work not on the like subject, but rather on the contrary: yet
labor to keep as close as they do. When God will give his people into the
hands of their enemies, he either takes away the spirit of council, as he did
from Israel when they grieved him; or he discovers it to the enemy as he did
the counsel of the King of Siria. Therefore, as I have showed, let his people
consult with God, and let him be president over all their counsels, against
whom there is no counsel: and let them look likewise to the sealing of their
counsel, that their enemies might not read it. Take heed of the Babylonish
Spies that convey themselves into your Courts, Camps and Chambers, in strange
habits, under the color of travel, traffic, profession of Sciences, or any
such like. These be the Hyenaes that lie by the walls, with men's voices, but
wolves hearts, ready to discover every one that looks out at doors. These be
like to that dissembling Romish hypocrite, Aenobarbus, with a brazen face
indeed, and a leaden heart. These are trained up and taught the Art of
discovery, so that all Ciphers and Hyerogliphs are familiar to them; but if
they be caught, it is good to make them pay for their learning.

But to come nearer home, into the inward society of secrets: Kings and
Generals in these days especially, had need, not with Osiris King of Egypt to
have an eye only in the top of the Scepter, or Sword; but they must have their
eyes in their own heads: yea, in their hearts, ad discernenda regia pericula
opus est oculo animi. To discover the danger of great ones, they had need of
the eye of the mind. As Achitophel is without giving counsel against David;
so Doeg is standing before the Lord when David asks counsel of Achimelech,
whereof Saul being by him informed, it costs the Priests their lives. You see
this hel-bound came to the place of Gods service; as some it may be with us
come to the Church to blow up the Church; and made likewise a show of Gods
service, 1 Samuel 21.7, an Edomite by Nation and Condition; yet an Israelite by
outward profession. This show without doubt made the Priests not mistrust him,
but like a bloody Edomite or Esauite he seeks their blood, and has it. His
heart was dyed in blood; for there he conceives the murder, his tongue dipped
in blood; he makes the matter worse by relating; his hand bathed in blood;
with that he executes the malice of his heart. Secrecy (if God had so so
ordained,) might have saved all this. Such be the kanker worms, and fretting
moaths that cat out the heart of good counsel, ere ever it come to light. Such
be the picklocks of the Cabinat of counsel. Yea, such and so many close
deceivers now there be of all sorts, Quos fugiamus sei mus, quibus credemus
nesctmus. Cic. ad Atti. Micah 7.5.6.7.
that it may be too truly said, as Tully said in another case: Whom to shun
we know, but whom to believe we know not. Yea, the book of God makes it good
of these evil days; Trust ye not in a friend, put no confidence in a guide,
etc. He shows a reason, The son dishonors the father, etc. In a word, a
man's enemies are the of his own house. If Sampson be deceived by his own
Heifer, and Noah dishonored by his own son; Isaak mocked by his own brother,
and David find no place to rest in for his own father-in-law, Psalm. 12.
what shall a man say then? Surely, this is his best refuge; Help Jehovah, for
the gracious Saint is ended, and the faithful diminished from the sons of
Adam: And for the present, till the world mend, it shall not be amiss to
follow the counsel of Epicharmus; Sis prude^s, memento diffidere.
Be wise, remember to distrust.

But since counsel must be used,

I answer, Constantine did with his servants; first try, and then trust. Yea,
here arises another question, how should they be tried? To which I answer;
First, just as he tried his servants, as I showed in the qualification of a
good Counselor. For he that consulteth with God, can both give counsel, and
keep counsel: He that keeps with God, will keep with man: but because these
are very rare birds, as I have showed you, and one of these is as a Lilie
amongst thorns: For the trial of mere civil men, let the practice of some
great Warriors be instead of a rule. Rules of trial.
They would first try their fidelity with things of seeming importance, but in
themselves of no moment. Dionysius going by Sea to besiege a City, gave a
sealed commission in show, to every ship-master, but never a word written in
it. Withal he commanded, so soon as ever a sign was given from a ship,
thereunto appointed, they should open their Commissions, and make their course
whether they should direct them. Withal he ships himself presently in one of
the best Saylors, and coming about before the sign was given, he demands of
every man his Commission: those that had opened their Commission against the
charge, he executed as Traitors; to the rest who had obeyed, he gave commission
indeed whether to direct their course. By which means he both discovered the
perfidious from the faithful, Polyaen. li. 5
and by his secrecy concealed, he assaults and takes Amphipolis, that neither
expected him, nor was provided against him. Again another rule of trial of
trust directs you to take heed of two sorts. The first is such as their very
Religion maintains treachery; namely, Papists, professing that faith is not
to be kept with Heretics upon any relation. The second sort is such as by
their practice have made ship wrack of their fidelity to any. Qui semel est
malus semper praes^mitur esse m^lus in eodem genere.
He that is once evil is ever so presumed to be in the same kind, except the
Lord renew him by repentance. It is the nature of faith, neither for fear nor
flattery, for gain or glory, for hatred or applause of men to deceive. Pontius
Centurio, a Captain of Caesar's, being taken by Scipio, Pompey his father-in
law, had his life offered him, with an honorable place, if he would serve
Pompey, who answered Scipio, That he thanked him exceedingly, Brusoni l. 2. c.
35.
but of life upon such unequal conditions, he stood in no need. So he chosed
rather to die, then to falsify his faith to Caesar. Constantine would trust
those Courtiers no more that had cracked their credit with God. Theoderick an
Arrian King, did exceedingly affect a certain Deacon, although he was an
Orthodox: This Deacon, thinking that he should gratify Theoderick much, and
attain to advancement, became an Arrian, which when the King understood, he
changed his love into hatred, and cursed the head to be struck from him;
affirming* that if he kept not his faith to God, Eusebius. lib. 2
what duty in conscience could a man expect from him. But to conclude this
point of keeping counsel, pray to God for wisdom, and for wise and faithful
Counselors; for it is God that gives and directs the counsel of the wise;
Cum consilium tuum cognoveris adversariis proditum, dispositione^ ^uta. lib. 3.
cap. 23.
and also discovers and confounds the counsel of Achitophel. To end then
with the rule of Vegetius; if your counsel be discovered to the enemy, take an
other course.

CHAP. XXVIII. The execution of things consulted on.
THVS having finished my discourse of Counsel, with the conditions thereof,
together with other things conducent to the good and guiding of war, I come
now to the execution or managing of things wisely consulted of: or if you will,
to discourse of the practick of war. As in all Arts and Sciences practical,
practice is the proper end; so especially in the Art of War, wherein Counsel
and Strength are required. Innata est nobis vis a magis communibus ad minus
communis procedere. Primo Physicor.
Counsel to deliberate, and Strength to execute. There is an inbred sagacity
in man, as Aristotle says, to proceed from things more common, to things more
particular; which course in this Treatise I keep, applying the unfolded
general rules to their particular objects; not that I take upon me to direct
in every particular (for that is both beyond my element, and unpossible to the
best experienced, by reason of new occasions arising, requiring rather an
exception then a rule.) As it is the discretion of the Physician, in the cure
of this or that particular man, by reason of occurring circumstances, of
implicate or opposite diseases, not to walk by his general rules; for so he
may kill rather then cure: so an excellent rule of war, evil applied in the
particular, is like a Cataplasme to a true Plurisie, in steed of Phlebotomie.
But not to insist in Apology, I intend to follow my aim; namely, having
touched the particulars, to take them along with me to the standard of the
Word, whereby they being ordered and directed; they may likewise be blessed
from above.

CHAP. XXIX. The true use of Stratagems.
THE managing of war, according to the nature of war (as you know) is either
Defensive or Offensive (taking the denomination from the chiefest part)
otherwise a pure unmixt war, especially if it be defensive, will prove but a
poor one. It may likewise be distinguished in regard of place, in field-fight,
and oppugnation of holds. In both which services, before I come to touch the
particulars, let this position take place without controversy, That stratagems
are both lawful and necessary; neither do they (being lawfully used) deserve
the name of deceit. That they are as usual as war it self, there is no
question; Witness all that have written of war. Vegetius; Stuchus, Egnatius,
Polyaenus; and Frontine who has four whole books of Stratagems. But because
the examples of men must rule us no further then they are ruled by the Word,
you shall not only see the examples of Gods people in his wars, warranted by
the Word, but also Gods own express direction for Stratagems, for the
destruction of Ai; though the Lord had decreed it, yet he gives order for all
necessary secundary means, that might serve for the overthrow of it. Ios 8.2.
Cum justa^ bellum suscipitur utru^ apperte pugnet quis an ex insidiis nihil ad
justiciam interest; dominus enim etc. Quest. 10, in Joshua. Dolus an virtus quis
in hosce requirit.
Lay thou an ambushment (says the Lord) for the City behind it. In which
words Ans^^ observes very fitly, When a just war is undertaken, wh^^ther one
overcome by open force, or stratagem, it is all one in the balance of Justice;
for God (says he) commanded Joshua the to entrap the inhabitants of Ai. The
very saying of the He^ then is sound enough in this point, so his terms be
we^^ construed; A Stratagem, or Force, all one to foes. Neither can a Stratagem
be properly called by the nam^ of deceit; because deceit presupposes some
trust under parley, league, or kindness; so that this being put upon a^ enemy,
is rather, as I may say, doins acceptus, then dolus d^tus; because he should
have looked better to it. The wo^^ Dolus, that the Poet uses abusiuely (as
A^ujnas says) (...) taken in the better part: wherefore the Ancients when they
took it in the worser part, to make a difference, called it ^^lum malum. Homer
likewise takes it in the better part; so^ commending Visses for his excellency
of wit against his enemies, and that by just proceeding, sets it down under
the very same name. It is said of Phillip of Macedo, that he^ prevailed more
this way, then by all his forces.

But as the course is both lawful and commendable; so you must look to use it
lawfully; you must not shift in false deceit and couzenage, under the color of
a true Stratagem. There is as much difference betwixt these two, as is betwixt
a Magistrate using the sword of Justice, and a man lying in wait to cut his
neighbors throat.

In every Stratageme there be two things especially to be avoided,
fa^se-deceit, and lying; the former has relation to any league, or parley, or
interim of truce, promised or proclaimed. Under these terms, to attempt any
thing directly against the enemy; is on the doers part to deceive. With this
soul blemish, Lucullus that great Roman Warrior did stain all his honor. He
being under terms of peace with the Portugals, whose forces lay in several
places; desired them so to remain, and he would show every company where they
should build and seat themselves most conveniently: He comes to the first
company, and under show of friendship persuades them to lay down their Arms;
whereupon he causes his Army to fall upon them, and kill them every man; yea,
so quickly was it done, Appian in hist. bellor. Hispan. perfidiae and non
stratagematis nomen meretur.
that the last knew not of the murdering of the rest. From this treacherous
Massacre a very few with Viriatus escaped. One speaking of this, gives it the
proper name; namely, Perfidie, and not a Stratagem. Likewise in a stratagem,
the least lie is to be avoided. It is true, that the most of your memorable
Stratagems, where speeches has past, have been strewed with untruths: but we
must not use in the best presidents, ^he least evil that is in them. Genesis 12.27
We should follow the Midwiues piety in saving the children; Exodus 1. Rev. 19.
Abraham's charity in securing of himself, Rahabs mercy in saving the Spies;
Ia^obs industry in getting of the blessing, and John his zeal and admiration
of Gods good power, and of the glory of the Saints: but withal we must not
follow Abraham his counterfeiting, Rachabs, and the Midwiues lie; Jacob his
untruth, nor John his do^ing on the Angel.

I know some will hold it much preciseness in Stratagems to be effected with
speech, not to allow an officious lie, since all such Stratagems has been so
effected, and almost it is impossible without such a lie to bring it to pass.

I answer. First, what has been done de facto will not serve; but what may be
done, de jure, we must examine. Secondly, the Word is so precise both in the
general, and even in the very particular, that it will allow no lie at all.
For the general, this rule is without exception. We must not do the least
evil, that the greatest good may come of it. Romans 3 8. Epes 4.25.
As for the particular, put away lying, says the Apostle, Lie not one to
another. And least men should take these places with a Pharisaicall gloss;
Lev. 19.11
that the Spirit forbids lying one to another, that is, to a brother, or
neighbor; but to ^^ enemy we may (especially upon necessity;) the Spirit will
have no lie at all, upon whatsoever good intent, to come from the children of
truth. ^ Ioh. 2.21
No lie (says S. John) is of the truth; that is, no lie will sort with the
truth; let the ground or pretense seem what it will.

Heathens, that sees no further then Owls, permits lye^ upon some necessity;
(...). P^s^nder. De repub. lib. 3. Job. 13.17.
as a certain Poet, he is not to be blam^ that makes a lie for saving his
life. Plato affirms, that Physicians upon necessity, must have leave to lie,
that they may comfort the sick, and hold them up with hopes, although^ there be
none. But neither recovery of health, or saving o^ life, is a sufficient ground
for a lie; because we may not lie for the glory of God, which should be deerer
to us the^ our own salvation. Will you speak wickedly for God; and talk
deceitfully for him? Hence it is that the defense of an officious lie falls to
the ground. We have examples indeed, both of pernicious, merry, and officious
lies, but in the book of God, Duo mendaciorum genera in qu^bus non est magna
culpa, sed tamen non sine culpa in Psalm. 5. Ex si quis peccatum non putet
seipsum decipit.
every lie is condemned, and no lie warranted. Austi^ having spoken much of the
diverse kinds of lies, upon good deliberation gives this resolution: There be
two kinds of lies (says he) that are less faulty, yet are not void of fauit^
(for he who thinks any kind of lie not to be sin, deceives himself:) Neither
is there any reason we should use this lie, if we consider it well. First, by
this we cannot effect anything; for it is not a lie that can save life, nor
gain advantage of the enemy. Secondly, we dishonor God exceedingly, and show
our distrust in the using of evil means: Thirdly, and lastly, we provoke God to
curse his own work, for mixing that with it, which is an abomination in his
sight. We must not then imitate Sopyrus mangling of himself, and lay it upon
others, though it be to gain dominion to D^rius, glory and grace to himself,
and the good of hi^ Country. Neither must Synons cogging craft be a warran^ to
do so, though it were to gain Troy: Neither must we emulate, or imitate the
new Synons of Rome; the croaking frogs, and other Papists, who are become
their crafts-masters in shameless lying, and hellish equivocation. They are
apt scholars in Lysanders school; tell them to their Them, as some did to
him, That by divellish lies, they have brought many massacres, treasons, and
outrages to pass. They laugh it off, and answer with their Master, That a man
must put on the Fox skin, when the Lions will not serve: that is (as Plutarch
expounds it) that which cannot be done by fair deal^ing, must by fraud and
dishonest means be accomplished. But they need not go so far to school,
their hollow fathers, fogged up with deceit, will teach them to cast the keys
in Tyber, and the Sacrament in the fire, when plain dealing will not serve.
Yea, old Leo the tenth, has taught the young Whelps a Text, which all of them
has by heart, and all the comments upon it: Flectere si nequeo superos, etc.
Fetch help from hell, if heaven deny you aid.

Neither, last of all, must we follow a multitude to do evil: The whole world
lies in wickedness, and truth and faith have left the world. Men are now
grown natural Cretians. It is a great piece of policy with great Ones, to lie
as ordinarily as to speak; but it is a great shame and disgrace to them. Prove.
17.17.
Excellent speech becomes not a fool, much less do lying lips a Prince.
For this quality in great Ones I cannot pass a remarkable passage in the
Scottish History. Young Malcom King of Scots, fled into England from the cruelty
of Macbeth, who had murdered his father, and usurped the Kingdom: Macduff
Earl of Fife escaped likewise from the Tyrant, and coming into England to the
King, did solicit and incite him with arguments, to labor for the deliverance
of his people from the tyranny of a Traitor: Malcom fearing deceit, which
Macbeth by sundry means against him attempted, he desired to be excused,
because he had two evil qualities incompatible to Kingly government, namely,
avarice and lust. Macduff answered, that these might be remedied by matrimony,
and abundance: The King replied that he would be plain with him as a friend,
lest afterward he might be deceived; that he had another fault intolerable in
any man, much less in a King; There was no truth in his words, no sincerity in
his heart; he trusted no body, neither was he trusted by any. At which Macdu^^
brake forth in these speeches: Away with thee (says he) the dishonor of the
name of Kings, a monster rather to be abandoned society, then to be called to
rule a Kingdom: With which speeches, going away in a great rage, the King got
him by the hand and told him; he put the case but to try him, for he was no
such man indeed: Hist. rer. Scoti. lib. 7.
yea, there was not a more religious, faithful, just and magnanimious King
amongst them all, then he was. David's lie to Achimelech did more hurt then if
twenty others had lied; 1 Samuel 21.2.
he said, the King had commanded him some secret business; which was not so
indeed: And though he coined upon near necessity, yet cannot he be excused of
infirmity, although he made no trade of it. This lie cost the Priests their
lives, as he ingenuously confessed, 2 Samuel 22.22.
I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy fathers house. Besides;
this fault in great Ones, as Kings, Generals, and Councillors, makes
inferiors of all sorts, to count lying a grace. The Courteours of Meroe, a
Kingdom of India counted themselves highly graced with limping and halting,
because the King halted. Exemplary sin in great Ones, makes sin common; and
vice once common is counted novice, but virtue: though a liar (as the Poet
says) is to be hated to hell. Yet for all this, that hell is so hugely
enlarged upon earth, that we are become like the Egiptians, who had no
punishment for lying, Nullus modus mentiendi and summa me^tiendi impunitas.
Alex. lib. 6 cap. 10.
nor no measure in lying. Two sins of all other, the Persians most abhorred,
lying and breaking; and these two of all others, bear now no little sway. Yet
it were our best to break off this sin. For though we may lie by authority, and
no man can call us to account; yet God will call us to an account for every
idle word, much more for every lie: And though there be no penalty on earth;
yet the Judge of heaven and earth has appointed hell hereafter for liars, if
they leave not of and repent. Rev. 22.15
Without shall be dogs (says the Lord) and whosoever loves and makes a ^ye.

But some may reply, what would you have a Spy to do; how shall he accomplish
his business, except he deliver some untruths? To which I answer, as his
calling is lawful, so he must use it lawfully, whatsoever he does he must not
sin; God puts sin as a necessity upon no man; he may conceal the truth, or
some part of the truth, change his habit, make show of what he means not to
do: In all which he must take heed that they be not in matter of Religion; for
that will endure no part of dissimulation. But some may instance that stratagem
of Hushai in subverting the counsel of Achitophel, wherein it seems he
delivers sundry untruthes, 2 Samuel 16.16.
and that against his knowledge; as first he saluteth Absalom by the name of
King, and that he would be his, and serve him. Verse 18. Fuit officiosum
me^dacium. Ambigue sermon ludificatur.
Osiander answers that it was an officious lie; but Iunius better, That he
dallied with Absalom in a doubtful speech. Peter Martyr pleads for warrant,
Divine instinct, because David so directed him, chapter 15. v. 34. But howsoever,
if there were either untruth, or equivocation in it, it is no warrant for us.

CHAP. XXX. The Oppugnation of an Hold.
NOW I come more particularly to the oppugning and defending of an Hold,
wherein I mean to be brief, because the particulars of the service, depends
much upon the circumstances of the subject. First, then to the Assaylants:
There be two kinds of ways, as Writers well observe, and experience teach,
Obsidendi duas esse species. Veg. lib. 4. cap. 7.
to besieg any place; either by continued assault, or by cutting off all supply
of means, whereby they may be forced to yield. The latter of these is first to
be attempted, Fame potius quam ferro.
as Caesar well observed. The Assaylants having chosen the best advantage of
ground, for entrenching of themselnes, and planting of their Ordinance, they
are in the first place to look well to themselves: Cum negligentia
intervenerit, paribus insidiis suliacent obsidentes. Veget. lib. 4 cap. 28.
for if neglect or carelessenesse overtake them (as one well observes) they
are subject to as great danger as the besieged. Claudian the Poet, both
expresses the danger and directs the remedy: -- multis damnosa fuere
gaudia, dispersi pereunt somnoque soluti.
-- Too many often joy
Secure does hurt, whom lazy sleep does slay.
The Apollinates whom Phillip besieged, served him such a trick; in the night
time, through the besiegers neglect, they took in the Roman supply (their
enemies not knowing:) All the day following they kept themselves very quiet,
giving occasion to the Assaylant of security: but in the silence of the night,
they sallyed forth without any noise, and possessed themselves of the enemies
Camp, where they slew some thousands, Livi lib. 33.
and took more then they slew; the King himself without his clothes very
hardly escaped. Frontine gave the same caution upon the same ground: For
whether the Assaylant (says he) be taken with sleep, or surfeit, or idleness,
or with any neglect of their place, the besieged on a sudden sallyeth out,
they take, kill, consume and spoil with fire; they undo all their works, take
their munition. In a word, they mar all in an hour, that the enemy has been
making, and devising many days, months; yea, it may be years. Therefore
(says he) they must look to guard themselves with all manner of defense and
vigilance, as trenches, towers, Lib. 4. c. 28
or sconses, against eruptions, as well as with means to assault. For men being
blocked up, where they must either fight, starve, or yield, it may be to a
cruel and faithless enemy; they make a virtue of necessity, the pinch puts
them to their wit, and despair strengthens their resolution, Foelices saepe
sine ratione.
upon the wings whereof they are carried to desperate attempts, wherein they
prove often happy beyond all reason.

Hereupon as the Assaylant must secure himself; so in the next place he must
keep the besieged doing. Fiuethings necessary for the oppugnant.
To direct the Assaylant against the besieged, these five things are requisite;
he must be wise, cunning, dilligent, constant, and upon occasion, wisely
adventurous. By the first he is taught not to persist against that which must
needs cost him more then it is worth.

The second includes all lawful stratagems, whereby every wise Assaylant
should labor to possess himself of any place, rather then by main force;
because so, on both sides, bloodshed may be prevented. It is not possible, as I
showed, to give rules for all stratagems, because of new occasions; yet for
taking in of places these be most usual. The Stratagem of corrupting
Sometimes the Assaylant corrupts some of the besieged, who betrayeth the
Town or City into the hand of the Assaylant, and so it is taken with little or
nothing a do: So Papyrius Cursor, the Consul dealt with Milo, who kept
Tarentum a Town of the Epyrots. Being taken with the great promises of the
General, both of reward and safety to him and his; he persuades the Town to
send him as a Legate to Papyrius, of whom he received the reward promised,
returns to the Town, and by fair speeches casts the people in a deep
security, and so delivers up the neglected Town into the hand of the enemy.
So Marcellus used Sosistratus a Syracusan, for betraying of the City: On a day
when Epicides did feast the people, he gave intelligence to Marcellus, who
(while the secure inhabitants did revell it out in profuse hilarities) scaleth
the walls, kills the watch, enters the Town, which was a glorious victory,
and a great booty to the Romans. So Hanibal took Tarentum by a corrupted
Citizen, who was taught by Hanibal to ask leave of the Captain to go out in
the night a hunting, which they durst not do by day. Hanibal had good store of
Boores killed ready for him, with which he often returned laden into the City,
whereof he gave a share to the Captain: But one night Hanibal put his soldiers
in the habit of Hunters, who being laden with prey, and let in at the gates,
they killed the watch suspecting nothing, set open the gates and let Hanibal in,
who killed all the Romans save them that fled into the Castle. Examples of
this kind are so frequent, that I will not trouble you with more.

Some to effect this, have sent the trustiest of their own, to proffer their
service to the enemies, who under complaint of a feigned injury (or at most
feignedly offered) makes the enemy to believe, that they will do or suffer any
thing for revenge, when they intend nothing but deceit. This kind likewise has
had good success, witness Sopyrus whom Cyrus so much esteemed) who by a
mangling of himself, and fleeing to the enemy, by some feigned service, got
Babylon into his hand, and delivered it unto Cyrus. When Tarquin the proud,
could by no means prevail with the Gabians to surrender, he takes rodds and
beats his own son Tarquinius Sextus, and sends him to the enemy, to whom he
accusing his fathers cruelty, desires in show of revenge to be their Captain
against his father, to whom when they came to fight, he delivered them up.

But here arises a case of conscience, ab ante or before is the chiefest
principal? Ars. Inst. Answ. Hosts fallere and v^stu^ and ^on^st^.


I answer he may very lawfully persuade them all to surrender, Ergo he may
lawfully persuade one to do what he can. Yea but the means used be naught. I
answer, on the perswaders part they are good, who may as lawfully by cunning as
by force overcome. Neither can it be called treason in him because he is not in
trust. Si amicus fuiss^t nunquam predidisset.
Again the enemy is become his friend, though he be an enemy to his own. If
it be lawful for a man in authority, to cause one thief, or traitor, to
betray an other being all enemies to the state; it is no less lawful for a
commander in this kind to divide his enemies one from another, and to make one
serve his turn against another. But in this, and passages of the like nature,
I refer my self to the judicious divines.

Another stratagem of use is to feign remisnes, Feying of remisness.
or neglect of assaulting, or to do some other thing then the main thing they
intend. Alcibiades General of Athens besieging the city Agrigentina, which
was almost impregnable: He desires the city to send some of their counsel to
him, with whom he might consult of matters concerning the common good. He
causes a Theater to be erected, and in great pomp, according to the Grecian
manner, he holds the eyes of the besieged with a show of consultation; who
neglecting to stand upon their guard, were supprized by the Athenians before
they were aware. Domicius Calvinus besieging Leucas, a Town both well
fortified, and well manned; took often this course, to compass the walls, with
all his forces without the least show of attempt, and so to lead them back
again into the camp. The Town being induced by this accustomed course, to
believe that the Roman did it only for use of exercise, began to slight it as
a toy and to grow remiss in their attendance; He turns his obambulation into
a sudden and unlooked for assault, and taking the walls he forced them to
render the Town and themselves. Neither does the like action of Joshua, in
compassing the walls of Jericho, want the nature of a stratagem. For though the
Lord had give^ it into his hand; yet he neglects no secundary means, either
of force, or cunning to accomplish the Lords decree. And no doubt the continued
compassing of the city, without any further attempt; made Jericho slight it
off, as a toy, rather then a strategem. As the custom of things do dull and
alter the sense; so it binds up the mind from judging, and disordereth the
affections from fearing, or affecting of things indeed according to the true
nature.

Besides; this general has likewise another trick of slight to simulate the
raising of the siege, and departure for a time, that the besieged, neglecting
their watch, they may return upon them, and take them at unawares. This did
Phormio, of Athens, against the Chalsidians; Agiselaus, of Lacedemon, against
the Phocenses; Alcibiades against the Bizantines, and Q. Metellus, as you
heard, against Cantrebia.

The last that here I relate, for all I cannot (and with many I will not cloy)
is the drawing of the besieged to sallie out, with laying ambushment to take
the place. Of many examples, I will give but a taste. Of this stratagem God
himself was the author to Joshua, as I showed you, Iosu. 8. Cato in the very
eye of the Lacedaemonians, whom he besieged, set the Suessens, being the weakest
of his forces to assault the Walls, and lays the strongest in ambush for the
service indeed; the Town breaking out upon the assailants (who fled for their
lives, and they followed as eagerly;) the town was taken by them that lay in
ambush. Hannibal, besieging Hymera caused not only his soldiers to flee
before those that sallied out; but also to quit the Camp into the enemies
hand, for which the Hymerans were so ravished with Joy, that they run all out
of the Town unto the Camp; and so the Town was taken by those that lay in
wait. The like stratagem he used against Sagunt.

The third thing required in the assailant is diligence in following the work,
Diligence:
(...).
loosing no opportunity, nor omitting any occasion of diligence. It may well
be said, that all things are subject to the service of it; yea nothing is so
hard but it will overcome; without this, nothing with honor can be achieved,
and by this, many times, things seeming impossible are accomplished. It is well
observed by Demosthenes of Alexander, that his happiness did not attend his
fortune; neither by it did he attain to so great victories: but his
industrious d^ligence, his boldness and serving of the occasion, brought those
great things to pass. Neither will this service suffer any delay or slipping
of occasion: for occasion (as one says well) is the soul of action. The
Israelits did compass Jericho for six days together; and when they came to
the point of the service, they did compass it twice. It is reported of Caesar,
(...).
that being asked how he had accomplished so great and admirable things, that
he should answer, by de^aying no occasion. The dexterous and cunning Hanibal,
neglecting his attendance upon this great commandresse, lost the Crown of his
victory, namely, the taking of Rome.

Fourthly, Constancy
for the taking in of a place of any worth there is required Constancy. It is
not common, to come and see, Venire videre and sic vincere.
and so to overcome. The place is very weak, or pestered with Cowards, or
traitors, that yields at the first, therefore the assailant must resolve to
stay by it, yea and to be at some cost with it, if he mean to have it. They
that come to besiege any places (as Livi well observes) must ever have that of
Appi^nus Claudius before their eyes. Preseverantia in omni genere militiae est
necessaria, maxim tamen in obsidendis nrbibus. Apud Livi. lib. 5.
That perseverance in every part of war is very necessary, but especially in
the besieging of towns. Titus besieged Hierusa em six mone^hs; the siege of
Troy continued ten years. In the time of Leo Iconomachus, Cal^ph Sull^man
besieged Constantinople for the space of eight years. Anno Domine 719. So the
siege of Constantinople, and the Rhodes, when they were taken, continued for
many days. But how short while soever it be continued, i^ shall be good policy
to make show of continuance. ^lea^chu^ the Lacedemonian environing the
Thracians, they were confident, that want of provision, would force him ^o
depart (for they had carried all into the mountains.) As they sent their
legates to him, he caused a captive to be cut in pieces, and in the presence of
the Legates to be distributed, as though it had been for victuals, which the
Thracians taking as an evidence, that he and his would endure any thing rather
then break their resolution, they rendered themselves into his hands. When the
Portugalls told Tiberius Grachus, that they had provision enough for ten
years, and therefore they did not fear blocking up, well (said he) the worst
is, then I shall take you in the eleventh year: with which resolution they were
so daunted that they rendered themselves, notwithstanding of their provision.

The last, The cost of oppugnation.
but not the least, thing to be thought on, is the cost which they must be at.
Stratagems, nor wearying out, it may be, will not serve the turn; they may
find the besieged as resolute to hold out, as themselves to continue; as
cunning to prevent, or to retort a Stratagem, as they are to devise it. They
must therefore come to handy blows, besides plying of ordinance. Neither must
the assailant be daunted with the valor, or resolution of the defendant; but
it must the rather whet him on to his attempt. First, considering wh^^ an
adversary he has: the valor of the adversary adds spirit to the valiant.
Caesar Domitian, knowing that the Germans, against whom the French were to
fight, would add strength to strength, courage to courage, if they should know
of hi^ being in the battle, came closely with his forces under the colors of
the French, and so overthrew them.

Secondly, the worth of the adversary, adds to the glory of the victory, and
to the gain of him that overco^meth him. Aulus Torquatus oppugning a Town of
Greece was told, by one of his army, that the young men within the city were
excellent Archers, and that it would be hard to expugne them all the better
(says the General) for I shall have the richer prey. When Aristotle his
Elenchus will do no good with the besieged, (...). Aut perdant aut percaut.
he must bring Achileum argumentum, an irresistible arg^ment, they must be in
their assault (as Homer says) like the wik^boores; who run upon them that
provoke the^, not shunning the lance Yea, the assault must be given with that
resolution, either to (...) or dye, as one (says well) where there is only
place for bold adverture; and of all the services of war this requires it
most: Yet this adventure must be with good advice; as men must not be timorous,
so they must not be temerous. (...).
It is a part of magnanimity to dare, but to be desperate without ground, is no
part of manhood.

In making of assault there be three cautions. First, Cautions in assaulting.
if by blocking up, and cutting off means, the place may be taken, it is vain
to make a desperate attempt upon it: and therefore I think the Duke of Alva his
will was above his wit; and that it was rather cholor, then true courage in
him, at the siege of Harlem, to spend so many men, to the number of 20000,
where he might in time have famished them out, as some of his own requested him
to do. Secondly, to attempt, continue, and reinforce assaults, where no good
can be done, stands neither with the wit, nor credit of a Commander. It was
well observed by Chilo, that things are not to be attempted that cannot
possibly be done, and that being effected, the evil overgoeth the good. The
great Turk, that cruel beast, continued and reinforced his assault upon the
Rhodes so long, with the loss of so many, that the soldiers refused
absolutely, notwithstanding of his threatenings, to renew the assault. It is a
good saying, and experience proves it true, that expense of danger, reclaimeth
a man from fool-hardinesse. This was verified in Spinola at the siege of
Bergan-upzome, where he came short of himself in two things; first in loosing
his opportunity; and secondly, when they were too good for him, he made such
desperate and hot assaults, and was so prodigal of the blood of his
soldiers, that every one might know, it was none of his own: but the cost of
his rash attempts made his courage to cool, till at last he left of a little
wiser then when he began.

The last caution concerns the person of the General, Reservation of the
General from danger. Judge 9.
that in the siege or assault, he be reserved from the point of danger.
Abimelech coming close to the Town of Thebes, which they were besieging, was
killed with a piece of a Millstone out of a woman's hand. Alexander the Great was
more adventurous this way, then it became so great a King to be: For he
endangered himself in taking the Towr of Jupiter Haman, where entering first
by himself, and put to his own defense against many, was very sore wounded
before any help could come at him. Charles Duke of Burbon, at the taking of
Rome was so eager in entering the breach, that upon the wall he was slain with a
bullet. D. de Maine, at the siege of Montabon, viewing of his works, and
coming too nigh the walls, was likewise shot with a Musket. The reason hereof
is this, that when the General is lost, the business is often quashed,
A^imelech being slain at the Town of Thebes, they proceeded no further, but
every man went into his own place. And thus much for the Assaylant.

CHAP. XXXI. The carriage of the Besieged.
NOW I come to the Defendant besieged, who as their case is the worser, so they
had need of the readyer wit, both how to hold out, and how upon necessity of
surrender, to make the best condition they can for themselves. As contraries
laid together, discover one another nature, so out of the directions of the
Assaylant, the Defendant may pick matter of instruction. Things required in the
besieged, Seven things necessary for the besieged.
may be reduced to these general heads, Providence, Vigilance, Cunning,
Fidelity, strict censure of Traitors, Wariness, and Continuance. By the first
of these they are directed to get all within themselves that they can, and to
consume the rest, that it may not serve the enemy. To th^^ head belongs the
making good of every place by water or by land, that may serve them for
sallying forth, or bringing in of necessaries, and for annoying the enemy. To
the second head may be referred the managing of all things and actions, that
make for holding out. As nothing does more incommodate the Assaylant, then
secure negligence, so to the Defendant it is much more obnoxious, because in a
repulse th^re is place for a second error, so is there not, if the place be
taken. Presumptuous security was the ruin of Laish. Dan (says the Word) came
to Laish, Judge. 18.27
a people that were quiet and secure, and they smote them with the edge of the
sword, and burnt the City with fire. A constant care must not be intermitted;
watch must not be neglected. When Alcibiades, General of Athens, would have
his soldiers to keep strict watch in a City besieged, he commanded the Watch
to observe a light that he would show them from a Castle, at the sight whereof,
they should all hold up their lights, and whosoever should fail in that should
dye for it. While every man expected a sign from the General, all kept
constant watch, to the safeguard of the place. This diligent and watcfull care,
should be always as a Watch upon the Walls, which the learned terms well,
(...).
the Shield of the City. The neglect whereof, in regard of the danger, has
been severely punished in particular delinquents. Iphicrates of Athens, keeping
Corinth when it was besieged, went about the Watch himself, even when the
enemy was about to make an assault; and finding one of the Watch a sleep, he
thrusts him through with his sword; Qualem inveni talem (inquit) reliqui.
and to those that taxed him of severity, he answered thus, that he left him
such as he found him. The like is reported of Epaminondas the Thebane: To omit
the example of diligence, used in the defense of the Rhodes, Constantinople,
Belgrad, and such places of former times, look but upon the diligence used by
the Defendants in the siege of Harlem; where, to fortify the Town against the
whole force of the Spanyard, 200 women wrought as pyoners, and that under the
ensign of a woman Captain, called Margaret Knenault, in one month they made
the Town three times stronger then it was, making Sconces toward the mouth of
the water; to assure safe passages for their necessaries. Such was the
diligence of Leyden, Bergan-upzome, Montabon, and others.

The neglect hereof, Application.
and want of mature providence, was a means, amongst the rest, to lay the
Palatinate in the mouth of the enemy: and indeed it is to be feared, that the
same faylings in us, together with our sins, may make way for the tribe of
Dan to smite us, as Laish was smitten, Security is one of the national sins of
Britain, and so much the more dangerous, because it vayleth it self, and all
other sins; from being taken notice of; yea, it is the stalking Horse to sin
and judgment: It is the mother of Negligence, and the Devils dore-keeper. As
there was never greater security; so was there never a time wherein it was more
dangerous. That speech of the Father may be fitly applied to us; No man should
be secure in that state which is assaulted continually by the enemy; Nemo
secu(...)
yea, indeed it may be called all one assault; their case may be ours, except
we repent. For (as the same Father says) we become rather worser of better,
then better of worser. The devil now has set all his Miners a work; that
Antiochus of Rome; and Senacherib his General, means to block up Zion to the
very gates. The Foxes are not only got upon the walls, but the Spies are got
within the Cities; and howsoever we are too credulous to take their word with
Jacobs sonns, that they are not Spies; yet when the Assault is given they will
prove such. It is time therefore that every one that is zealous of Gods glory,
careful of his life, and the life of his, and true to his Country, awake
himself and others as much as he can, to make up the breach, before the enemy
enter.

But to proceed. It is a main point of diligence to make sure at every point.
That rule of Gregory is true in all kinds of defense, that in vain do we
fortify all the rest, In cassum munita sunt caetera, cum locus unus, de quo
hosti patet aditus non est munitus. Moral.
if we leave one place unfortified by which the enemy may enter. A dangerous
thing it is if there be the least breach in the wall, or the wickat of a gate
be but open: but if the surest-seeming part of the wall, be but daubed up with
untempered mortar, or if the city gates beleft open by night, though the keys
for a fashion be carried up, is that city sure think you? Judge by your own
private house, and it will tell you the danger. Sallying out.


A third point of diligence is to be used in sallying out upon the enemy: so
Furius the Roman consul brake out by the gate called Decumana, and did the
assailant great hurt: So Caesar in the French-war tells us, how he served the
enemy; Sic nostros contempsere* lib. 5.
slighting us (says he) they fell to their work, some to cut trenches, some
to fill up ditches: Caesar in the mean time sallyeth out at all the gates and
put the enemy to flight. The like did Labienus and Hircius upon Pompey. Harlem
made many brave Sallies upon Duke Alvaes forces, and not only killed many,
with small loss to themselves, but also carried diverse ensigns out of their
trenches, nayling some pieces of their battery. Without further example, it is
an usual thing. A mere Lion couchant, or a Serpent dormient, though they have
both courage and wit; yet (not employing it to offense) are not fit to keep a
hold.

The third thing required is cunning: Cunning.
for the art and cunning of the assailant must be opposed and cut off with the
like. Stratagems in defense are of exceeding great use, neither is it sin by
those to deceive a deceiver: for this is but to take him in his own net. As
there be many examples of this kind, well known to men of reading and
experience; so I will show you but two or three examples for instance. In the
besieging of Rhodes, the enemy made an Ambulatorie or walking-Tower, an engine
then of great use, not unlike (it may be, though of greater quantity) to the
moving wooden sconces used at the siege of Harlam. This over-topt all the
Towers of the city; to cut off the use hereof, the enginers caused to digg
through the walls, and in the night to make the way hollow, by the which they
did convey it, which the enemy not perceiving (being covered with earth) as it
came that way, it sunk down with the own weight; so they lost their engine
and all their labor, and the city was delivered. There were many pretty
Stratagems used in the defense of Harlam, amongst the rest, this one put Duk de
Alva from working any more that way. The defendant preceiving that the enemy
meant to lodge in a new battered bulwark, they left rampering against it, and
fell to the mining of their own bulwark, wherein they put barrels of powder
casting many trenches round about it, the enemy offering to enter they quit
the bulwark; As a multitude of the enemy pursued and were come to Push of
Pike, at the barrier of a trench they fired the mine, blew up, killed, and took
to the number of 1600, and sallying back to their own trenches, recovered the
ground of their bulwark, which again they re-intrenched and kept. One more of
excellent note, related by Vitruvius in the siege of Apolonia. Trypho
Alexandrinus did mine through the wall in sundry places, till he brought his
mines a flights shot without the gate, in all which he hung up vessels of
brass; so sone as ever the enemy began to mine toward the city, by the
sound of the vessels they understood where he wrought; whereupon they
countermined the enemy, by penetrating their own, and powered vessels of hot
boiling water, urin, boiled sand, and such like upon the heads of their
enemies, lib. 10. cap. ult.
whereby they plagued them. Not unlike to this was he practice of a carpenter
at the besieging of Berca by the Persians, who carrying a brazen shield about
within the walls, and laying it to the ground, Herodot in Melpemone.
by the sound of the same discovered the working of the enemy. In our time it
is usual to set basins full of beans or peason upon the ground, which
rebounding at the strokes of the miners, discovers the enemies works.

There were never more Miners or Enginers under Zions walls then now there be.
Pharao has said to the Egiptians, come let us work wisely with them; that is,
craftily; for so the word signifies. It is not unworthy our observation; when
that Typical Phara^ began this undermining of Israel; even then when they
began to corrupt their religion, and to commit whoredoms with the Idols of
Egypt. That this is true, look in Ezech. and sundry other places of Gods
book; the Lord shows what direction he gave them, namely to cast away the
Egyptia^ Idols, wherewith they were defiled: Eze. 20.7.8 23.8. I^s. 24.14.
but they rebelled against me (says the Lord) they did not every man cast away
the abhommation of his eyes, neither did they forsake the Idols of Egypt; then
I said I will power out my fury upon them to accomplish mine anger against
them, in the midst of the land of Egypt. Ps. 105, 25.
Then (says the Psalmist) he turned the hearts of the Egiptians to hate his
people, to deal craftily with his servants. You see when his peoples sins
provoke God, the enemies wit begins to work against them, being guided
thereto by the overuling hand of God: So stands the case between us and
Pharao his Antitype. We have hugged the gods of Rome so long, and kept in the
strange fire of their sacrifice so carefully; that we are become, as some call
us, a Nation of devi^s, for reasons and conspiracies: by this means many are
infected, others grown lukewarm, the most part key cold, for which the Lord
has increased the hatred of forreyne, and of our homebred Egiptians against
us, and sharpeneth their wit, that they may deal craftly with us; not that God
is the author of the evil of sin, but of the action as it is a just plague and
punishment to us. With their craft they have undermined our wit, they have
undermined our State; and which is worst of all, the have undermined, yea and
almost blow en up the power of our religion; they have made Israel naked, and
Judah contemptible and bare: We stand in need then, that wit should awake, and
some Trypho should discover their undermining (for we see but a little:) But
vessels of brass, or tinckling cymbals will not serve, but some silver Trumpet
must give Israel the alarm, and awake them out of sleep, that they may have to
the breach. We had more then need of some cunning Archimedes to countermine the
Romans, for keeping of our Syracusa.

It is likewise a part of cunning to meet with the enemy in his own cunning,
Anti-cunning.
in feigning a regresse, or raising of the siege, for that (as I showed) is a
special Stratagem in oppugnation to withdraw themselves, that the besieged may
be secure, and they may return with the greater advantage. It shall be their
care therefore to make use of that time as occasion shall be affoorded.

Our enemies seem to withdraw themselves from the work about which they are,
Application. Astu se subtrahunt ut ex insperato nos opprimant.
as though they had given it over. Upon the Parliaments proceeding, some seems
to turn, that they may overturn us; the frogs keeps a croaking at the
proclamation; the nymphs of Babel seems to mourn that their ghostly fathers
must be gone; and great Dian^ droups right down, as though Jupiter were in an
evil aspect. In a word, all the Edomites take on, as though both Spain and
Babel were fallen: yea, and the Spanyard himself taken on, as if Gondomars
works were all blown up. But for all this they have not said in their heart,
there is no hope. Their night counsels, their continual intercourse with the
Pope and Spanyard; their Scout-watches every where; their threatenings, out of
their abrupt passions, does plainly tell us that they mean yet to have a round
bout. Their seeming retraits are trecheries; the Jesuit can go out at the
foredore, and come in at the back-dore: yea, under Gi^es ring he can go where
he list. Therefore right Honorable, and most worthy of the Parliament, look
nighly to them now especially; lest their re-attempts upon us, with greater
force and counsel, cause us one day say of our deceived selves; The fool
believes every thing.

The fourth thing following, Fidelity.
namely fidelity; which as it is the bond of all other societies; so it is the
Man, the muniment, and munition, in maintaining of an Hold: without this,
neither valor, wit, nor fortification will serve. What was the special
maintenance of many places mentioned in this Treatise, as Constantinople,
Rhodes, Vienna, but fidelity? And what has betrayed many impregnable places
into the hand of the enemy, but infidelity. The instances of later times, and
of our own memory, are freshest and of fittest use. When Solomon the great
Turk besieged Buda, Thomas Madastus, a brave Captain, possessing the Castle,
defended it valiantly; and, without doubt, had kept it, with great dishonor
and disadvantage to the Turk, if his soldiers had not betrayed him into the
hands of the enemy: For they took him (denying to render the Castle) and
delivered both him and it to Solomon, upon condition, that with bag and baggage
they might safely depart. So the Isle of Rhodes was betrayed by a Varlet to the
Turk, on condition that he should have the Turks daughter to wife, with a
great portion. Lastly, Deventer was betrayed into the hand of the Spanyard, by
Sir William Stanley, the stain of his Nation, though treason be the common
badge of his black profession.

But if you will have inslances of fidelity; let me give you one of note for
all the rest. William Seton, Captain of Barwick, having maintained the Town,
against Edward the first, for ^he space of three months; and besides the hot
assaults made continually at all quarters, he was driven to great want; the
Town being blockt up, and not able to hold out any longer, he conditioneth with
the King, that if supply should not come within a month, he would deliver up
the Town to the King; and for further assurance of performance, gives his
eldest son, Thomas Seton, in pledge. Not long after, the Scots raised their
forces, under the conduct of Archbald Douglasse; they present themselves before
the English forces, which the King perceiving (though the time of the condition
was not yet expired) he sends to the Captain, willing him either to deliver
up the Town, or he would hang both his sons before his eyes (for the one was
taken, and the other was a pledge.) In the distracted soul of the worthy
father of so hopeful sons, love, mercy, honor and fidelity, could not
choose but make a great conflict. But to be short, his rarest wife, the mother
of the children, proved here an helper above her sex. She laid the honor of
his house, the duty to his Country, and loyal fidelity to his Prince, in
balance against his private affection; she showed him that they might have
more children, but honor and fidelity once lost, he could never recover; and
she had often heard from the learned, That to sacrifice their children in the
service of their Country, was their highest praise. The Captain admiring the
spirit of the woman, was persuaded with her words, and removing himself to
another part, that he might not behold so doleful a spectacle, was contented
rather to part with the sonns of his love, then with his fidelity in his
service.

But because places of note in the time of oppugnation, The punishment of
traitors
be often not only pestered with Traitors, but also betrayed by them; it shall
be the States care, to look narrowly to such, and to give them their desert if
they be found out. These be the special underminers, and nothing can be safe
so long as they are within. If the name of a Traitor be odious, what should be
the penalty of a Traitor? Each nation has labored to exceed other in the
rigor of punishing Traitors. The Fgiptians pricked them through all their
members to death. The Grecians threw them headlong over Rocks; the Macedonians
stoned them; the Romans drew them in pieces. Quae nex tanta tanto sceleri
inveniri potuit?
In a word, to so heinous a crime what death can be sufficiently devised? Yea,
as they have been hateful to those whose ends they have served, as to Caesar,
Phillip of Macedon, and others; so from some they have received a shameful
death in stead of a reward. Instance these Villains that betrayed the Castle
of Buda, with their Captain: notwithstanding of Solymans promise of safe
departure; when he understood how villanously they had used their Captain, he
caused to put every man of them to death. The other that betrayed the Rhodes
was as finely served: for his promised wife and portion were presented; but the
Turk told him, that he would not have a Christian to be his son-in-law; but he
must be a Musil-man, that is, a believing Turk, both within and without; and
therefore he caused his baptized skin (as he called it) to be taken off, and
him to be cast in a bed strewed with salt, that he might get a new skin, and so
he should be his son-in-law: but the wicked wretch ended his life with shame
and torment.

Not to trouble you with more examples, Two sorts of men to be taken heed of.
take heed of two sorts especially; namely, of Traitors to their God, or
Idolaters. The Town, or people, professing the truth of Gods worship, can look
for no safety where they are in trust with the place. Constantines position (as
I showed you) of his apostate Courtiers is very true: They that are not
faithful to God, how should they be faithful to men? A second sort is, such
as have been tainted with treacherous dealing; they that are inured to their
tricks of Legerdemain, and are once fallen a peddling with the enemies of
State, they can never leav chopping. A traitor will never be true till he get a
new skin, with the Turks son-in-law. When Lycimachus K. of Macedo, besieged
Ephesus, he used the help of Mandro, a very wicked perfidious fellow, and an
arch-pyrat: he was quickly corrupted by Lycimachus. And as he used to bring in
ships laden with men, and goods to Ephesus for a prey; so one time he brought
in the strongest of the Macedonians with their hands bound, as though they had
been captives: who fitting themselves of Arms out of the Castle, brought in
Lycimachus, who possessed the Town. When the Ephori commanded Agis to take the
young men with him, and to go with one there present, Plut. in Lacon.
who had promised to deliver them up a Castle: How shall I ( Lords, says he)
trust him with these young men, who has betrayed his own country? giving
thereby to understand, that nothing can be safely committe^ to them that will
betray their country.

It is to be feared, Application.
that we have too few Setons, and too many Stanleyes: the treasure cannot be
safe when the thief is in the house. Besides (the dissembling Giliadits, who
may pass the watch without inquiry for the word) there be the crafty
Balamits, there is the double hearted Semiiah, either to curse or to cog it
over for the enemies ends. When Tobiah and Samballat, will seem to build, Nec
familiaritate nec intinctione buccellae, etc. Hier. Epist. ad ruse:
take heed of Gods house. One observes well of I^das his treason, that no bond
could tie up his wicked hea^^ from that monstrous act, neither the common
graces which he had, nor his familiarity with Christ, nor the giving of the
sop, nor the knowing of him to be the son of God: when men are sold to work
wickedness, they will sell their country, and that for ^^gaine. I read of
Clearchus the Tyrant of Heraclea, that taking an^ indignation against his own
people, could find neither cause nor occasion to plague them; at last he
calls out all the special youth, in the very heat of the caniculer days, to
besiege a town in Thracia; he incamps them in a marrish ground, and commands
them there to stay, taking the higher ground himself with his mercenaries,
where there was plenty o^ fresh springs, he caused them stay so long, that
through extreme heat, Polien.
and corrupt water, they lost all their lives, which was the thing he desired.
Was not this to betray the lives of his people, and that without any hope of
gain?

The more eminent the person, the more odious the treason. All circumstances
considered, could there be a more odious treason then that of Barnevelts, who
was advanced by the State to what honor, wealth, and esteem, that the common
wealth could afford him; of whom at any time could a State deserve better?
Should a pillar of the State subvert the State? his Excellency gave him no
just matter of envy: for though he sat at the stern; yet many a wave went
over hi^ head, that never touched Barnevelt. What, would nothing serve but
Spain must have all? What wanted he that Spain could have given him? nothing
but a traitors reward, and that he had in the end. I would all of his cut, were
as openly known, and as closely followed: but God will unmaske them to their
eternal shame. It shall fall out with all grand traitors, as it fell out with
the Duke of Venice, namely, Falarius, who (beside the condign punishment, that
he suffered, for conspiring against his country) lies under an hierogliphe, of
infamous memory to this day: for where as the statues of all the Dukes, from
the beginning of the State to this day, are erected in the Senate house;
instead of the statue of Martin Falarius, that pernicious Prince, there is se^
an empty chary of State, covered with a black veil, intimating thereby, that
traitorous Princes to the state deserve the obliteration of their names, with a
monument of perpetual hatred. As there is no punishment greater then public
hatred; so ^here is no sin better deserves it, then the betraying of the
country. Had the danger of these bin well pondered, the nests of such well
searched, and all that were found foul in the gunpowder Treason duly
punished, the lowing of the oxe^, and the bleating of the Sheep had not this
day been so loud in our ears. As Sertorius in Spain dispersed his forces for
his greater advantage, (which being recollected did more annoy their enemies;)
so since that time their dispersed forces are hugely increased. Our slighting
over of that unparelelled attempt, what will it not encourage traitors to do:
our lopping of some superfluous branches makes the tree more fruitful: the
casting a little water upon a hot fire, makes it burn so much the hotter. The
not casting out of those whom God would have cast out, may cause them do to us
as we should have done to them.

I come to the last, which is Constancy in holding out. Constancy in holding
out.
As he is a pusillanimions assaylant that rayseth siege upon the first repulse;
so he is a faint defendant that gives over at the first assault. The enemies
semblance or resolution of continuance should not daunt a whit or discourage
the besieged? How bravely did Constantinople hold out against the Saracen?
where, besides those that were slain there dyed with famine and cold 300000,
and so they desisted. Likewise hot and furious were the assaults that Soliman
made upon the same city in Anno 1529. His army consisted of 144000: but
Frederick, count Elector, General of the Imperial forces, did man the Town
exceedingly well, three days before the Turks approaching. Philip, Count
Palatine showed himself a brave soldier in that siege, by whose means, under
Gods favor, the Town was safely defended, the Turkish tyrant with shame and
loose repulsed and set a packing. He lost as it is reported 80000, besides
those that perished by famine and cold in the way. Harlem maintained their
siege for 10 months to the very last pinch. Ostend held out against all the
Spanish force, and Italian cunning, for three years and three months, and
gave it over at last on honorable terms.

There be many reasons to bind the defendants to all possible preseverance.
Reasons.
First, there is nothing more dishonorable, then to quit a place in all
appearance defensible: for he that is not a man in a Hold, will never be a man
in the field. Secondly, while men put on noble resolution, and quit themselves
like men the Lord in straits does send them admirable deliverances. In that
lamentable misery of the siege of Samaria, beset by Benhadad King of Siria,
you may see how they bought and eat asses flesh, and doves dung; yea their
childrens flesh, and yet holding out against hope, and above hope, the Lord was
seen in the mount, the Lord made the host of Syria to hear a noise of
chariots and horses, 2. Kings chap. ^. v 7.
and of a great host, saying one to another, the King of Israel has hired the
neighbor Kings to come against us; wherefore they fled in the twilight, and
left their tents, and their horses, and all the camp, as it was, furnished
with all plenty: So that Israel was not only delivered, but also had their
wants supplied. When Duke de Alva with all his forces, after the taking of
Harlem had engaged Leyden, that they could neither sallie, nor receive supply,
he battered their bulwark with 18 piece of ordinance, making a sufficient
breach as he thought, insomuch that they were in a desperate case: but when he
came to the entry, he found such brave entertainment, that in three assaults he
lost many of his best Captains, and no fewer then 1600 of his bravest
soldiers: but being never a whit daunted, but rather enraged with this
encounter, the next day the Lord rayned from heaven, so that the raising of the
waters caused them to raise their siege, where they left some of their battery.
The like may be said of Mountaban, where Duke de Maine had advanced his
battery, made fit all necessaries for the very last assault; insomuch that he
doubted not (as himself said) but within two or three days he should take the
Town: but one day after dinner walking along to view his works, one that was
come thither out of S. John de Angelot observed him a far off, who with a piece
of a longer sise then ordinary, did level at him, and struck him starck dead;
after which the siege was raised.

Thirdly, some by the brave entertainment of assaults do quit themselves of
their enemy. Fourthly, by holding out they attain to honorable conditions,
which the enemy would never afford them, but that he fears their valor will
answer their resolution. Fifthly, and lastly, a resolute continuance saves
both life and honor, where, an untimely surender might loose both, by laying
them down in the hand of a merciles and faithless enemy. The best of the
defendants at the siege of Leyden, did ingenuously confess, that through the
fear of the people, and also of the Soldiers, they had quitted the Town, if
it had not ben blocked up; in doing whereof, they had lost their honor, and it
may be their lives; yea which was more, they might have lost the country: but
being bound to see it, by continued valor they overcame, saving their lives,
honor, and the place; yea they so daunted the courage of the Duke de Alva, and
so defaced his credit as all his former encounters had never done the like:
after this he never attempted any thing worthy of note. To conclude this point,
let them take heed in this continuance of the enemies dalliance; yea (to give
them a caveat) to beware whose word they take, or whom they trust. I will say
no more but remember Wesell. The lawful usage of the surrendered, whether on
composition or at mercy.


There is one point more concerning the oppugnation and expugnation of houlds
to be treated of, namely, the just and lawful usage of the surrendered or
taken: for the defenda^ts, sometimes render upon composition, sometimes they
are taken in the very assault: In the former, fidelity is to be kept; and in
the latter, cruelty to be avoided. The word of a soldier, is the worth of a
Soldier. As public faith inviolable by the laws of nations, in all places
should have place; so especially in keeping conditions with the surrendered,
whose lives as they are be-trusted into the enemies hands upon articles; so it
is a kind of sacrilege to break any one of them. What honor from man, or
blessing from God can that soldier expect, who has torn his colors and
flung away his shield? To dye, lapt in the colors, or with the shield in the
hand, is counted a matter of the greatest honor. The Grecian laws set a
mulct for him that lost his shield, but none for him that lost his sword,
signifying thereby, that their care should be greater for their own defense,
Au. Clypeus salvus Amian. lib. 25.
then to offend others. This was all the care of dying Epaminondas, is my
shield safe (said he.) It was the only command that the Grecian women gave
their children going to war; either to dye upon their shield, or to bring
back their shield with them. This fidelity is the shield and colors of a
soldier, (...).
which when he has lost, he has no more to keep. By this allusion Henry the
4, was nipt in the quick by one of our own Poets, he lost (says he) his
shield. The execution of the two sons of William Seton (formerly mentioned)
contrary to covenant, and the law of nations, was a foul stain to Edward the
first, and much regrated of his own. All the excellents parts, and
magnanimious actions of Charles, Lib. 8. de rebus gest. Gall.
Duke of Borbon, were eaten out with this one Canker-worm: the Inscription of
his Tomb, mentioned by Ferronus, declares his valor. Aucto imperio, devicto
Gallo, pontifice obsesso, Roma capta, Caroli Borboni hoc marmor cineres
continet; that is, The Empire increased, Italy overthrown, France overcome, the
Pope besieged, Rome taken; this Tomb contains the ashes of Charles of
Borbone: But his fidefragie vayleth all these with black; for, as Histories
tell us, he oppressing Millain, much pressed it at last with the payment of
30000 Crowns for to pay his soldiers. And though he had sundry times broken
with them, yet he got them to believe him upon his oath, and imprecation, that
if they would let him have it, if ever he troubled them again, he wished, that
a bullet might strike the head from him. On this hope to be rid of him (though
they could hardly do it) yet they made him up the money; but they were never a
whit the better: for once having the money, without faith of promise, Guiceiard.
Hist. Italic. lib. 7.
or fear of expressed imprecation, he let loose his spoiling soldiers to all
their wonted outrages. This was an hereditary fault in Hanibal, for it was his
National sin: Hence the proverb, punica vel Carthaginea fides, etc. But now
the Papists have taken the badg from them. For in both these two, infidelity
and cruelty, they exceed the African, Turk, Grecian, or Thracian; if any go
beyond him, let him have Pluto his chair. Nunquane ista natio coluit fide^.
(...).
It may verily be said of that brood, as Tully said of Afric; That that
Nation was never to be trusted, for it never respects faith. When all things
are at the best with them, as they suppose; yet there is one thing wanting with
them, as Lewis the 11, said of France; namely, truth or fidelity.

And in this one thing they exceed all other, that they do not only practice,
but preach perfidie. After the burning of John Hus, contrary to the Emperors
safe conduct, they made an act in the Council of Constance, That no faith
should be kept with Heretics. Julius the second goes one point further, and
tells us, the Church is not bound to keep oaths. And as their position is
(which I shall have occasion further to handle) such is their practice, in
their Capitulations which is the present point in hand. How was the
capitulation of Sancere performed by the French Papists? D. de Alva his faith
to Harlem, Narden, and Zutphen, was washed out with blood. And here I renew the
challenge to all the Romish calumniators, to tell me if they can, what
Protestants, at any time, contrary to their faith given, has put any,
surrendered upon terms, to the sword. The Devil I know has been about to
make where he wants. (...)
Instance an imposture of the French Papists, who to cover their more then
Turkish infidelity, and bloody cruelty, like the Fox that lost her tail, did
labor to bring the Protestants under the same aspersion. Popilintere a French
Historian records (but falsely) how a Popish town in France, being besieged by
the Protestants, was surrendered upon composition of life and liberty to the
besieged; which composition (says he) was not kept by the Protestants: But
according to the truth indeed, it was rendered at their discretion. Oubigne
Historian to Henry the 4, of France, meeting with Popiliniere, the penner of
the said calumny, charged upon him the wronging of the Protestants with his
pen, contrary to his knowledge: Popiliniere, with tears in his eyes, confessed
that his pen had been hired to it, to the end that the Protestants might be
charged with falsifying their faith, O^bign. Histor. Fr.
in one particular of that kind, as well as the Papists.

Miniers that bloody Tyrant, having taken by treachery the Town of Cabriers,
entered the Church whether the people were fled for succor, and caused man,
woman, and child to be cruelly slain. So the Duke of Guise at Va^iacum, caused
his soldiers to enter the Church, and put all to the sword. No murder so
monstrous, nor no act so unnatural, which against the firmest oath, or
strictest bond in nature, they will not commit. Amongst a million of instances,
none more remarkable, then that horrible act of Gaveret the Frenchman (if he
might be called a man, and not rather a monster:) He being given to all manner
of vice was cashierd by his father; yet found entertainment by a Gentleman of
great nore, in whose house he swore himself brother to a young Gentleman; but
coming to his patrimony he turned Papist, of whose fidelity the Papists could
hardly be assured: He to put them out of doubt, undertook the killing of Henry
the 4, then King of Navarre; and to that end he boughtan excellent horse: But a
little from Bordeaux he was discovered to the King; where the King ^ryed his
horse, discharged his pistols that hung at his saddle, and so dismissed him.
Having failed of this, he plotteth ^he death of his dearest friends the
Protestants, whom he ^nvited to his house; namely, the Gentleman his father,
Monsieur Seamats; his sworn brother, and six other Gentlemen of good note. All
the dinner time he entertained them with protestation of obligements to his
said father: but this was the bloody Catastrophe. Sixteen men came up in Arms,
and laid hold on all the guests; himself lays hold on his father; and
willing the rest to stay their hands, till he had dispatched him; he stabbed
the old Gentleman (crying for mercy to the Lord) four times to the heart.
After that he ^unniades all the rest with his own hands, save three that were
dispatched at their first entrance. The young Gentleman, his brother, he
reserved to further torment, whom he ^rought to a window, and caused him to
sing (as he could very sweetly, though then; no doubt, he did it with a very
^eavy heart) toward the end of the ditty; that bloody Traitor cried out with
many blasphemies; that there was ^ut one Gaveret that could end that Tragedy:
and with that tabbed his brother, first in the throat, and then to the heart;
and so flung the dead body of him, and all the rest, out of the window into the
ditch. The act being discovered, it was known, that he had promised to his
Confessor, to manife^^ himself an undoubted Catholic, Oubign.
by setting a sure seal t^ his profession. Judge you if the devil himself
would not b^ of this profession, that has such a Seal.

As for their monstrous outrages and cruelty, the blo^ of the slain in the
Massacre of Paris, proclaims it, when they neither spared age, sex, nor
quality, as Natalis Comes tells us: Hist. lib. 23
where were murdered 60000 persons, or upward.

To this add the loud cry of the late and fresh bleeding State of Bohemia, and
the Palatinate, wherein the Spanyard and Austrian have renewed an Indian
cruelty; no year nor sex, have they had any pity of. View but that immane and
monstrous murder, of an ancient Minister, and man of God, Mounsieur Mileus, by
the Spanyard in the taking o^ Heidelberg (notwithstanding that such should be
safe by the very laws and practice of the Heathens;) yet they took him having
abused his daughter, and tied a small cord about hi^ head, which with
trunchions they wreathed about till the squeased out his brains.

To think on their cruelty, me thinks, should make o^ heart to bleed: But
when God makes inquisition for blood, woe to that soul of whom God shall
require any of it.

As the coming of these Dragons from Babylon in red and their bloody
executions, bewrays them to be of the blood of the Whore (for she is the
mother, and Romulus the father) so it shows the nature of the Religion, or
rather Arch-Heresie, which they do profess. A bloody disposition i^ the very
badge of heresy, as Hierom tells us; for Heretici quos non possunt verbo,
eos putant glabio feriendos cruentas leges ore dictant manu scribunt. In Great.
Auxen. de non trad. Basil. Tom. 3.
Heretith when they cannot overcome with the Word, they smite with the sword;
they indite with their mouths, and write with the^ hands bloody laws. Hence it
appears, that Vnde apparet ubi scaevitia, ibi sophistica, and haereticos in
Ecclesia semper fuisse crudeles.
Heretics ev^^ have been cruel; because cruelty and falsehood of Religion
goue^ always together, where the one is, there the other is. But i^ this they
are worse then heathen Rome, fides hosti data servanda. Off. lib. 1.
who by the very light of nature and by the law of nations, both protested, and
professed against this breaking covenant with the enemy. Assurance made to the
enemy (says Tully) is at any hand to be kept. Joshua kept with the Gibeonits.

If men will not be moved with all these, let them observe the judgment of God
on such as have broken in this kind. A remarkable example of this in Saul's
posterity, who were hanged up for breaking of the covenant made by Joshua with
the Gibeonits, although it is said he slew them of zeal: 2. Sam. 21.1.
Was not Edward the first, served in his own son Edward the second, as he
served William Seton in his sons? For by Mortimer his own subject, against
all loyalty, his life was taken from him. And what became of Charles of Borbon
in the taking of Rome, while too too adventurously he scaled the wall, according
to his imprecation, he was shot quite through, and so for breaking with
Millaine he made his end.

CHAP. XXXII. The Exercising of Forces in the Field.
NOw I come from oppugnation and defense of places, to speak of exercising
forces in the field, the ordering and joining of battle, the lawful use of
victory; and the behavior required in the conqueror and conquered. As the
nearer things come to their Center, they move the faster; and the nigher the
Sun approaches the Zenith, it is the hotter: so this, the last part of my
subject, being the chiefest part, and highest point of all the warlike motions,
it requires the special workmanship, and that of such a workman as is highly
guifted with wit and experience. Haniball could not but laugh at a stoicke,
disputing by arguments, that only a wise man should be a commander, not
knowing that use, and experience must concur to the making of a military
man: Stobeus Sermon. 52.
so if my affection to the business, should not gain excuse; in place of
approbation, I should move laughing, and insteede of a plaudite, I should gain
an apage: but having experience that men of Arms, are generous, eue^ in
affecting them that love Arms; I proceed to touch, though not to sound, the
depth of those things. And if my skill were to my affection, yet could I not
direct in every particular: because necessity offers many inconveniences in
war, which the wisest and expertest Commander cannot avoid: for the which
notwithstanding there is a good general rule, to correct that by art and
counsel which of its own nature is adverse. The hearts of soldiers should
be knit together by the bond of love. Lib. 2. cap. 21. Caritas inter milites
comilitio augesst.


To this rule, for the better directing of all the particular passages, let me
add or perfix the counsel of Vegetius; that the hearts of soldiers should be
knit together by the bond of love; yea, they should be compacted and united
together, not only in order, but also in affection: so they all should be but
one body or one soul in diverse bodies: where an Army thriveth; a^ Tryphonius
the lawyer observes, not only knowledge and familiarity, but also love
increases in the fellowship of war.

The Army being thus bound together, as head and body, in their several places
and functions, ready to serve one another, Two Special things
there be two things which the leader especially must set before his eyes;
namely, laying hold of present occasion and celeritie of dispatch: The former
as I showed is the soul of the action, and the latter is the quick passage of
the animal spirits, Lay hold on occasion.
effecting the functions of the soul. Life once lost cannot be recovered:
occasion once past cannot be recalled. Lucius Portius Cato, speaking of
Catelin, takes this (as he shows) for a rule approved on by all, that in all
our affairs, opportunite is to be served, and nothing more to be avoided the^
neglect of occasion. Stobeus Sermon. 52.
Agesilaus being demanded what were the rarest ornaments of a commander; summed
them in these three particulars, Valor, Counsel, and laying hold on occasion.
That proverb of Vespatians courtiers taking their best opportunity to
petition him, is an excellent motto for a commander, know thy time. (...).
Avidius rapiendum, quod cito praetervolat.
A man in this sense must be a time-server as, one injoyneth us, serve time. A
man, as Erasmus says, must snatch at that which flees away. Scipio the great
Cunctator, did call it the part of a sluggard to pretermit occasion. The
neglect of this lost Pompey his greatness. First, not to dispute whether he
did well or no in quitting Rome, at Cesars approaching; I am sure he lost his
way, when he went to Greece, to cast himself upon inexpert and weak forces,
degenerate from the use of Arms. Had he rather gone into Spain, of whose
warlike and strenuous soldiers of proof, (when with Q Metellus he warred
against Sertorius) he had experience; without question, he had made his part
good against Caesar: for which I have this ground, that Caesar in his last fight
in Spain with Pompey the elder, was put to such a desperate pinch, that he was
in parle of offering violence to himself. What would he have done if Pompey
himself had been there, especially in the beginning, when Caesar was neither of
any great power, nor authority in the place? This error of Pompey made way
for many others: for his camp in Greece began to grow effeminate; lazy, full
of riot, and neglect of all good occasions; and that out of the abundance of
good things euilly abused; insomuch that it was liker the camp of Darius, or
Sardanapalus, then of the ancient Romans, such as Camillus, Fabritius, etc.
But the neglect following is most palpably of all without excuse; neither
think I, if Pompey were alive, that he would deny it, namely, in the battle of
Dyrrachium, wherein he overthrew and routed Caesar; but he neglected to follow
the victory, which when Caesar, perceived he said of Pompey, Negavil eum scire
vincere. Semper nocuit de far paratis.
that he knew not how to overcome. You may see then in this instance and others
of the like nature, the saying of Lucanus made good.

Neglect of time does ever hurt the cause. As occasion thus does animate the
business; Vs^ celerity.
so celerity in performance is the energetical power of life in military
performances. In rebus bellicis celeritas amplius solet prodesse qua^ virtus
Qucknesse (as Vegetius says) is often mo^^ helpful then valor it self.
That golden saying of Caesar, should in capital letters, always be in the
eyes of great Commanders, That whatsoever he had effected, celerity h^^ done it.

Another thing to be thought on in the leading of Forces, How to quit
themselves in a strayt.
is how to quit themselves, when they are brought into a strayt, and so
environed with the enemy, that there is no way to pass without hazard; then
and there is the special use of some cunning stratagem. Examples of such we
have many of good note in Frontine; and none more witty then that of Hanibal
against Fabius, A witty Stratagem
although none more common: Where Hanibal was brought to such a strayt that he
could quit himself no way, but through the narrow passages that Fabius kept:
Lib. 1. c. 5.
He tied bundles of combustible matter between the Horns of Oxen; and set them
on fire. The Romans sent out by Fabius, could not tell at first what (...) make
of it; for they thought it had been some prodigiou^ thing: but conceiving what
it was, they told the General* who fearing it to be some slight, to draw them
out, kep^ close in their Camp; so that Hanibal, with all his Forces, past
without opposition. This was indeed a witty one, but yet a costly one: for the
pattern, out of which he had it, co^^ his father Amilcar his life. The Dukes of
Spain, against whom he warred, yoked up Oxen in Waines, laden with wood, which
the Army drove before them, as they came toward the enemy: who counted it a
foolish toy, but eve^ in the joining battle, they fired the wood, and drove the
Oxen and Waines so fired upon the enemy, whose force^ were broken, and Army
quite disordered: so that the Spanish, Appian Alexandrin. de Bello Hispan.
following the advantage, slew Amilcar, and many o^ his Army. Out of this
Stratagem, no doubt, did Haniba^ pick the other.

The next thing following, advantageous to fight, The taking and keeping of a
fit place.
is the opportunity of place, which as they are to take, so they are to take
heed they loose it not by circumvention, as some have done to their own
undoing. Praeter virtutem locus quoque adjuvat. Vt arma librata ponderibus
figantur lib. 7. Qui adversus nitatur clivo, duplex subit and cum host, and
cum loco certamen. lib. 3. c. 13. Pugnandu^ saepe non quia tu velis, sed quia
hosts iube^t.
Besides strength and valor (says Livi) the place helps much; He gives a
reason, that Arms being used with advantage from above, may fix their blows
with their own weight. Vegetius has the same position, whereof he gives this
reason; He that goes against the height has a double enemy to deal with;
namely, both the adversary and the ground. This advantage was well looked to by
Marcus Curious against Pirrhus, and by Pompey against Mithridates; Lucullus
against Tigranes; Caesar against Pharnaces; and Hanibal against Marcellus; all
these, by advantage of place defeated their enemies. But as I said of
Encamping; so I say of the place for fight: It is not always in the Commanders
power to make choice; for sometimes in March they are charged by the enemy, and
then being forced to fight, not because they would, but because it pleases the
adversary: they must take the place as it falls out: but if the place be
incommodious, they must labor by all means to gain a better, detracting fight
all that they can, till they obtain it. Publius Decius, Tribune of the
soldiers, obtained leave of the Con^sul Cornelius, being to figh with the
Samnites, that with some few forces he might adventure the taking of an Hill
that was nigh hand by; which he did indeed, to their own gain, and the enemies
loss. The sole disadvantage of the place lost the Earl of Anguise the field
against Edward the first.

The second branch of this point, The keeping of a fit place.
concerns the keeping of a fit place already taken. The wise enemy perceiving
the odds of the place, will detract fight by all means and labor to shift his
adversary from his place, and then give him battle. All the cunning in this
kind that I have read, affoordeth not a fitter instance then that of Hanibal
against Fulvius, the Roman General; who being seated for fight very
commodiously, was more negligent in watching, and rash in skirmishing then he
should have been. Hanibal perceiving his humor in the very dark of the
dawning, presents a Perdiu to the Watch, who giving an alarm, Fulvius with
his forces breaks out, whereupon Hanibal, by the most of his forces laid in
ambush, interceps the place, charge them on their backs, and slew 8000 of the
bravest soldiers that Rome affoorded. Not unlike to this, was that Stratagem
of the English against the Scottish, at the Field of Floudon: King James was
counseled by his Nobles, to seat himself beyond the river of Til; where, by
the opportunity of the banks, and of the river unpassable (but at one bridge)
they might save themselves, and have the enemy at their mercy: for planting
their Ordinance toward the bridge, they might let some of the English forces
pass, as though they neglected the bridge, and thereafter cut the bridge with
the Ordinance, when they would, and so divide their enemies forces, which they
might easily foil without danger to themselves: but this counsel could not
find place with a man hastening to destruction: yet counsel, or common sense,
so far prevailed with him, as to fortify himself in the next fittest place
namely, on a hill, at the foot of a great hill, called Zevist; the place was no
where pervious, but by a strayt and narrow passage, which they did fortify on
either side with their Munition; and they stood no less then need of this
advantage, for they were far fewer in number then the English; who
understanding by their Spies, that there was no coming at them in that place,
without eminent danger, they remove their Camp, making show as though they went
toward Barwick, or otherwise into Scotland, to quit the damage they had
sustained; which the King fearing especially, quits the place, sets fire in the
shiels, and such things as they could not carry: the smoke deprived them of the
sight of the English, who fet a compass about and crossed Till, with all their
Ordinance, coming on the backs of the Scots, whom they found in an equal
plain called Floudon: Thus the Scots drawn out of their strength, having their
Ordinance to transplace, at the very encounter with two Battalions, either of
them consisting of as many as all their Forces, they were forced to fight at
all disadvantages; where in a hot and bloody fight (as most has been heard
of,) they held it out till night overtook them. Great was the loss on both
sides, and for number equal: but the Scottish loss exceeded in quality of
person; for they lost as Royal a King, and illustrious Nobilty as any Europe
could afford: and all, as you see, upon neglect of good counsel, and want of
taking heed.

Neither would I have any so to presume of opportunity of place, as without
valor and vigilance it could secure them: for the enemy may adventure beyond
all reason and expectation, and so surprise them in the same whereon they do
presume. Pharnaces charged Caesar so hotly and unexpectedly against the steep
of a Hill; that had not their inexpugnable valor quit them, they had lost both
the place and themselves. Thus being placed, they are to inure their rawest
soldiers under some good Leaders to light skirmishes; as the Romans inured
their Gally-men first to use their oars by rowing on the sands. Further, in
keeping place for the annoyance of the enemy, men must take heed of false fears
suggested by the enemy. So was Fabius hood-wincked by Hanibal. Ne terror and
error transferant.
It is good for a General to have a Lions eye for his Symboll, with this
inscription; Let not fear nor error transport you.

CHAP. XXXIII. The ordering of the Battle.
NOW it follows, that I come to a point of no small importance; namely, the
ordering of the battle, in the undertaking whereof it may be justly said to
me, as Pirrhus said to one that would undertake to teach him the Art of
imbattling; I stand not need (says he) of a Commander whose ears did never
tingle at the sound of a Trnmpet: Therefore let me apology my weakness once
more, with the like speech that the people should use to Archippus; Take heed
to thy Ministry: Col. 4.17.
so may I safely say to Commanders; Take heed to the ordering of your battles.

The very word imports the necessity of order; it is called Acies (says
Isidor) from the defensive Arms of proof, Quod ferro and acumine glads orum
armata sit.
and from the sharpness of the sword. When swords are sharped, and the sight
of the eye is cleared, then they are fitted for cutting and sight: so when men
are set in battle array they are indeed called Acies: A battle consists of
men and order, as of matter and form. Plutarch. in Marcello.
and as man consists of matte and form; so a battle consists of men and
order. The weal and wisely disposing of a battle, (says Vegetius) helps
much to the victory. Gaius Flaminius being to fight against the French, was
called off, both by the Senates letters, and by some prodigious tokens; he
opened not the letters, but charged the enemy, where he slew 8000, and took
17000. This great victory of Flaminius was got, Lib. 2.
as Polybiu observes by the due ordering of his Forces. This was the main help
to Alexanders victories, as witnesses Q. Curtius in his fourth book. When the
Romans had equalled the Carthaginians with a Captain; insomuch that it was hard
to tell, whether was the better: where then lay the odds? Not in number, Non
fortunae ut solent ii (qui foelices sine ratione duces vocant) sed ducum
industriae and acei instruendae periciae tribuitur victoria lib. 17.
nor in feigned fortune, nor in such a General, as men call foolishly fortunate
without reason: but it was especially (as Polybius well observes) to be
attributed to the ordering of the battle: for the Roman Acies (as the Author
insisteth in commending of it) far excelled that Phalangical form which
Hanibal used, and that for sundry reasons. For in it there is an easier motion,
a quicker turning, and fitter distance: This form will fit any place or time,
where the Phalanx will fit but place and time appropriated.

As Caesar could not endure the least error in battle array; so Alexander by
no means could be moved to break it. In his last battle with Darius, at
Arbela, many Companies of the Persians brake in, and drove away the Macedonians
goods, Parmeno thinking much of that, desired Alexander to fall upon them. At
no hand, answered Alexander, will I dissolv my battle, with which I must
encounter the enemies forces, and not go rescue beasts. Front. lib. 2 cap. 3.
For if we be overcome we shall need none of these; but if we overcome, both
ours and theirs shall be our own. A few forces so well ordered, with some
advantage of place, has put a huge Army to their stand, and made them glad to
be gone. A notable instance of this we have in Chabrias the Athenian Captain,
who having embattled himself in the side of a narrow Hill, in exceeding good
order; Agiselaus, that great soldier, charge him with 18000 foot, and 1500
horse; where he was but 5000 foot, and 200 horse; but in contempt, as it were,
of him and all his forces, he causes his soldiers to attend him, with their
pikes ordered, and their Targets sunck to their knees. Agiselaus wondering at
their excellent order, Fulgos l. 7. cap. 3. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 15.
and constant resolution, that they would not stir one foot, like a wise man,
gave them over.

Now for the several forms of battle array, it is neither pertinent, nor
possible, for me to discover them. The Grecian Phalanx, and the Roman Acies, or
the mixture of both is the most common; the frame of the first, you may gather
from Vegetius; the description of the second, word for word you have in
Polybius.

In this point of imbatteling, The matter in ordering of the battle to be
looked to.
there is not only a due form required, but also fit and convenient matter in
the due place: some do order the weakest forces in the front, and the
strongest in the wings; some do the contrary: no certain rule can be given in
this, but as occasion shall be given from the enemies order, so must they do.
The ordering of Xantippus his forces, was the only means of restoring Carthage
from her ruins: He placed his stronger forces in the wings, and his weaker in
the front. In the fight against Marcus Attilius Regulus, he charged the light
forces, that after they had shot their shafts, they should retire themselves
within the wings, drawing the enemies after them, and withal they should get
themselves without their own, and help to compass in the enemy.

As the powers are often placed, as occasion is given by the enemy; so
sometimes the enemy will deceive by a sudden transposition of his order.
Change of forces is of use.
Publius Cornelius Scipio, whose surname was Africanus, warring against
Asdruball in Spain, led out his Army some days before the fight, with the
strongest in the front, and weakest in the wings: but that day that he came to
join indeed, he led them in a contrary order, Front lib. 2 c. 3. Number. 10.
and so circumvened them. I will conclude this point of ordering with these
general rules to be observed, in every form of battle (though especially in a
four square battle with a long front,) namely, first, that there be no gulf,
nor emptiness (for so they term it) in front or wing, or any particular part
of a battle, In acie ordina ^d^ ne sit sinus aut curvatura.
because in it the order by the irruption of the enemy, is easily broken.

Another rule in battle ray, is this, that the Sun, dust, or wind be with
them, and adverse to their enemies. Where this advantage is got, it makes much
for the victory. This helped Hanibal, that subtle Commander, to the day, at
Cannas, to the almost undoing of the Romans, Livi. Florus Plut. Front. lib. 2.
cap. 6
as Historiographers relate. The great advantage of this, does herein manifest
it self, that the greatest Commanders have contended for it. It stood the
Romans instead (being taught by their own evil) against the Cymbrians; and
the General of the Cymbrians made use of it against Marius. The victory
always went with the advantage of this Stratagem.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The Joining of Battle.
NOw I come to the (...), or highest point of warlike exercise, namely, the
joining of battle, or fight it self, which determines in three or four
hours, that which has taken up a long times preparation, and a great deal of
deliperation; therefore this adventure is well and wisely to be considered;
Praeliorum delicta eme^dationem no^ patiuntur. Veget. lib. 1 cap. 14. Non licet
in bello bis delinquere apud Plutarch. Nulla est negligentiae venia ubi de
salute certatur. lib 3. cap. 5.
and the rather because failings in fight leaves ^o place for amends. That
Apothegme of Lamachus, to a Captain of a Company, is worth the remembrance.
The Captain being rebuked for an error in fight, told Lamachus the General,
that he would do so no more: to whom he answered prettily, that for a second
error there is no place in fight. Vegetius gives another reason, from the
preciousnes of ^ife that lies at the stake: There is no pardon (says he) for
an error in fight: because all the good of life, and life it self, is that
which is contended for. This as the same Author says, is the ^atall day,
wherein the fullness of victory does laureate the temples of the conquering
with a wreath of glory: but it lays ^he honor of the conquered in the dust:
And be he never ^o great, he is at the pleasure and service of his triumphing
^nemy. How wise and careful then should Generals be in committing fight: and
how courageous and resolute in the fight it self?

There be many remarkable cautions that should accompany the good advice of
fight. The disposition of the soldier.
First the very day of fight; the disposition, or indisposition of the soldier
to fight is much to be regarded, which may be gathered by their words,
countenance and carriage. A second thing to be looked to, is the avoiding of
temeritie: a little of this, like a Coloquinti^^ marreth all the rest. Fresh men
at Arms may out of their hot blood have a great mind to fight; because they
know not what it is to fight, nor what lies upon it. Aman that never sailed
thinks it a sport to be at sea: because he never fe^^ a storm. Pericles
being pressed by his soldiers to fight, and that with vile reproachful terms,
replied thus; that if he could repair loss, and recover life, he would as
gladly adventure as they: but you see (says he) Trees being cut the grow
again, but men once slain revive no more.

The disposition therefore of the soldier is not enough, except other things
concur. Avoiding of temeritie.
It is here as it is in Physic, e^sie to err, but the least error brings
great damage. An^ therefore it is a good axiom, Temeritas in bello ante omnia
vitands. Nihil in bello oportet contemni.
that nothing in fight is so much (...) be avoided as temeritie. The rashness of
Vladislaus that young King of Hungary, lost him his crown and his life. It is
a^ good precept, the least disadvantage in war is not to be contemned. Contempt
of the enemy, and confidence in forces, makes many reckon twice, and sit
down by the loss. Instance this in King John of France, who presuming of his
multitude, would admit no conditions from Edward the black Prince, but fight:
who with a few wearyed forces, driven to a strayt, gathered courage from
despair, and gane the French such a foil, both in their honor and forces,
that they blame themselves much in this, that they had no mo^^ wit. Agiselaus
that worthy Captain, was wiser, in not adventuring on Chabrias the Athenian
Captain against advantage of the ground, giving this reason, that courage,
opportunity of place and necessity are the wings of victory. A wise fear of
such is no cowardice, but rather a good temper of resolution. Aristotle calls
this discreet fear, (...).
the right hand of counsel. Incogitancie (says one) begets temeritie, but
consideration breeds a wise or cunctatorie fear. It is a pretty Adagie; the
mother of the fearful seldom cries. Augustus compares them well, that cast
themselves upon disadvantages and unnecessarie dangers, to those that angle
with golden hooks. Poliaen lib. 8
G. Julius Caesar dictator, who had no fewer then fifty times bin in fight with
the enemy, and in this, unparalleld by any of the Romans, learned this in the
end as his masterpiece, to be very wary with whom, how, and on what terms to
fight. In this particular, as in many other, we may worthily admire his
Excellency indeed the Prince of Orange, who by age, industry and experience,
has learned to play the Fabius, as well as the Marcellus; he has got much
honor to himself, Festinae lent.
and good and glory to the State, by the use of that Motto, that Augustus gave
to his Captains; make have deliberatly. There was never man more desirous of
fight, then that wise politic Emperor, Dion. Niceph. Xiphilin. in eius vita.
and great Commander Trajan; yet in this he did so temper himself, that he
would rather break his enemies with delay, then unadvisadly, or unnecessarily,
adventure his own.

Thirdly, Not to fight at the adversaries pleasure.
a considerate General must not fight at the pleasure of the enemy, but at
his own best opportunity: none will draw our their enemy to fight but upon
some assured advantage. That vexed Hanibal, that he had more a do to get
Fabius to fight then to overcome other Roman Generals in fight: and therefore
he said he feared Fabius more detracting fight, then he did Marcellus, though a
great warrior, in fight. To this point, that speech of Gaius Marius fitteth
very well: who being importuned by his adversary, Theutonus to fight, Front.
lib. 4 cap. 7.
answered him thus; if he were weary of his life, there were ways enough to
rid him of it.

Fourthly, Omit not opportumtie.
as he must avoid temeritie and not serve the enemies desire; so he must not
omit opportunity: by this I have formerly showed how great things have been
done, and how the greatest Commanders have attributed much to this.

No more I say of it; Application
but the neglect or loss of this, gives us all just cause to Iament: for had
battle been given to Spinola approaching the Palatinate, when opportunity was
affoorded, it may be the Sanctuary of the Lord had not been possessed by the
enemy: yea, by all likelihood, all the outrage committed might have been
prevented; all the blood saved, and all the country preserved; but where the
fault lay, there I leave it.

I come to the fifth thing very necessary in fight, The necessity of
exhortation.
that is, an exhortatory oration from the mouth of the General, that they quit
themselves like men. It is fit that the General have the faculty of
encouragement, as well as of commandment. C^sar was excellent at this; Et manu
and lingua promptus.
for he was a man both with tongue and hand amongst many. Of other instances,
none shows more cunning then this, that being to fight against Ariovistus,
and the Germans, the hearts of his soldiers, through the forces and
fierceness of the enemy, began to fail them; and amongst them all the tenth
legion especially, which Caesar, very cunningly fell to commend in his oration,
and told the rest, that he would use none but that legion: Which speech so
affected them, that being partly ashamed of their former fear, Fro^tin. li. 1.
cap. 11. numb. 3.
and partly ambitious to make good his seeming conceit; that no service seemed
too hard for them: and the rest being emulous of their commendation, Oration
saepe plus valet, quam pecunia. Comment.
did strive to deserve it as well as they. Thus by experience Caesar made good
the proof of his own position: That a good speech prevails sometimes more
then money.

The motives whereby Generals may persuade are these, The motives of an
exhortatory oration.
and the like; as first, from the goodness of the cause; for every one (at
least) pretends a good cause, as you may see in all the speeches of this
nature. From this Ioab did enforce valor upon his soldiers: 2 Samuel 10.12.
Be of good courage (says he) and let us play the men, for our people, and for
the Cities of our God. Of which one says very well, Non potui^ vox duce
dignior c^gitari. Pellic.
That though he was no good man; yet no speech could be worthier of a great
Captain. Secondly, they persuade from the valor of the enemy, and sometimes
from the weakness of the enemy: to overcome the former, it is exceeding great
glory; Pro aris and focis pugnatur.
and to have the other to fight with, assures victory. Thirdly, from the
preservation of them and theirs; for goods, liberty, wives and children; life,
honor, and religion it self lies upon it. When the Romans were to fight,
they brought all the prey, the sallary and richest substance that the soldiers
had, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. c. 2.
and laid it bound in fardells hard by the colors, that thereby they might be
whetted on to fight. The Persians bring their wives and preciousest things into
the field; and so does the Spanyard the richest things he has.

Fourthly, they move with hope of glory, and promise of reward. Fear and
punishment are the bonds of Camp Discipline; but the soldiers must be carried
on to the battle, on the wings of hope and reward.

Fifthly, it is no small motive to observe the impossibility to escape the
enemy (if they should fly) through the nature of the place wherein they
fight. Myronides the Athenian General, leading his soldiers against the
Thebans, brought them into a fair large field, where they were to fight; where
he caused them all to lay down their Arms, and view the place all round about.
You see my soldiers (said he) what a large field is here, and our enemies are
bravely mounted on swift horses; therefore if we flee there is no possibility
to escape; but if we stand to it, there is good hope of victory. Upon which
speech they pur on resolution to stand it out to a man, and did second the same
with such courage, Polyaen. l. 1.
that they carried the day, and had a great victory, which they followed to
Phocis and Locris.

The last motive, and that of no small force, is taken from the cruelty and
inhumane condition of the enemy with whom they are to fight. If men fight
against such as are worse then Bears and Lions, that are never satisfied with
blood; such as the brood of Gog and Magog, Turks and Papists, whose very
mercies are cruelties; Were it not better to die upon the sharp, with honor in
the field, then to be reserved for a while unto some cruel torment,
intolerable sorrow, and disgraceful reproach? Fpaminondas, General of the
Thebans, being to fight with the Lacedaemonians, that he might not only
strengthen his soldiers, but also sharpen their indignation against their
enemies, delivered in his Oration, that it was the determination of the
Lacedaemonians, if they overcame, to kill all the Males of the Thebans, man and
mothers son, and further to make slaves and captives of their wives and
daughters, and last of all to equal Thebes with the ground. This did so
inflame the Thebans against the Lacedaemonians, that at the very first shock
they overcame them.

Does not the belluin rage and cruelty, Application.
executed upon the Germans and Bohemians, by woeful experience tell us, what
merciless and inhumane enemies we contend with; namely, the bratts of the
bloody whore. The ripping up of women, the shameful abusing of them, not to be
named, the torturing of men with new devised torments; the bathing in the blood
of inoffensiue children; the cruel murdering of Gods Ministers, (who by the
laws of God and Nations, have always been sacred.) In aword, their
unparall^ld immanity, above Turks or Barbarians, would put life in a man to
fight to the last gasp, rather then to live and see, the least part of these
horrible indignities. To pass by the Spanyard outrage upon the Indian and
Hollander (whose resolution and valor, arises out of the Spanish cruelty and
perfidie) cast but your eye upon the Spanish provision for 88, and you may see
how like the base bramble Abimelech, they were determined to burn up the
inhabitants; and as the scourges of Gods wrath, to whip us to death with
tormenting scorpions; as if they would have made the torments of the English a
terror to all nations. But by you, my Lords and people of the United
Provinces, let this particular be observed in your encounter with the Spanyard.
I know the monuments of the more then Saracen cruelties remains with you; you
have pictures in your houses, and draughts drawn in the tables of your hearts:
Yet let this sharpen your resolution to fight it out to the death; that if ever
the black brood be masters, you shall have the blackest day that ever men had.
If Radamanthus and Minos were come out of hell to torment, they could not
exercise more cruelty then they would, upon you and yours; yea, as they would
make you a spectacle to all the world, so they would send you, bodies and
souls to hell, if they could. As Hanibal therefore was a sworn enemy to the
Romans in his childhood; so teach your youth, rather to die, then to live at
the mercy of the Spaniard: But, withal, fit your selves, and yours for death,
better then you do; and then let fire or water have the land, and all that you
have: yea, if I may so say, and make it good in dispute, let the devil have it
(as he had all Jobs substance) rather then the Spanyard have it, who is a
devil incarnate.

As the bloody disposition of so devilish an enemy, should put you on to fight
it out to the very last pinch; so should it likewise terrify you from any
terms of peace, which if once you intertain, you are caught in the trap. The
Spanyard is like the Irish, who under a perfidious peace does his adversary
more mischief then in open war. Your charge and pains in peace shall be never
a whit lesser (for I am sure you dare not trust them) your damage and danger
shall be greater. For who ever gained by peace with the Spanyard, England
excepted, who has of late gained repentance, I wish they be not too late in
bringing forth the fruits of it. But to speak of this, though I cannot speak
enough, I shall be further occasioned; only I will shut it up for the present,
with showing what I think of that distressed people of Bohemia and the
Palatinate, under the yoke of the enemy. If they had expected such barbarous
cruelties, they would all have dyed upon the point of the pike, or edge of the
sword, rather then to have trusted themselves in the hands of such men of
bloods. But to conclude this point, all and every one of these means has
often prevailed; in so much that Generals had need to be well versed in this
faculty, to which Vegetius does not unworthily attribute very much; If
exercised soldiers (says he) do fear to fight, the exhortatiue power of the
Generals oration, will rouse up their strength, and kindle their courage.

But here arises a doubt not unworthy the answering. A doubt.
What if the heart of the soldier be so sunck, De fuga maius qua^ de conflictu
eogitat. Veget. lib. 3 cap. 10.
and his courage so quailed, that words are but wind with him, his fear has
made him deaf, and he minds nothing but taking of himself to his heels?

I answer, as the Noble General in this case is in a great strayt; so some
have forced their soldiers to fight. For this we have many examples of note,
both in the most expert Grecian and Roman Generals, whereof I will observe but
two or three. Themistocles, and the Grecians having their Navy at Salamis,
they fearing the enemy, would needs fly with their ships, for all that
Themistocles could do or say to the contrary: he seeing this, sends Sicinus
his sonns Tutor to the King, and tells him (in show of good will) that the
Grecians were about to fly, therefore it should be his best, with his whole
Navy to come and charge them: To this the King did hearken willingly, and
brings all his sea forces into the narrow sea, where he cooped up the
Athenians ere they were aware, where they were forced to fight, Polyae^. l. 1.
yet with great advantage: and so nil they would they, by the dexterous policy
of a witty Captain, they had the victory. Where observe by the way, that to
fight at the enemies instigation or counsel, is no sure nor safe course.
Another instance in Fabius Maximus, arriving at the same place, Front. lib. 1
cap. 9. Polyaen. l. 5.
and being to fight with the enemy, sets all the ships on fire, that no
place of refuge should remain for flyers. The like did General Vere, at the
battle of Newport, in sending away the ships that attended them. Timarchus
Aetolus did the like. Clitarchus choosing rather to fight the enemy, then to be
blocked up in the City, draws out his forces; and lest they should recoyle
back again from the fight, he caused the gates to be shut, and the keys to be
laid up on the top of the walls, which he showed to the Soldiers; admonishing
them thereby that there was no refuge left, but for fight; who making a virtue
of necessity, fell resolutely upon the enemy, and carried away the victory. The
like of this did Charles Martil against Abdiramus the Saracen; knowing that the
valor of his soldiers would countervaile the multitude of the enemy, he
preventeth all refuge for flight, by setting of the Camp on fire, Aegnat. l. 2.
cap. 2.
and shutting of the gates of Turon, so that there was no way but even to fight
it out.

Yet for all these examples, in my simple opinion, this will not always be
safe, but only where there is fortitude and experience in the soldier; yet
overdaunted and quashed wi^h the fear of the enemy, being overmatched in
multitude, or some other odds: But where insufficiency concurreth with fear,
to force such to fight, were but to stop a ditch with Cowards, to flesh the
enemy, and to spoil a good Commander.

The sixth main thing to be observed for the joining of battle, is this; not to
be daunted with inequality of number, Encouragement against inequality of
number.
if necessity enforce the fight; (I say if necessity enforce it) for
otherwise to adventure upon great inequality, without some odds, to
countervaile the number, were not the part of a wise Commander: but if he be
put to it upon this odds, I may boldly use that speech to him, being such as he
should be, Iosu. 1.
that God often uses to his Generals; Fear not be, strong and courageous,
etc. The reason of this particular may be taken from that speech of Jonathan,
there is no restraint with God to overcome with many or with few. 1. Sam. 14.6.
Which speech, as it is an infallible truth, so it is full of encouragement:
for though God prescribe means; Saepe numer^ pauciores sub bonis ducibus
reportaverunt victoriam. lib. 3. cap. 9
yet he is not tied to means; for he works above means, and without means,
and against means. Besides the instances of proof for this point from the
word (which some may think to be extraordinary) there is plenty of examples
in military treatises, humane histories. Vegetius has the position it self,
that often, the fewer in number under good Comma^ders, do carry the victory.
The Commenter gives instances in Datames, who never fought but with the fewer
number; Aemilius Probus. Plutarch. Florus.
yet by his wise carriage, and using of his best opportunity had ever the
better. Sertorius with a handful, got admirable victories over Marcellus, and
other Romans, with great armies. Admirable was that victory that Charles
Martill, great Master of France, and father to King Pippin, had over the
Saracens, in the battle of Tours, where Abdiramas encountered him with 400000
Saracens: but with a number for inferriour, yea with a handful in respect of
them, he did not only foil the Saracens, but made the hugest slaughter, of
any that we read of, to wit, he slew 370000. One instance more of no less
wonder, if we mark all the passages of it; in the battle of Poictuiers, where
Edward the Black Prince with a handful of weareyd soldiers, not passing
8000, overcame King John with an army of 40000; of which besides the nobles,
10000 where slain, King John and Philip his son taken prisoners, with 70
Earls, 50 Barons, and 12000 Gentlemen: so that they both slew more, and took
more, then themselves were in number: likewise at the battle of Cresy, the
English where but 1180; yet they overcame the French being in number 70000; of
which besides, John King of Bohemia, 11 Princes, 80 Barons, 120, Knights, there
were slain 30000 common soldiers.

So that you see it is not the multitude of our foes that have prevayled
against us: Application
For if they had covered the face of the earth like grasshoppers, the Lord could
have swept them away. But as we shall hear hereafter, we have provoked him
to strengthen their hands against us; he goes not forth with us, because we
go not out and in with him: the Lord is not with us, but has left us and
forsaken us: because we have left and forsaken him. Why do we not prosper in
any thing whither soever we go as Iosuah did? even because we do not as
Iosuah did. We walk not according to all the law of God, which he has
commanded; and yet for all this, if we would turn to the Lord, we need not to
fear the increase of their forces. It is true, that they do increase, and
must once make a head, and that in great number; for as the great Whore sits
upon many waters; that is, as the spirit expounds to be, the inhabitants and
Kings of the earth; so the three unclean spirits come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, of the beast, and of the false Prophet, to gather the Kings of the
earth, and of the whole world to the battle of Harmagiddon; and that they may
the more prevayle, they come with lying miracles in judgment, to those whom
they do deceive. You see their number must be great; for they must be many
Kings; yea of the whole world in account, the^ there must needs be many people,
to maintain the tottring Kingdom of the devil, when it is even at the
downefull. Yet, for all these hands, they shall have enough to do. The Angel
that powers out the seventh violl says, it is done; Rev. 16.
yea the cup of the wine of the fiercenes of Gods wrath, shall be given her by
the hand of Gods little flock. The multitude shall neither maintain her, nor
themselves, but all shall perish together. Avoid superstition.


The seventh thing to be looked to is, that superstition be avoided; whereunto,
as corrupt nature is very subject, In Moral.
so most of all in extremity. A superstitious man (as Plutarch well observes
( fears every thing, except that which he should fear. Four especial ways
do men in this particular commit superstition, by consulting with sorcerers,
or southsayers; How many ways superstition is committed.
by taking some casualties as ominous; by observing of days; and by seeking to
Idols. To the first, Gaius Marius had a Witch out of Scythia with whom he
always consulted of the event of war, Front. lib. 1 Cap. 11.
before he undertook it. Did not Saul in the like case seek to the Witch at
Endor? They who forsake God, and whom God has forsaken, may run to the devil
for counsel; for that is all their refuge: yea when men take that course it is
a shrewd evidence that they are forsaken of God. As he would not answer God
with any kindly obedience; so God would not answer him by any manner of
manifestation; not by a dream: for he had no temper of the spirit; not by the
Vrim or Priest; for he had killed the faithful ones; and so in his greatest
necessity, he wanted the comfort of them; not by a Prophet: for he despised
the spirit, he runs therefore to the devils dame (for so the word does
signify) or the mother of a familiar, ^al alah ob^ 1. Sam. 28.
and she must tell him what shall be the event of the battle When God leaves
men to themselves, they know not what to do, all his wit and policy, and all
the cunning of his courtiers could not help him out with this lurch. This,
amongst the rest, made way for Pompeys overthrow: for he consulted with a
woeman of Thessaly, who brought him a soldier as he thought from the dead,
Luc. lib. 6.
declaring to him the bad success of the Pharsalian battle. Julian after his
apostacy, betook him wholly to Sorcerers and Conjurers. Richard the third,
made this a special part of his counsel. James the third of Scotland, was much
corrupted with this kind of vermin; and so much was the more pity; for he was
a Prince of excellent parts; but he plagued himself with two sorts of evil
beasts, namely, superstitious figure-flingers, and cater-piller favorits,
whereby he brought desolation upon the land, and himself to an untimely end.
Considering Gods hatred against the sin, and the evil end of all such as have
taken this course, it is a wonder, especially that men illuminated should look
this way: but whom God will destroy he gives them up to corruption of
judgment and madness of mind (as Austin well observes of Saul) being become
a reprobate he could not have a good understanding. Mox repr^bus factus, non
potuit habere bonu^ intellectum.


As for the Papists conjuring and consultation, it is a main part of their
Leiturgie. Yea, they have one trick more of this kind, namely, to give Amulets
to soldiers going to fight, whereby they assure them of security from all
hurt. A worthy Historiam gives an instance of this. The French under the
conduct of Charles Alobroge, going against Geneva; in the year of our Lord
1502 had Amulets from their charming fathers to hang about their necks, wherein
were engraven crosses with the beginning of S. John's Gospel, the name of Mary,
Jesus, of the Trinity, with many odd Characters and inscriptio^s; promising to
all those that should wear them, that they should not perish that day by earth,
water nor the sword. But the devil was cunning enough to cozen the^: Salustius
Pharamumdus de adventu Alobrogum in Genevam.
for though they escaped those particulars; yet they perished another way: In
the night their Characters were taken from them, and they were strangled and
blown in the air. Jesuits know it is foul play to wear amulets in fight, and
against the laws of Arms, and yet they will be doing. Let such as love soul
or life, beware of these; for such things have neither hid force, nor
elementary quality to save or preserve. Austin of such, has a very good
speech, with a counsel subioyned; Many (says he) being driven to a strayt,
seek help of the devil in the persons of Charmers or Enchaunters, and in the
supposed force of Amulets: what is this but to go to our invisible enemies,
who kill the soul persuading us that there is no help with God? The ears of
such (says he) are shut at the voice of God, saying, In Psalm 34.
the Lord is my salvation: but let us (says the father) inquire of God, and
not of any other: for our deliverance is of God howsoever he work it by
lawful secundary means, which we may use: but all the means of charming,
we must hate as the devil from whence they are.

The second thing to be avoided, is an ominous construction of casualties. When
Scipio transported his soldiers out of Italy unto Africa, as he went a shore,
his foot slip, and he fell on his face (whereat his soldiers being astonished,
conconceiving it as a token of evil success,) Scipio with a brave courage
making a better construction; Go sport your selves (said he) my soldiers, for
I have already taken possession of Africa. It is fit for avoiding this, that a
wise General be seen in some measure in the causes of natural things, which
seeming to the ignorant prodigious, they may therein give them satisfaction.
Lucius Sulpicius Gallus, foretold to his soldiers the Eclips of the Moon, and
the causes of the said Eclipse, that they might not be dismayed at it, through
the ignorance of the cause. Pericles going to war, as he went aboard of his
ship, the Sun was eclipsed, at the darkness of which eclipse the Master of the
ship was exceedingly astonished, taking it for some ominous or prodigious
thing; but the General cast his cloak over the Masters face, and asked him if
there were any matter of terror in that; who answered no^ No more in the
other, said the General, but that the cause is not so well known. If Heathens
were thus wise, is it not a shame for Christians to startle at the signs of
heaven, or at the casual occurrences of accidents below? Let Gods command,
medcine this shie disposition (which is worse then heathenish in the Lords
account. Ier. 10.2.
) Be not dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the Heathens are dismayed at
them.

The third thing is seeking to idols or false Gods; so did all the Heathen: and
new Rome is not one whit short of old Rome in this. Mayor coelitum populus,
qua^ hominum, lib. 2. cap. 7.
Yea, as Pliny says of the one, so I may say of the other; that the number of
their gods, exceeds the number of the Papists. And as another says well;
they are Lapideus populus, a people made of stocks and stones: to Saint George,
and to such they go for success in battle.

The last is difference of days, as some days they hold good to fight on, and
some bad; as though the Lord, had made one day good and another bad. This
superstitious differencing of days, the other Rome held both in position and
practice. They were called Fighting-daies, says one, wherein it was lawful to
fight with the enemy; Proeliares dies appellantur, quibus fas est hostem bello
lacescere: erant enim quaedam feriae publicae, quibus nefas fuit id facere.
for there were some feriall days, wherein it was not lawful to fight. Of
these irreligious days, and of their strictness in this point, Cato makes
Festus,
mention in his commentary upon the Civil Law. In those days (says he) they
did not levy men, nor join battle, nor sit in judgment. The Macedonians
abstayned from fight, all the month Tacit. Dio. in Pompo.
of June. The Germans held it unfortunate to fight in the beginning of the new
Moon, or in the full of the Moon. It is observed of the Jews, that they
neglecting to defend themselves on the Saboth, Pompey took Jerusalem. Lucullus
the Roman Captain, considered better of the matter, who being to fight upon the
eighth day of October against Tigranes, was by some of the company dissuaded
from it; because Scipio, as on that day had had a great defeat: Plut. Romans
Apoth.
Let us (said he) therefore fight the more stoutly, that we may make to the
Romans, a good day of an evil. Joshua and Israel compassed Jericho seven
days, and on the last day took it, which was the Saboath of the Lord. Ios 6.
One persuading a General not to fight, upon some ominous conceit taken of the
day; Optimum augurium est, pro patria fortiter pugnare'
I hold it (says he) the best kind of divination to fight stoutly for my
Country. To observe days, or months, and times, stands not with Christian
liberty. It is charged upon the King of Bohemia, when Prague was taken, that he
would not fight on the Lords day; but it is one of the lightest aspersions put
upon him by his calumnious enemies. If he had fought and carried the day, they
would have put his fighting as an imputation upon his profession, for fighting
upon the Saboath.

As fighting hereon, and all other works should be avoided, as much as may be:
(though the Papist (as one says) pestereth the week with idoll-holydaies, and
heathenishly makes less reckoning of this then of the least of his devised
holydaies:) yet if necessity command, either to assault or defend, the day is
made for man, and not the man for the day. That restriction which the Heathens
held concerning their days, agrees very well to the Lords day. Si ultima
necessitas suadeat administretur; Cato in comment. de jure civili.
that is; if necessity enforce to fight, we may.

Let Gods people therefore, both in peace and war, beware of Romes
superstition. It is said that old Rome had their superstition from the
Hetruscians, whether they sent every year, Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 1.
six of the Patricians sonns to learn the rites of religion: but all Nations
now have their superstition from new Rome, which is become the Mistress of
Whorish inventions; and whether our Romanists send their young Cobbes, to learn
their postures and motions. Of her, whosoever borrows for garnishing, or
rather for gaudifying of the worship of God, may justly fear, to the woe of
their souls, that they pay as deer for it, as Israel did for the golden Calf.
The Altar of Damascus, provoked the Lord to forsake his own Altar, wherein
Achaz presumed of safety (oh! Cimm^rian blindness and fearful apostasy!) but
it proved contrary, for it was the ruin of him, 2 Chronicles. 28.23.
and of all Israel; according to the word, it was the break-neck of them; or as
some translate, not unfitly, it plagued him and all Israel. Was the Apostle in
fear of the Galatians, Ga. l. 4.10
because they kept days and moneths^ And may not we fear and tremble, who
have not only their dismal hollow days (mince them as you will) but (...)
great deal more of the devils dirt, wherewith, as with a garment spotted with
the flesh, the garment of Christ is fearfully defiled? The strange Arms, or
colors of the enemy in the field or City, are ominous indeed: for by them
the wall^ have been scaled, and the forces slain and routed, without so much as
a blow given in defense; even so, do not the Arms of the Beast, and the
colors of the Whore, set up cheek by joull with Gods colors in his House, and
amongst his Armies in the field, presage some fearful plague approaching;
especially to those that are a sleep: our Laodicean conceit, shall be so far
from sheltering us, that thereby we provoke God, that he can bear no longer,
but that he must needs sp^^ us out of his mouth; which, if he do, it is to be
feared we are such a loathsome thing, that he will never take us up again; but
make a new people to himself.

Wherefore, in the first place, Awake you Angels and Watchmen indeed upon the
Walls, whom I charge, as you will answer before God your Master, that you will
cast away the inverse Trumpets of Furius Fulvus, which sounded a retrait, when
they should have sounded an Alarm, With the Prophet Psay, proclaim the
iniquity of those things, which pestereth Gods worship, Isa. 30.22.
and run so many upon the rocks of separation. Are they not the coverings of
Idols, or Idols themselves? Show the people how they should loath them, and
account them as a menstruous clout; and that they should hold them unworthy of
presence, and should say unto them, get you hence. Let them plead for Baal that
are of Baal. Hold never that to be clean in Gods worship, that the Pope, or
Pagan has once polluted, being man's invention. No, it is unpossible that it
should be cleansed. With ^he sound of the Trumpet, awake the Kings Majesty,
awake the Prince, the Parliament, the Council, the Nobles, Gentry, and
Commons, that we may meet our God in sackcloth and ashes: for great is the
controversy that he has with us all. You are the Physicians, content not your
selves with the bare theoricke, or general rules, but apply your rules, and
pick out particular medi^ines, for particular diseases, in particular subjects;
for Chronical, pandemical, or Epidemical diseases. Have your specific rules
and receipts, discover the dark day, and the devouring people, wherewith we
are threatened; Joel 2, v. 2.3.11.
the day of the Lord is great and very terrible, who can abide it?

As for your Majesty, on the knees of my soul, with all humble duty, I do
entreat you, as you have begun in the spirit, you would not end in the flesh:
but that you would beat down that Altar of Damascus, bray the golden Calfe to
powder, crush the brazen Serpent to pieces, and break off those bonds of
superstition: Ease Sion of her burden, under which she groaneth; help not
those that hate God; and hate not those that love God. Let not God be robbed of
his Sabboath, nor his name be torn in pieces by bloody oaths; for these, and
the like, are like to make your Dominions mourn. Yea, if your Highness love
the Lord, your soul, your life, your Crown, your people, look to it: Aegipt is
deceitful; Nilus is rank Poison; mixture of his worship is a mockery, and no
worship; and God has said he He will not be mocked. For the Lords sake down
with Balaam, Balaamites, and all their pedlery ware; give the Lord all or
nothing, for he is a jealous God. In a word, Dread Sovereign, remember I
beseech you, by how many mercies God has engaged you to be zealous of his
house; and that of all sins, he cannot endure backsliding.

As for you Gracious Prince: If you desire to present your self to God, as a
member of his unspotted Spouse in Christ, be not unequally yoked; away with
that Linciewolsie Match: (with reverence be it spoken) it is a beastly,
greasy, and a lowsie-wearing, unbefitting your Grace. Scripture will apology
my terms, which speaking of spiritual whoredom, gives it always the vilest
terms. Then good Sir, curtall Baals Messengers by the middle to their shame:
Cast out of Gods house all the garish attire of the Whore, and bring not an
Athaliah (what soever she be) into your bosom; who will adorn Balaams house
with the riches of your God. Let it never enter into your Princely heart, that
Dagon and the Ark can stand together; for Christ and Belial has no communion.
Let no profane person, nor Popishly affected, like briars and brainbles, pester
your house, nor choke both life and practice of holy disties in you. Keep good
and plain dealing Physicians for your soul, cheer the hearts of Gods people
with the love of your countenance, and in so doing you may be assured, the
Lord will make you a sure house.

And you right Honorable, and most Worthy, of the High Court of Parliament,
together with his Majesty's Council; Use the counsel of a great King to his
council: He would always have them to leave two things without; Simulation,
and dissimulation: be either, first for God, and the reforming of his house, or
otherwise you can bring no honor to your selves, nor good to your Country.

You illustrious Princes, Nobles and Favorites of the King; serve not the
times, nor your own turns, Ezr. 3.5.
with the neglect, or opposition of Gods cause; withdraw not your necks from
the work of the Lord, with the Tekoites, nor break not the yoke of Gods
obedience, by impiety, profaneness and superstition; as those Princes did, in
whom Jeremiah sought some good, but found none: Ier. 3.5.
be not like those Princes of Judah, that with their false flatteries, feigned
courtesies, and fleshly reasons, 2 Chro. 24.17.
made Ioash cast down all with his heel that he had set up with his hand; but
let Nehemiah his care, Daniels zeal, the three Childrens resolution, Gid ons
valor, and Obadiahs love, possess your souls, for the purity of Gods
worship, with a loathing hatred of all superstition.

And to you great Prelates, or sprightfull Lords; the very hearth that keeps in
the fire of all this superstition, and the Ensign staff that fixes those
strange colors in our Camp. (If I could persuade you) let your train fall.
Away with the little beast with the two horns: Rob not the Nobility and
Magistracy of their Titles and places, no more then they should usurp the
office of the Ministry: Lord it not over the Stewards of Gods house, and let
not him find you beating his servants, when he calls you to a reckoning; in a
word, lest Pashur his case prove yours, if danger come. Let Christ reign in his
Ordinances, and let that maxim once be made good, in a good sense, no
ceremony, no Bishop.

Lastly, to you people, which be of two sorts, carnal, and called of the Lord:
to the former, Think not the rotten walls of your profaneness, or mere
Civilisme, shall still be daubed over with the stinking mortar of Romish
superstition, the dirt whereof you cast in the faces of Gods faithful
Ministers, if they touch your galled sores: away with those fig-leaues and
leprous clouts, and let the Word have its course with you. To you the latter
sort, that with some lazy wishes are content to have it so (as the Prophet
speaks) give me leav out of my very love to tell you, that Is^char his
caraiage, or bowing down, like an Ass between two burdens, will not serve,
but you must hate the garment spotted with the flesh, and say to the Idols, Get
you hence what have we to do with you?

Lastly, to conclude the point, to you all, I say again from the highest to the
lowest (with my duty to all in lawful place reserved) if admonition will not
work, let terror of judgment prevaeile; Levit. 10.
the strange fire in Gods worship was punished with the fire of Gods wrath from
heaven. God proportions judgment to the sin; we have ever kept in, and pleaded
for the excommunicate thing, for the which the Lord may plague us: we have like
fools reserved the seedricks of superstition, and therefore the Lord is like to
give us enough of it; Hos. 8.11.
we have made many Altars to sin, and they may be unto us for sin; let King and
Prince, and Nobles, and Ministers, 2 Chronicles. 25 14, etc.
and people look to it. King Amasiah setting up the gods of Seir, by the God of
Israel, caused the wrath of the Lord to be kindled against him, which never
slaked till it consumed him: for he ran from one evil to another, while his
own conspired against him and slew him. Shebnah, that great and rich Treasurer,
who was hewing out his Sepulcher, and scorned the Lords call to humiliation;
for idolatry and other sins, Esa. 22.15.
he is tossed by the Lord like a ball in a strange Country, where he dies; so
that the chariot of his glory becomes the shame of his Lords house. If
Diotrephes will not leave his Lording it over Gods house, and beating his
servants, till he cast them out of their own houses and Gods house, forbidding
others to receiv them; 3 Ioh. 9.
Will not the Lord remember their deeds? If the lukewarm Angel, with people
of this loathsome quality, will not grow zealous and mend, Will not the Lord
spue them both out of his mouth? In a word, Rev. 3, 16.
if we do not as one man humble our selves, for partaking with Idols, and
suffering of Idols, and every man in his place put to his hand, to bring
Iezabel from the window; we may justly fear, that neither peace, nor war,
nor Parliament, nor Plantation, nor Traffic shall prosper with us? Yea, to
shut up the point; if we will neither hearken to counsel nor threatening, we
may fear, that be made good upon us which the Prophet threatened against
Amaziah; that God has determined to destroy us; 2 Chr. 25.1^
because we have done evil, and will not hearken to the counsel of God. I
hope I am no enemy because I tell you the truth; the Lord in mercy make us hear
the sound of the Trumpet, that we may stand up in the breach and live.

As all these things aforesaid are duly to be considered; so in the eight
place follows, a thing not immateriall to be thought on, and very often
helpful to the victory, being thought on; namely, that soldiers wearyed with
a long March, Multum virium labor itineris pugnaturus amittit lib. 3. cap. 11.
Livi. lib. 2.
should not imediatly (or if they can) that day join battle. Vegetius gives a
reason, by a great March the soldier weakeneth his spirits, and loses his
strength. Instance of this may begiuen in the Volscians fighting against the
Romans; after too great a March, and much crying, they joined in fight, and at
the very first encounter were defeated, and abandoned their Camps. Sergius
Galba, with his wearyed soldiers, set upon the Portugalls, and routed them at
the first, and pursuing them unadvisedly with his over wearyed soldiers; the
Barbarians, with their recollected forces, returned upon them and slew 7000
Romans, very able soldiers. The neglect of this observation did the A^ch-Duke
no good at the battle of Newport, Appianus de bello Hispan.
who after a long March, as I am informed, gave battle to his adversary and
that upon a sandy ground. Had Spinola with an easy march brought his forces
fresh before Bergan-up-Soom, and presently given an assault, he had hazarded
the taking of the Town: but with over marching, they were so wearyed and
weakened, that five days past, before they were able to assault, and by this
they lost their best opportunity. He laid the blame on Velasco: but it was
well howsoever.

The ninth, and the last thing to be remembered, but not the least; The
necessity of fervent prayer.
yea, the chiefest thing of all, is devout and servent prayer unto God for the
victory. If an eloquent and pithy speech, from the mouth of a natural man
prevail much (as I showed) in provoking them to courage, how much more
couragio^ shall these men be, whose hearts God does touch, and whose hands God
does strengthen for the day of battle. Now ^hese by prayer are ob^ayned of God;
witness that instance of Moses praying, and, the people of God fighting, when
Moses held up his hand (that is, was strong in prayer) then Israel prevayled,
and when he let down his hand, (that is) when his spirit failed, (...). 17.1.
Amalec prevayled. A man may think that Moses should rather have gone into the
field being the Lords General, then got him up to the mountain to pray; but
Moses knew well enough what he had to do; he appoints a man sufficient for the
place; he knew wherein the strength of Israel lay, namely, in their God, and
what would most prevail with God, namely, fervent proyer. One good man praying
is worth an Army of men fighting; and therefore Moses the man of God guided by
the spirit, took this as the best course for obtaining of the victory. The
prayer of the righteous (says S. James) avayleth much if it be fervent. Iam.
5.16.
This is the key that opens heaven, and the steps of the ladder, whereby we
ascend: This makes the Lord to bow the heaven^ and come down: By this we
wrestle with God that he may give us strength to wrestle with the enemy: This
strengthens the feeble knees, and hanging down hands, of those that fight
Gods battles: Finally, this blunteth the forces of the enemy, and overturneth
the horse and the rider. Origin on that practice of Moses makes this
application; lift thou up thy hands to heaven, Eleva and tu manus in coelum,
etc. Homil. 11. in Fxod.
as Moses did and obey the Apostle his precept; pray without intermisssion: for
Gods people did not so much fight with hand and weapon, as they did with voice
and prayer. This time of battle is the very pinch of extremity; and therefore
the best opportunity for prayer. Deuteronomy. 33.7.
Moses joins these two together in the blessing of Judah, hear oh Lord the
voice of Judah (or as the Chaldee well tra^slateth the prayer of Judah) when he
goes forth to war. If we be commanded to call on the Lord in the day of our
trouble; what greater trouble then this when the enemy is ready to devour us,
and to reproach the name of our God? This you may see to be the ordinary
practice of Gods people in the fighting of his battles. Judah cried unto the
Lord. 2. Chron. 13 14. Chap. 14.12
Notable is that prayer of Asa, going against the Ethiopians, he cried unto the
Lord. He^pe us, oh Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go
against this multitude. So, that of Iehosaphat, going against the Ammonites, is
a president at large for all Gods people, how to behave themselves in this
particular: First, 2. Chron. 20
that good King discovers the strayt wherein they were; we know not what to
do. verse. 12. Secondly, his refuge, but our eyes are up toward the, ibidem.
Thirdly, his pressing God with petition, oh our God will thou not judge them,
ibidem. Fourthly, the arguments whereby he would move God to hear his
petition, from the 6 verse. to the 13. Fif^ly, there is the preparation to this
duty, that it may be the more effectual; and Iehosaphat feared the Lord, and
set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast through all Judah. verse.
3. I show the scantling of the place, the rather, 2. Chron. 32 20.21.22.
because I know no place in all the book of God fitter for this purpose. Other
instances there be, as that prayer of Hezekiah against the Asstrians. The like
course took the Israelits being to join battle with the Philistines. So Jacob
looking for nothing but for battle from his brother, he prepares himself by
prayer. So did Ezra. I urge the more places, the rather because I would enforce
the necessity of the duty, and manifest the good effect of the same, being
performed; and justly to tax our selves, to our humiliation, for the neglect or
uniound performance of this duty. To the first; you may see by this cloud of
witnesses, how strict Gods people have been in this duty. To the second, it
is likewise clear that good success has followed the duty, in all the
quoted testimonies. Ezra relating how he had commended the cause to God, when
they stood in fear of their enemies, shows us what was the issue of this
their holy practice; Ezra. 8.23.
So we fasted and besought our God, for this and he was entreated of us.

And for the last, namely, our neglect, would to God our mourning for the sin
were as manifest as the sin it self: look but on the success of our battles,
that argues our neglect. God is one and the same God, and the cause is
likewise Gods: but God is not sought unto, he is not importuned. We are like
to the Israelits going against Benjamin, who inquired of the Lord whether they
should go up against them or no, and what tribe should lead them: and having
their direction in both these, they set themselves in order. Hear they make
the cause sure, and for avoiding contention about the leading, they have the
bravest Leaders allotted them, Judges 20.
and for their forces they were either enough, or too many; yea of the choice
soldiers, and very well ordered: but how sped they? But very meanly, as you
may see in the text: they were twice foiled, and lost to the number of 40000
men. But what was wanting hear? I answer, even the self same things that are
wanting in us, Search of sin, and seeking to God. We do not read in all the
text that they did either of these, till they were beaten to it: And what
needed they in their own conceit; They had a just cause, and the Lord his own
warrant, and brave Commanders, and for multitude they might have eaten them up,
and why should they go to God for the victory? they doubted not of that: but
as they looked least to the matter of greatest weight; so they were plagued in
that which they least feared; to teach them and others to take their whole
errand with them, God gave them twice into the hand of their enemies, and then
they saw their oversight, and went up to the Lord and wept, and fasted, Verse.
26.
and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the Lord; then by the
Lords direction they went up and prospered. So we may lay our hands upon our
mouths in this case, and proclaim our selves to be faulty: for we have
presumued much upon a good cause, and secundary means, but we have not
wrastled with God for the victory. The Pagans and Papists do condemn us in
this, who toil themselves with their idols, babbling out many blasphemons
prayers, and that for the most part, for the prosperous success of wicked
designs. Lib. de bello punico.
Appianus tells us, that before the Romans joined battle they sacrificed to
Audaci^ie and Fear. Plutarch, Satim ante acient immolato equ^ concepere votum.
Florus.
tells us that the Lacedaemonians before the fight sacrificed to the Muses.
The Mysia^s before they fought did sacrifice a horse. To what a number of
Saints do the Papists sacrifice, when they go to fight; how do they ply the
idol of the Mass in which they put their considence. The Jesuits indeed, the
Popes bloud-hounds, trust more to the prey then to their prayers. They much
resemble, as one says well, the Vultures, whose nests (as Aristotle says)
cannot be found; yet they will leave all games to follow an Army: because they
delight to feed upon carryon: neither will they be wanting with their prayers
(such as they are) for the success of the great Crack, and black day (as
they call it) wherein these harpies thought to have made but a breakfast of us
all; they erected a new Psalter for the good success of a wicked counter
parliament, the depth of whose consultation was fiery meteors, the project,
whereof, was the rending of mountains, and tearing of rocks, and with an
earthquake of fiery exhalations to consume and swallow up both hills and
valleys, and to increase the iniquity with wicked Iesabel, they would color
it with a fast, and with blasphemous and lying Rabshakah, they would bear the
world in hand by this their Psalter, that they came not up against us without
the Lord, 1. Reg. 25.
and the Lord had bidden them do it. Their develish dittie consists of a
sevenfold psalmody, which secretly they passed from hand to hand, set with
tunes to be sung for the cheering up of their wicked hearts, with an
expectation (as they called it) of their day of Jubilee. The matter consists
of railing upon King Edward, and Elizabeth, and our Sovereign that now is; of
perition, imprecation, prophecy and praise for success. I will set down some
of these, because the Psalter it self is rare, or not to be had. For they are
taken up by the Papists, as other books be that discover their shame. Prayer
Psalm 1.
Confirm (say they) the heart of those thy laborours; endue them with strength
from above, and give success unto their endeavors.

Embolden our hearts with courage, to concur with them freely, in the
furthering of thy service.

Confirm your hearts with hope, Prophecy Psalm. 2.
for your redemption is not far off.

The year of visitation draws to an end, and jubilation is at hand.

The memory of novelties shall perish with a crack, as a ruinous house
falling to the ground, he will come as a flame that bursteth out beyond the
furnace.

His fury shall fly forth as thunder, and pich on their tops that malign him.

Howsoever God in mercy disappointed them; yet by these, you may see, as by so
many ignivomus eruptions of the helfiry-zeale of Aetna, what their diligent
endeavor was: for they would be wanting in nothing. The necessity therefore of
the duty, the good success of it, the sinister zeal of idolatry in this
point, according to their kind, and the danger of the neglect of it, may
provoke us if we be not void of sense, to set upon the duty. If idolaters,
who by their prayers and sacrifice bringing nothing but sorrow upon themselves,
do so bestir themselves; what fools are we in slighting off so excellent a
duty wherein the Lord has promised to be with us; yea, give me leave to
speak the words of truth, whereat I would have none offended, but rather
offended with their own negligence, that all that have had their hand in Gods
battles, from the Kings Majesty himself, to the meanest soldier, have been,
and are yet exceeding faulty in this, as their own hearts (I know) upon
examination will tell them; which neglect indeed, to them and us both, does
minister matter of great humiliation. If they do reply, Instance.
that prayer has been made, and God has been sought to, by themselves and
others for them. To this I answer, Lament. 3.8
yet (as the Prophet says (he shuts out our prayers. The lineaments of
prayer.


Though it be not my purpose, nor for the place, to handle the common place of
prayer; yet for the better discovery of our neglect, and the amendment of it,
let me briefly lay down what things in prayer (if we would speed by it)
should be observed, namely, the matter of it, the person that makes it, the
manner of it, the quality of it, and the helps to sharpen it.

First, for the matter, it must be such as the spirit approves on; the rule
whereof is laid down in the word. For the person, he must be good, otherwise
his prayer is not good, nor can it do any good. The prayer of the just man
prevayleth much. If I regard iniquity in my heart (says the Prophet) the Lord
will not hear me. And as the blind man in S. John, Ios. 9.
God hears not sinners; Moses, Iehoshaphat, Ezechiah and Ezra were all good
men; their prayers were of force against their enemies, The Lord heard them,
and gave them the victory. Kings and Commanders should be good themselves, if
they would have any good by their prayers: for God is no respecter of persons;
the greater^he party is, if he be not good, the worser is his prayer in the
sight of God; yea let them have some good men of God, to be their mouths to
God. The people of Israel being to join with the Philistines, 1. Sam. 7.8
they say to Samuel, Cease not to cry to the Lord our God for us, that he will
save us out of the hands of the Philistines. Where no doubt the people joined
with him, but he led them in the duty, and was their mouth. I showed the
necessity of such before: the Lord touch your hearts with a desire of such,
and stir up such for you.

Thirdly, the manner of the prayer must be performed, by going along with the
spirit, who helps our infirmites, with sighs and sobs, that cannot be
expressed. We must not be like to Julius the second in our devotion, who sat
by the fire and said over his prayers in the time of the fight. It is not the
ringing, nor chanting with the voice, nor the Barotonus lowing of a mighty
lung, that will prevail with God Moses cried hard to God, Exodus 14.^5
though he spoke newer a word. Which cry did so ring in Gods ear, that he
could not but answer; why cryest thou Moses? Egit vocis sileontio ut cord
clamaret. Aug Q. 52 in Ex:
yea as one says well, upon that place, he held his peace that he might cry
the louder; not that the cry of the voice is to be condemned; but the cry of
the spirit commends the matter to God.

Fourthly, for the quality of it, it must especially be fervent; it prevayleth
much if it be fervent. This is the fire that does burn the odors in the
Censor. Moses zeal in this particular was so fervent in that battle against
Amaleke, that (to use the words of the Prophet David.) It did eat him up. A
key cold Leiturgie galopt over, or cast through a sive with a many parat-like
Tautologies, or a lukewarm lip-labor, can never bring down a blessing from
God.

Fifthly, and lastly, the helps of prayer, are fasting and mourning; wherein,
and whereby the soul is humbled with God, and fitted to hear from God, and to
speak to God. The necessity of these you may see, by the practice of Gods
people in all the former examples. 1 Samuel 7.^.
The people of Israel in Mizpeth, are said, to draw water, and pour it out
before the Lord, and they fasted. What is that, but as the Chaldee well
observes, they poured out their hearts before God, and shed tears in such
abundance, as if they had drawn water. So Iehoshaphat proclaimed a fast. So
Ezra proclaimed a fast, and he and the people afflicted themselves before God.
Witichindus.
It is recorded of Otho the great, Emperor, to his great commendation, that
being to join battle with the Hungarians, he proclaimed a fast in his Camp,
and called on the name of God. This afflicting of the soul, and pouring out of
the heart is not yet come home to you the Warriors of the Lord, and give me
leave a little in particular to entreat your Highnesses to lay home the neglect
of these duties to your hearts, with both your hands. Affliction, or nothing,
will drive men to God. God threatening his people that he will leave them
(which is indeed the fearfullest punishment) tells us; Hos. 5.15.
that in their affliction they would seek him early. Histories tell us, that
the dumb son of Croesus found his tongue in the danger of his father. The Lord
has been sought for you, both frequently and fervently; but you must seek him
earnestly your selves, or all is lost labor. Hezekiah in his trouble sent to
Esaias the Prophet, desiring him to lift up his prayer for the remnant that were
left, chapter 37. v. 4; but in his own person also he fasted, mourned and prayed
hard, v. 1.15. You should not want some of Gods Masters of requests, to lift
up their prayers for you, but you must also in your own persons, with Hezekiah
cry mightily to God if you mean to be heard. There be too many (though your
Graces are not) of the mind of that popish Earl of Westmoorland, who said; He
needed not to pray, he had Tenants enough to pray for him. Turn in (for Gods
cause) upon the closets of your own hearts; examine your selves and be still:
And that it may not be a lame nor a liuelesse prayer, get matter from reading,
hearing, and meditating on the Word. Labor for holiness, without the which it
is impossible to see God. Get the guidance of the Spirit; for bare saying is
not prayer: be fervent and frequent: and for fitting you the better, afflict
your souler in fasting and mourning, as your State is afflicted. With Hester
make your servants fast and pray; Try but this course in truth; and as sure as
the Lord lives, he shall heap glory and honor upon your heads, and shame
upon your enemies.

This course will break the heads of the Dragons of your sins; this will offer
violence to heaven, and as it were enforce God to answer: this will be like an
earthquake to your enemies, it will sink them, it will swallow them up. A
pretty instance of this, I remember from the confession of an arch-enemy of the
Gospel, namely. Queen mother of Scotland; who fighting against God, and the
erecting of his Kingdom, confessed openly, That she feared more the fasting and
prayer of the man of God John Knox, and his Disciples, then an Army of 20000
armed men. As your neglect has been great in this particular; so the blemish
of out Nation, in neglecting and opposing this office, is indeleble. No Nation
professing the Gospel, but they have publicly been humbled in some measure,
we excepted: we only, have not set forth to help thus against the mighty;
which I think verily has accursed all the rest of our helps, that they are as
Water spilt upon the ground. It is true, that the souls of Gods people have
been exceedingly humbled in secret for the afflictions of Joseph, and have
poured out their hearts, in abundance of sighs and tears for their miseries;
But what is this to the public discharge?

Since I am fallen upon the point, I cannot but with grief observe, that this
Nation has been at such opposition and enemity with this duty, that it is
thought as dangerous a thing to undertake it, as it was in Athens to make
mention of the recovery of Salamis; or as it was amongst the Jews, to speak
in the name of Jesus. What should be the cause of this I have often wondered; I
am sure of this, It is an evil sign of an evil cause; yea, a fearful
forerunner and provoker of Gods long protracted wrath to fall upon us. Not any
finne of omission, or commission, has a more fearful threatening against it,
then this; Witness the Prophet Esaias; Chapter 22.12.13.14.
When God (says he) called to weeping and mourning, and to humiliation (in the
highest degree, as the word imports) then behold (says he) joy and
gladness, slaying of Oxen, and all the contraries; by which they braved out
God to his face. But what followed? A fearful threatening; Surely, this
iniquity shall not be purged from you till you dye (says the Lord of Hosts.)
Whose ears should not tingle to hear this? And whose heart should not tremble
to think upon it? And yet the best in this is too secure.

But since the duty is so called for, and since it sets such an edge on
invocation, it has so prevailed against the enemies of Sion, and the neglect
of it is so severely threatened; what may be the cause, may some say, that in a
Christian Common wealth it should be thus neglected and withstood? If you will
have my opinion, in my judgment, I conceive these to be the Remoraes, or
break-necks of this duty. First, the universal plenty (except the wants of the
meaner for;) so long as there be Oxen and Sheep to kill, and sweet wine enough;
so long no humiliation: Joel 1.13.
When the meat offering and the drink offering fails them, then will the
Priests (says the Lord by Joel) gird themselves in sackcloth, and lament and
houle. A second let is the conceited glory of the Church; the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, say they, and that imgreat pomp and glory, and
what need we mourn? It is an outside glury indeed, but there is but a little
glory within. A third let is this; men are so inslaved to sin and Satan, and so
vassalled to their own corruptions, that they dare not encounter with their
Masters, for whose service they have bored their ears. The fourth Remora is
this, the plants that are not of Gods planting, know well, that the use of
humiliation, would find out the causes of our evil, amongst which themselves
would be found to be the chief: So that it is no wonder, that they cannot
endure to hear of humiliation. But if men be thus fearful to awake sleeping
dogs, and will hazard themselves, and the Nation upon the point of Gods Pike,
what a fearful plight shall they be in, in that gloomy day that is like to
come upon us, wherein the Lord shall give the Alarm. May not Ahab condemn us
in this? Obliviscitur se Regem esse, ubi Deum omniu^ Regem pertimescit,
purpuram abjicit, etc.
And where shall we appear when Ninivie shows it self? Of whose King
Ambrose gives this pretty observation that he forgot himself to be a King
when once his heart was smitten with the fear of the King of Kings; he casts
away his robes, and begins by his repentance to be a King indeed: for he
lost not his command, but changed it from the worse the better.

But to conclude the point: oh that my counsel could please all those that I
have spoken to, both Kings, Ministers, and people, that we might be humbled as
one man together; and every man apart by himself: and renting our hearts
before the Lord, never leave importuning him, nor let him go till he were
entreated. If we would humble our selus, the Lord would humble our enemies. It
is his Covenant; Psalm. 81.13.14.
Oh that my people had hearkened to me, and walked in my ways, I should soon
have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their Adversaries. Oh
that we were like Israel in the Judges, Chap. 20.
who went to God the second time, humbling themselves and offering
burnt-offerings and peace offerings, whereupon the Lord gave their enemies into
their hands. So if we would humble our selves and kill our sins, our enemies
should quickly loose what they have got, and pay full deerly for all costs and
damages. But before I conclude the point take one caveat with the duty; that it
be performed with sincerity and singleness of heart; for if it be done in
hypocrisy, or perfunctorily slighted over in the performance, it provokes God,
and plagues the performer. The Hollanders and French fast, (but without
exprobation be it spoken) they had need to send, as God speaks, for mourning
women, Ier. 19.17.
that by their cunning they may be taught to mourn. A soft heart sets well to a
mournful ditty, where this is wanting, there is no music. Humiliarion,
without reformation, is a mockery of God, and the undoing of a good cause. The
Lord tells us in the 58 chapter of Esaias, and the 7 of Zachary, how he abhorred
the fasting of his people without reformation, he gives a good reason in the
fifth and sixth verses; They fasted not to the Lord, but to themselves; that is,
for their own ends: as if men would serve their own turns with God, and care
not a whit how he be served of them; it were just with God to mock both them
and us with shows of favors, because we mock him with shows of service and
amendment. And surely, if we look not to it, in the humbling of our selves
indeed, all our hopes may be on a sandy ground, and then that of the Lord by
Jeremy be verified of us: Ah Lord God, Ier. 4.10.
surely thou have greatly deceeived this people; and Jerusalem saying, Peace
shall be unto you, whereas the sword reaches unto the soul: the word does
signify in our Language, to put a trick upon them; and so he may do indeed,
for the many we have put upon him. But God give these words to work upon our
hearts. I have been the longer in this point, because in it lies the strength
of all our forces: for pray well, and repent well, and you cannot choose but
fight well. Prevail once with God, and it must needs follow that you shall
prevail with men.

CHAP. XXXV. The Fight it self.
I Come now to the very point at length which does determine all, and that is
the fight it self: Men must not only pray, but they must also fight against
the enemy: they must not only speak, but they must also strike: Strokes and
words will do well together. Moses and Aaron prayed against Amalecke, Joshua
and Israel fought against them. Amalecke is a smiter, and he must be smitten.
It is a general fault amongst us that profess Christ, that we can discharge
a few prayers against Antichrist; but a heart to abhor him, and a hand to smite
him (even so far as our places reach) we have not; we are too too like that
white livered Roman in Tully, who under excuse to keep the Camp, stayed back
from the battle, to whom Africanus said well, he could not endure officious
seeming Soldiers, Non am^nimium diligentes, in quit, Africanus.
whom indeed do stark nothing. When Moses cried hard to God, Israel being in
a great strait, the Lord answered; Wherefore cryest thou unto me; speak unto
the children of Israel that they may go forward. He does not check Moses
because he prayed, Exodus 14.
but because he went not on with the people, as he was commanded, and therefore
God renews the charge. The Ancients commend the Lacedaemonians, that with
their prayers, their hands were prompt to fight. To this effect was the speech
of that ancient Roman, that by bare wishes and woemanish cries, we must not
look from God to overcome, but by counsel, ^^l^stianus (...).
watchfulness and doing (which are the secundary means whereby God has
appointed us to help our selves) we must look to overcome. In coming to the
very shock, what part of the enemies battalion, and with what forces it is
first to be charged, is at the Generals discretion. As for that Military cry
used, and commended by many in the joining bartell; yet holden as a base and
barbarous thing of others, I will not much contend; only this, as it is a
thing most used by Turks, Barbarians and Savages in their fight; so it rather
spends spirit, then she weth spirit. The Barbarians have this observation
against this crying; that dogs that bark much, do not bite much. True
fortitude consists in a stout heart, and in an able hand. Of this mind was
Regulus Mauritanus, and others. As for the Israelites using of it, Ios. 6, it
was the Lords command, and they had little opposition in the fight. As for Cato
his commendation, and Casars approbation of the use of the voice in his
Commentaries; I take them not to mean hollowing and hooping, but rather a
courageous stirring up of one another, and daunting of the enemy with high
words, and austerity of looks. Howsoever, let the soldier remember, not to be
daunted at the encounter of such as come on with a cry.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Generals and Soldiers part in Fight.
NOW the Battle being joined: The duty of General and soldiers in fight.
as the General and the soldiers, as head and body, are to perform the
charge; so to each of those in particular somewhat belongs; as to the
General, with the spirit of wisdom and magnanimity to command and encourage;
(...).
and that as Xenophon said of Clearchus, with a pleasant and cheerful
countenance, which will refresh and encourage his Soldiers in their greatest
dangers: Boni duces publico certamine nu^quam nisi occasion, aut nimia
necessitate conf ligunt. lib. 3. c. 25. Front. li. 4. cap. 7.
but he must not fight at all, except necessity drive him to it. Vegetius
sets it down as the property of a good General, not to fight except
necessity compel him. When it was objected against Scipio Africanus, that he
was no great fighter; he was not ashamed to answer, That his mother bare him,
not to be a Fighter, but a Commander. The Romans were so careful of their
Commanders, that Q. Petilius the Consul, being slain in the fight against the
Ligures, the Senate decreed, that that Legion in whose front he was slain,
Ibi. l. 4. c. 1
should be neglected, they should have no annuary stipend, and their Arms
should be broken. In Pelopida
Rashness in a General deserves rather blame then commendation. Marcellus
and Pelopidas, two great Captains, and very famous for their exploits; yet (as
Plutarch tells us) by adventurous rashness, they lost both their repute and
their lives.

As this rule of wariness is given by Vegetius to a General, that he should
not only have a care of the whole Army, that he may bring them off, as he
leads them on; but also of himself: so Iphicrates gives a good reason, from
a similitude taken from the head, which is the fountain of life and motion; if
it be cut off, the body is but a trunck; so the loss of the General, Caeso
duce facile vincuntur milites. 2 Samuel 18.3.
is the loss of the Army. Agreeable to this, is that speech of that loyal
people of Israel to David their King, dissuading him from going forth to
battle, Thou art worth ten thousand of us. Yet for all this, upon necessity,
when honor, life and victory lies upon it, the General must (as many Noble
ones have done) put his life in his hand, and sometimes with Pompey take the
lot of a common Soldier. M. Furius Camillus, a man of Consular dignity,
perceiving his Army to slack the charging of the enemy, he lays hold on the
Ensign, and carries him upon the enemy; whereat the Soldiers being ashamed,
they went on. Lucius Sylla, seeing the Legions give way to Mithridates forces,
under the leading of Archelaus, drawing his sword, he made toward the body of
the battle; telling his soldiers, that if any asked for their Leader, they
should say they left him fighting in Boesia; at which, the soldiers being
ashamed, they went on to their service. I could instance the like attemps in a
number of our own nation, as the renoumed Norice; the redoubted Vere, and the
never dying Sidney, but let these suffice.

Now as the General, from whom the life and motion of the service, depends
must be careful of his soldiers, and of himself that he expose not them to
any desperate service, nor himself to danger beyond his place; so all the
soldiers must be careful to quit themselves in their places: for the defense
of their head; the maintenance of their good cause; the glory of their nation;
the good of all that depend upon them; and their own honor and reputation.
For military directions in fight, I think there be no better rules then that
of the Apostle Paul, though in another kind; namely, a spiritual fight. The
terms are borrowed from a bodily fight, and therefore they are the fitter for
the purpose. The words of the rule are very significant and emphaticall, and
therefore I set them down; watch ye, stand fast, 1. Cor. 16, 13.
quit you like men, be strong. The words, as they are applied by the Apostle,
express the whole use of every part of the spiritual Armor, unfolding fully
all the cunning and dexterity of a spiritual fight; So the words in
themselves, are as so many rules, out of which every soldier may read his
duty in fight.

All things required of a soldier in fight may be reduced to those five heads.
Vigilancie, Fidelity, Five things required of soulciours in fight.
Valorous Magnanimity, Promptitude and Perseverance. All these are included ^n
theforesaid terms.

First, then there must be a wise and heedie watchfulnes, especially in
subordinate Commanders, (...).
even from the file-leader ^o the highest in subordination, that thereby they
may take, or give command, Nil magis ad victoria facit quam monitis obtemperare
signorum. lib. 3. cap. 5. Interest quoque non parum ut milites in praelii
confusione de ducis consilio certiores fiant. In Veget. page 216.
by or from signal, crier, or trumpet, o^ from the motion of the Commander;
which is an excellent director for all military motions. As there is nothing
according to Vegetius, more avayling to victory then the true taking and
observing of command, by what means soever i^ be given; so there is nothing
more dangerous, then the mistake of the mind of the Commander. It is a matter
of no small consequence, (says Stuchus) for the soldiers in confusion of
fight to be well possessed of the Generals mind: and by the contrary, the
mistaking of his mind may mar all. Appi^nus gives a pregnant instance of this
in Hanibal, who being in fight, and seeing some troops of French and Spani^^
horses, go to the ascent of an hill, he made toward the^ to bring them on
for renewing of the fight; the souldie^ and Commanders, not understanding his
intent, but supposing him to flee presently forsook fight, and routing
themselves fled without any order, not after their General, bu^ whether each
one listed. By this you see what shame, and confusion, followed upon a
contrary construction of the Generals intent. At the battle of Newport (as I
have been informed) there was a foul mistake, and full of danger in Lieutenant
Yakslie, who having his command from General Vere t^ bring up such forces, for
such a service, was so taken up, either with a jealous emulatio^ of Lieutenant
Honywood (with whom that very morning he should have fought) or with some other
transporting cogitation, that he quite mistook the matter, and brought on such
as were not any way fi^ for that service; which the General perceving in grief
and anger, gave him this farewell; Go on Yakslie (said he) and adieu, for th^^
have lost this day, all the honor that ever thon have got in thy life. The
Lieutenant being brought to this strayt, that there was no place for retreat,
nor opportunity for change was forced to lead them on howsoever, who being to
weak to entertain the charge of the enemy, gave presently back, and would
not for any thing he could do, or say, stand to it, whereat the Commander
being vexed exceedingly; and being ashamed to come off, and live with the blot
of that misscarriage, desperately threw himself in the gulf of the enemies
fury, to the pitiful loss of a noble soldier, and a very brave Commander,
and all as you see upon a mistake. Thus then in fight, it is first required
that the soldier have a good eye, and a good ear, both being given in charge
under the word watch.

Now to the second thing required which is fidelity, (...).
enjoined in the word stand, this is as much here as (...), to be resolutely
bent to endure the worst, or (...) to stay by it faithfully, and not to flee a
foot: for as men must overcome the devil, not by flying or shifting; so must
soldiers their enemies. And this word here is properly opposite to flight,
which is holden by the current of all millitarie laws, very ^ignominious, and
if it be to the enemies very treacherous. Vegetius (as Stuchus expounds him)
has the very same in effect; to fly beastly, or to be taken cowardly, Illa ad
ignominia^ pertinet haec Remp. prodit. Lib. 1. cap. 20. page 44. In praeliis
maxim timentibus maximum est periculu^.
is ignominious to the party that does it: but to fly to the enemy is to
betray the cause and the country, hurting with those same Arms and hands the
very parties, that have inarmed them. Again as they endanger all the rest; so
they are so far from exempting themselves from danger (as the same Author
observes) that they are in most danger of all others: and therefore he calls
it madness in men to flee if they can do any other. The case may so stand,
and such may be the adversary that men had better dye like men in fight, then
to forsake their colors and be at length made subjects of the enemies
tyranny: We read of the Romans in fight, that when it was told the Tribunes
of the seventh Legion that the left wing was clear defeated, their colors
taken by the enemies, Caeser 7. Belli Gall. Mercina^ia fides unnquam durat in
adversi^^.
who were charging them upon their backs, they gave not way one foot, but
stood to it till they were slain every man. But because there is too much
mercinarie faith, which never endures in a strayt, Generals have taken course
sometimes to tie the run-awayes to their service. Lucius Lucellus preceiving the
Macedonian horse to flee to the enemy, caused presently an alarm to be given,
and sends some out after them; the enemy conceiving that they were coming
against him, entertained them with a flight of darts. When the fugitives,
preceived that they were pursued by their own, and encountered with the enemy,
they fell upon the enemy, and quit themselves like honest men against their
wills. So Datames following his fugative troops, commended them, out of
cunning, that they would first charge the enemy; with which speech they being
ashamed, they did it indeed. It was very frequent with the Romans to inviron
such as were suspected of cowardice, or infidelity, with their choycest
troops, who might either cause them, for fear, to stand to it; or cut them
off if they attempted flight. It is reported to be the manner of the Cymbrians
to tie their companies together with long chains, Alex. ab Alex. lib 4 Cap 7.
that they should not break their orders nor run away in the fight.

Yet all this that has been said does not abridge the soldier of the benefit
of a fair retreat, which is a special part of service, and of no less
cunning and commendation, then the highest point of atchieving the victory;
neither barreth it the benefit of an honest flight, which some Generals have
commended, and accelerated upon good grounds for better occasions. That brave
retreat of Horatius Cocies, from the overswaying power of Porcenna, is worth
our memory. He caused his forces to return by the bridge into the town, and
to cut the bridge, to cut off the enemies from following; but like a valiant
Champion for his country, stays himself to stop the enemy, Front lib. 2
cap. 13.
till they cut the bridge; and when he heard the crack of the fall thereof, he
cast himself into the river, swimming through, laden with his Arms, and a
great many wounds upon him. As many were the brave services of that noble and
completely qualified soldier, General Norice, so none is held of greater note
then that retreat at Gaunt. It is no less virtue sometime to fly well, Non
minor est virtus aliquando been fugere, quam fortiter pugnare.
then to fight stoutly. It was a pretty policy of Sertorius in Spain, being
compassed almost with the Army of Metellus, to cause his soldiers disperse
themselves by an orderly flight, and appointed them a place where again they
should meet him.

The third and fourth things, (...)
be magnanimious valor, with a promptitude in the usage of the same; which all
are included in this phrase, quit your selves like men. The Greek verb
contains more indeed, then can be fully expressed, without paraphrase; yea, I
read not one word in all the new Testament, that contains more in it, except
the words that express the Dietie. The word does import, an expressing of a
manlike fortitude, by maney actions. The Latins translate it viriliter agere,
to play the man; this is that indeed which strikes the stroke (as were say)
This gets the day and gaynes the laurel wreath.

Two things (says Stuchus commends a soldier, Aside and viribus
co^mendantur milites. page 224. Sermo ad militis tem. Pli. cap. 2.
fidelity and valor. And though Barnard was no soldier; yet he hit the mark
prettily well in these directions. A soldier (says he) must be circumspect to
save himself and others; he must be expedit, and faithful in his place, and
he must be valorous and prompt to give his enemies blows. Admirable it is to
read, how the heathens have excelled in this. And because all soldiers are
persuaded of the truth of this, and have plenty (if they have read) of
instances in their memory. I will only present you with a view of the
Lacedemonian valor, in Lucurge.
much commended by Plutarch, and cited to good use, by that industrious
Ambodexter (mistake not the word) Captain Bingham. page 70.
A Goat being sacrificed by the King, according to the Lacedemonian manner, and
the command being given, they crown their heads, and at the sound of the
flute, and the song Pean, taken up by the King himself, they measure out their
March, and come on with such an undaunted, and advised resolution, that they
seem joyfully without astonishment to entertain the encounter. And as herein
they show their magnanimious valor, so their carriage and demeanor is very
fearful to the enemy; according to this encounter they perform the service.

I come at the last, (...).
to the last thing required; namely, constancy in holding out: be strong, hold
to it, endure to the end. So Joshua is willed to be strong; be strong and of
good courage, that is, continue in thy courage. To the same effect, says one;
he is said to be a strong man that has endured with an unconquerable mind. It
is not the giving of the first stroke, nor the getting of the first ground; but
a continuance in valor, and holding out to the end, that carries the day: He
that overcommeth, says the Spirit, shall be clothed in white; which is the
color of triumphant victory. Pertinent is the speech of a Father to this
purpose, though in another case; Nec paranti ad proelium, nec pugnanti ad
sanguinem, multo minus tergiversanti, sed vincenti ad victoriam. Sermon. 141. de
reip. Non desera^ meum astitem, quo cu^ sunctus fuere: pro sacris and profanis,
sieve solus, sieve cum mul^i^ dimicabo.
Not to him that prepares to fight; yea, nor to him that resists to blood,
much less to a coward that gives back in the battle; but to him that
overcommeth by conquest shall the Crown be given. A continued battle proves
often like a Cock-fight, where the case is so altered on a sudden, that he that
was thought to be the Conqueror is the conquered. Stobeus makes mention of an
oath that the Athenians took, I shall not leave my fellow in fight with whom I
am joined, b^^ I shall fight for Religion and Country. It was one of
Scanderbegs special honors, that he never fled. It often falls out, that by
holding out, men obtain the victory that they have little looked for. Divus
Julius, at the battle of Munda, being forsaken of some of his forces in fight,
who saw they were like to have the worse, he caused one to carry his horse out
of sight, and leaped into the front of his foot: which the same soldiers
observing, and being ashamed to leave their Commander in the field, they
reinforced the fight, and so had the day. This courageous holding out at the
battle of Newport, especially by that thrice truly Noble Sir Horace Vere;
gave the Spanyard a memorable foil, got much honor to the English, and
redeemed the Low Countries from the mouth of the grave.

For such soldiers, so qualified, Application
we should be earnest with God, for a few of these are worth a great many mere
mercenary fellows, that fight only for themselves (that is) for their own
gain, and fly for the advantage of their enemies. There is little good to be
expected of the fearful and faint-hearted, who when they come to join, are
ready to lay down their arms, or run away, having no other thing to cover
their cowardice withal but calling for pay. There is no way with those, as
ancient practice teaches us, but hemming of them in, and holding them to it;
and even in this the best is bad enough; for compelled prayers and forced
fight, are much of one nature, and has often the same effect. God himself the
great Warrior, and Lord of Hoasts, who knows best the danger of fear, and
faint-heartednesse in those that are to fight; gave a law concerning such, that
they should depart from the Host to their home. Deuteronomy. 20.7.
And to that end he caused the officers to make proclamation: What man is
there, that is soft or tender, (that is) faint-hearted, let him go and return
unto his house. The like proclamation did Gideon make at Gods command, when he
was to fight against the Midianits; and of 32000 men that were with him, Judge.
7.3. 1 Match. 7.
there returned 22000. Judas Ma chabeus being to fight against Licias makes
the same proclamation. The Lawgiver himself gives a reason of this Law, that
his brothers heart melt not, or grow not faint as his heart: a good reason
indeed; for as melting metal cast upon other, may make it also melt; so a
sort of fainting swoonding fellows, may cast all the rest in a syncope. As the
faint-hearted spies, returning from the view of Canaan, discouraged all the
rest; insomuch that they durst rather rebel against God, then look their
enemies in the face; so a company of cowards may dash the courage of the best:
and as the Spies brought a plague upon Israel, for their faintness and
incredulity; so faithless and fearful Cradons brings the rest to
destruction. And as this faintness is dangerous to their fellow soldiers, so
it brings themselves to further evils then they are aware of. It brings
sin, shame and destruction: for besides, that with deserved ignominy, they die
often like dogs and swine, they bring also (as the Hebrews observe) the blood
of all the rest upon their heads. Yea, these white livered fellows have a
double curse. First, this soft, feeble, and effeminate heart is a curse in it
self* the Lord speaking of the curses that he would bring upon his people, if
they would not obey, threatens this as a special one. I will even bring
softness into their heart in the land of their enemies. Lev. 26.36.
Secondly, they are accursed in withdrawing their hand from Gods work, or in
doing the work of the Lord deceitfully. Cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord negligently, or deceitfully, and cursed be he that keeps back his sword
from blood. The 300 valiant and courageous men, that lapped water with their
tongues, Indg. 7.4.5
were worth all the 32000. Caleb and Joshua having another heart, were of more
esteem with God, then all the rest of the people. I would have all Gods
Warriors to take heed of softness of heart in this sense; and at any hand not
to trust such: for commonly they have hard and cruel hearts against any thing
that good is. The King of Britains observation upon the Lords prayer, makes
this good by the instance of the Deer, which being the softest hearted and
fearfullest of all other beasts; yet is the cruellest of all, to mind an
injury, and an opportunity to revenge it. Hence a fearful man is called, A Man
like a Heart. Ancients do tell us, (...).
and examples do testify, that there is no greater Tyrant then a cowardly
King; Witness Nero, Caligula, Tiberius; yea, according to Plutarch, as fear
and cowardice is the cause of their cruelties, so the greatest coward of all is
a faint hearted soldier. The idolatrous Gentiles both Roman^ and Grecians, Dii
(...)
made a Temple to Fear, as to one of their (...) which they sacrificed a dog,
intimating thereby, Alex. ab Alex. l. 1. cap. 13. p. 21
that they should have no fellowship with fear. It is better to have a coward
to thy foe, then to thy counselor or copartner: for a man can look for no
true good from the fearful. Benevolentiae vis est metus insbecillis. 2. off.
Faint fear (says Tully) is an enemy to good will. The Camelion (says Pliny)
is the fearfullest creature of all other, and therefore it turns it self into
all colors that it may shift for it self. So fearful men, without respect of
faith or friendship, they turn themselves into all colors but the truth, that
they may save themselves. And whom they fear most, they serve most, though it
be least to their credit or commodity. (...).
Cowardice is well compared by the Grecians, to a white livered disposition,
whence we take our proverb white livered: as that waterish duscrasie, or
distemper of the liver, causes dropsies and Lienteries, and so hurts the
body more by corrupt humors, then it helps it by sanguification; and
howsoever life for a time be protracted; yet color, strength, and appetite
fails exceedingly, and breath at length forsakes the body: so a fearful
white livered friend, may seem to keep life in a good cause for a time, but it
is but an hydropick, or lienterick life, which being both together are
symptoms of inevitable death. Some corrupt counsel, lukewarm comfort, and
weak forces to no effect, they may afford; but it is but a palliation; it is
no cure: it is but to quench the City with a pottle pot when it is all on
fire, which indeed will make it burn the faster.

In a word, the fearful man is a foe to his friend, and a sriend to his foe.
What made Saul eye David continually to do him hurt, but his conceived fear;
though other causes concurred, yet this was the special: 1 Samuel 18.8.9.
What can he have more but the Kingdom? Whence arose the ruin of Achaz and all
his, but from the servile fear wherewith they were possessed, as the the holy
Ghost, by the Prophet Esaias witnesses: When he heard that Syria was
confederate with Ephraim, hi^ heart was moved, and the heart of his people, 2.
Tim. 1.17.
as the trees of the wood. Where this spirit of slavish fear is, the spirit of
God is not. God (says Paul) to Timothy, has not given the spirit of fear,
but of power, of love, and of a sound mind. Where the Apostle opposes the
spirit of God, or the graces of the spirit, as power, love, and soundnes of
judgment, to this slavish fear, which for the prevayling power of it, he
calls the spirit of fear, which cannot consist with the power of the
foresaid graces, whether it be in ministers, soldiers, Captains, Generals,
or Kings. As it is spoken there directly to the Ministers; so of all men they
had most need to look to it: for the spirit of fear in a Minister is a most
fearful plague to himself and others, especially in these fearful times,
that requires so much use of the Spirit of power. A sound conclusion
But observe this, as a main conclusion from the place touching all persons,
that where this spirit of fear resideth, there is neither soundnes of
judgment, nor sincerity of affection, (...).
nor power of action to be looked for. What should men then do with such
Ministers, friends, soldiers, or any other such? these white livered men, as
the Grecian notes well, are good for nothing.

As I desire that all men might remember the fearful punishment of this
slavish fear; namely, the burning lake; for the fearful and unbeleeving,
Rev. 21.8.
etc. Where observe, they are the very first in front, so I wish and pray, that
all that put their hand to the work and fight those battles, would take
courage to them. I would that speech of God, by Moses, unto the people might
prevail with them, Hear oh Israel, you approach this day to battle against
your enemies, let not your heart be soft, fear not, and hasten not away;
neither be you terrified because of them. The Lord adds a reason, for Jehovah
your God is he that goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies; to
save you: Even, so would he be with us, if we would be with him; if you will
fight for God as David did, that blessing that was pronounced upon David by
Abigail, shall be upon you and yours, the Lord would certainly make you a sure
house, and honor you and your children for ever, because you fight the battles
of the Lord: 1. Sam. 2^.28.
and he would bind up your souls in the bundle of life. I will not herein play
the Pope, to assure life, and relief of friends, out of purgatory for
fighting of the Lords battles; No, if such a fight would serve the turn, in
vain, did Christ fight that great battle on the cross: but thus much I will
assure them, that they that fight these battles, they fight the battles of the
Lord, for the maintenance of which, the Lord has given his promise: and surely
such as dye in these, they dye for the Lord; and thrice happy they, if they
dye in the Lord. As for their enemies fighting against the Lord, they have none
of this assurance, and howsoever it go with them they can have no sound
comfort.

One thing more in the fight to be observed is, that beaten rule of much use
and practice; not only to let the enemy fly, but to make way for him to fly,
if he be so disposed, for this there be both laws and a multitude of examples.
Po^aen. lib. 1.
Licurgus gave a written law to the Lacones, not to stop the enemies flight. It
was the saying of Scipio Africanus, that he would not only give way, but he
would also make way for his enemy to fly. A number of examples you have in
Frontine. Caesar having enclosed the Germans, standing to it desperately, made
way for them to fly. Haniball did so with the Romans at the battle of
Thrasimena opening his orders, he let them fly and so defeated them. So did
Camillus with the Gauls. The Grecians having got the victory at Salamis,
Polyaen. lib. 1.
they determined to cut the bridge over Hellespont, to stop Xerxes his passage:
but Themistocles that old beaten soldier with danger, counseled to let him
pass: for it stood with greater wit to rid the land of him, then to force him
to fight.

The reasons of this rule be two; the first given by Vegetius; necessity is a
desperate virtue which will effect (as Themistecles well observes) that which
neither valor, nor magnanimity durst adventure to do. Secondly, by this the
victory is more easily obtained: they may kill, and take at their pleasure
routed forces without the loss of themselves, Desperatio magnum est ad honest
moriendum incitamentu^ Curtius lib. 9.
where as by keeping them to it, they may buy the victory to dear. Despair
will incite some to dye with honor, (if dye they must) that it may be, never
meant it. G. Maulius the Roman Consul, keeping the Hetruscians too strayt,
lost his life, and had lost the field, if his Legates had not opened their
orders and let them pass, and so they had them at their pleasure. Yea this
sometimes has lost the victory; witness King John of France invironing Edward
the black Prince, not suffering him upon any conditions to pass, put him and
his handful so to it, that the French had shame and repentance for their
pains. To conclude the point, I will shut it up with the saying of Count
Poetiline; If mine enemy (says he) would fly I would make him a bridge of gold
to fly upon; yet all this must be taken with a grain of salt; Not so to let
the enemy fly as to loose the occasion of the victory, or for fear, to hold
back the sword from blood (that were to encourage the enemy, to redintegrate
the fight.) That wise speech of Kings Agis, is worthy of observation, who in
the pursuit of his flying enemies, Plutarch. in Apotheg.
being counseled to make way for them; answered thus: If we be not able to
overcome our flying enemies, how should we overcome our fighting enemies?
intimating thereby that no occasion against the enemy should be lost.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Issue of the hattle in General.
NOw I come to the Issue of the battle, which gives the one party the
victory, and the other the overthrow: for seldom they part on an even hand. It
is true indeed that the victory is so dear bought many times (that as the
Learned observe) it scarce deserves the name of victory. Victoria mag^o empta
non est victoria sed calamitas. (...).
Of that dear bought victory, the Grecians have a pret^ie proverb. The
conqueror cries and the conquered is undonel. Pyrrhus that Mirror of Generals
made this good out of his own experience; who having twice defeated the
Romans, but at so dear a rate, that he was forced to say: such another victory
would undo us. Yet since there is always a better and a worse, my task
putte^h me to it, to discover as briefly and perspicuously as I can, how both
the conqueror, and he conquered should carry themselves. Seneca lays down
the general: Noscere hoc primum decet,
Quid facere victor debeat, victus pati
It first becomes the conqueror to know
what he should do, the conquered also
what he should suffer.


CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Carriage of the Conqueror.
TO begin then first with the victor: Victoria est semper insolens.
for (as Tully observes) victory is always rash and insolent. For the
ordering of victory there be two sorts of directions, the former for making of
it up, the latter for the right usage of it, when it is fully a^^ained. In the
former there be these two observatio^s. Be careful to make up the victory.
First the conqueror must take heed of the rash and disordered pursuit of the
enemy. To this effect serves well that counsel of Iphicrates joined with his
practice. This Commander following his flying enemy, at his leisure in good
order, gave order to his soldiers in the pursuit, that they should beware of
ambushment, and that they should not follow too hard, Lib. 3.
nor near to the Walls or forts planted with munition, giving a good reason as
Polyaenus well observes, that many by doing so have lost the victory, that
they had obtained. Vegetius tells us, Frequenter jam fusi aeies dis^erso^, ac
passim sequentes reparatis viribus interimit. lib. 3. cap. 25.
that it often so falls out, that forces put to flight, recollecting
themselves against the disordered pursuers, does alter the case, and kills
them right down as conquered, that ere while were the conquerors. This change
of fight, by way of a proverbiall speech, is called osculana pugna, or a battle
wherein they, which before had the victory, are now overcome; as though victory
with a kiss had saluted them, and so forsaken them. So it fell out with
Pirrhus, who having in a manner overcome Valerius Laevinus, the Roman
Commander, was by him in the same battle by the recollection of forces
overcome. A notable instance of this, Historians give in Q. Fulvius that noble
Roman Commander, who being overcome by Carus, General of the Segadans, and
having lost six thousand, he observed the disordered pursuit of the enemy, out
of his too too much pride and confidence, as though there had been no danger of
re-encounter; whereupon he commanded some troops of Horse being laid to keep
the strayts, to charge the disorderly purfuying enemy; who presently-unhorsed
and killed the General Carus, Appienus de bello Hispanie.
being in the front of the followers: besides him they slew 6000, and pursued
the victory till night.

Yet with this caution, another extreme is to be avoided, namely the slacking
so of the pursuit, that they loose more which they might have, then that which
they obtain is worth. This neglect of Hanibal at the battle of Cannas lost
Rome, which would have been the crown indeed of the Charthaginian war: had he,
according to the counsel of his friends, flowne to the mark, that is, pursued
the defeated and routed, Romans into the city; he might have taken the prey,
of which again he had never so fair an offer; neither do I think (though
otherwise a great Commander) that he could give any good account of his
neglect; o^^ely this general might excuse him; no man is wise at all times.
Nem^ omn^^^s boris sapit. Vincere scis H^mb^l. victor^a utines^^.
For this Barchab the Carthaginian gave him this Motto, to his ever lasting
blemish; thou can overcome Haniball, but thou can not use the victory, to
thy best advantage.

The second observation is, that they abstain from spoil, till ^hey have
fully secured themselves, Avi^itate prae^ae saepe exercuus victoriam
camiserunt. Hantbal. Scotus Placentinus.
from any further reattempt of the enemy: some snatching at the prey before
the victory insured have often lost, both prey and victory. Tacitus gives an
instance in the Germans, who only out of their greedines of the prey, were
overthrown by the Romans at the battle of Lib. 1. Aunal.
Horminius. Therefore Saxo Gramaticus gives a good rule for this: with Auro
spreto, anr^ d^m^nos in sequimin^.
contempt of gold it self, pursue the p^ssessors of the gold. Many examples
there be of this kind, let this one more suffice. The Germans at the battle of
Erlam in Hungary, Anno 1596, having thrice defeated the Turks; yet through
untimely falling on the spoil, were themselves defeated. And so much for the
insuring of the victory.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the true Vsofe Victory.
THus having showed you as well as I can, Five things to be observed in the
true used of victory. Acknowledge victory to be of God, and be thankful for
the some.
how to secure the victory; I come now ^o the true use of the victory being
thus secured. The true use or good carriage of the victory consists in these
five particulers. Thankfulness to God, moderation of themselves, C^emencie
toward the conquered, Lawful usage of the creatures, and due respect to their
own soldiers.

Now to the first, wherein there be two things to be noted, First an
acknowledgment of the victory to come of God, and next to be thankful to God
for it. For both those there be plenty of testimonies, both in Goods book,
and other writers: the former of these two all men will easily acknowledge in
word (except they be Atheists) but the neglect of the latter shows the
former, in the most, to be but verbal: for if men would acknowledge that
victory were from God indeed, they would never carry themselves so insolently
in their victories against God as they do. But to come to some proofs. First,
that all victories are of God. Samuel speaking of the victories that David and
his worthies obtained: 2. Sam. 23.10. Genesis 14.20 Iosuab. 11.6. Exodus 15. Judge.
5.
and the Lord wrought a great victory that day. God is said to give Abraham the
victory over his enemies. So to give Joshua his enemies into his hands: So you
may see in that song of Moses, and in the song of Deborah. As victory is of
God, so all the Saints of God have attributed their victories to God, and
thanked God for them; as may appear at large in the aforesaid songs. Blessed
be the most high God (says Melchizedeck to Ahraham) which has delivered thine
enemies into thine hand. Moses after the victory obtained over the Amalekits,
in token of his thankfullnes erecteth an Altar to the Lord, which he calls by
the name of Jehovah is my banner. I^hovab Nissi. Exo. 17.5.
The Prophet David at Gods commandment, having smitten the Philistines,
attributed all the power unto God, and for the victory gives him all the
praise; The Lord has broken, forth (says he) upon mine enemies as the breach
of many waters; therefore he called the name of the place Baal Perazin; where
observe how he as^ribeth the victory wholly to the power of God, and in token
of his thankfulness for the same obtained, he leaves a monument thereof in the
name of the place, calling it Baal Perazin, or the plain of division, or broken
assunder; because he brake in upon them, by the power of God, like the
inundation of waters. To this purpose, the 22, of the second of Sam: is worth
your reading.

The very heathens who were ignorant of the true God; yet did acknowledge their
victories to be of God, and therefore labored to entice from their enemies
their tutelar gods, to get them on their side, that they might the easier
overcome them. Of that mind were the Philistims in that battle against the
Israelites, when they perceived that the Ark of God was come into the Camp
(though he were not there himself) yet were they exceedingly afraid, and said;
God is come into the Camp, and they said, woe unto us, 1 Samuel 4.6.7.
who shall deliver us out of the hand of those mighty Gods? etc. They spoke not
this out of any true fear, or yet out of any true knowledge that they had of
God: but only they feared that the Gods of Israel (for so they called the
Ordinances) would plague them, as the Aegiptians were plagued by them: but God
in just wrath gave his people into their hands: which victory they attributed
to their god Dagon, and in token of their thankfulness, they sacrificed the
best of their spoils to him, namely, the Ark of God which they had taken from
the Israelites. The Thracians, though a warlike people, yet the most barbarous
of all Nations, Marcellinus lib. 27.
do challenge Mars for their Countryman, and so make him their God, to whom
they bow before they go to battle, and to whom they sacrifice the best of
their captives, after their victory. Where, by the way, in exercise of Arms,
to offer a laurel bough to a feigned Mars, is more Thracian-like, then
Christian-like. For in jest or in earnest, we should not attribute, or make
any show of attributing victory to any other God, Aedes victo^iae. Alex. ab
Alex. lib. ^. cap. 11.
but to Jehovah. The Romans likewise had their Temples consecrated to Victory.
And to put the Romish Philistims in the bushel with them, as they duly
deserve, they sacrifice the praise of their victory, to Jack in the box, or
other Idols.

But all these may tax a great many that go under the name of Christians. They
know that victory and deliverance are from God; yet when it comes to the
acknowledgement, and tendering to God his due honor; they say little less in
their actions then Pharaoh said in plain terms; Who is the Lord that I should
obey his voice? Exodus 5.^.
I know not the Lord. That which is related of Tamerlan, called the Securg of
God for tyranny, may make many blush at their unthankfulness to God. Having
taken Bajazet the great Turk, at the battle of Stella montis or Cassona, (as
the Turks call it,) he we^ out on foot to meet him, brought him into his Tent,
s^ him on the same Carpet^ a^ meat with himself, and did hi^ all the honor
that possible he could: he began to recou^ how much they were both bounden to
give thanks un^ God, for the great things he had bestowed on them; (...) for
bringing himself, being a poor lame man, to command from the borders of India
to the gates of ^^vast^ from the which he had given Bajazet to command to the
borders of Hungary; insomuch, says he, if God ha^ vouchsafed to have given me
a share in the whole world, wha^ could such a crooked thing as I desire more?
An^ are we not bound (says he) to give him many thanks* This is more I am
sure then a great many have thought on in any serious manner; but they are
liker to Baiazer indeed, whom Tamerlane questioned, whether ever he had give^
thanks to God or no, for making him so great an Emperor; who confessed
ingenuously that, whereof many be guilty (though they are ashamed to confess
it;) that he had never so much as thought upon giving thanks to God. To whom
T^merlane replied, that i^ was no wonder that so ungrateful a man should be
made a spectacle of misery. For you (says he being blind of one eye, and I
lame of a leg, was there any worth in us why God should se^ us over two great
Empires, Haec L^onclavius in editione sua Annael. Turcar.
of Turks and Tartars, to command many more worthy then our selves? I would
have many to observe this; and if neither Gods works for them, nor his Word to
them, nor their professing that they know him, will serve to work their hearts
to thankfulness: yet let them for shame pick a pattern out of one of the worst
men that ever we read of: and let them blush at the drowning of many great
deliverances in oblivion, as though God had been bound to them. Are not some
from their cradle to this day, engaged to the purity of Religion, by their
continual preservation, and admirable deliveries from the designs of their
enemies; yet how have they requit religion, and her followers? in plain terms,
with the devil to their thanks. Yea, let those to whom God in fighting of his
battles has given any victory, be humbled for their great neglect of this. I
speak in particular to the Hollander, whose deliverances has been admirable,
and whose maintenance is from the very finger of God against the whole forces
of Babel; but I fear their forgetfulness will make God weary of them: and we
may well take them by the hand; for we have not yet so much as reckoned with
God for the debt of 88, and the Powder Plot deliverance. As we have joined in
this so sacrilegious a sin of unthankefulnesse; so God give us to join both in
reckoning and restitution.

It is a thing incident to Gods children to be too too faulty in this very
particular, if they look not to it. Witness good Hezekiah, who had more mind
to show his pomp and bravery to the Babylonish Ambassadors, then to give
thanks to God for his deliverance from Senacherib; and therefore the Lord met
with him. In time to come, upon any opportunity, forget not to offer sacrifice
of praise, be the victory never so little. David in the very same case, Psa.
116.12
does model with himself what to render unto God. What shall I render to
Jehovah for all his bounty toward me? The return of thanks in any true manner
and measure, makes an increase of the stock.

To these two former, a third may be added respecting God, that if any place
contended for, Purge out idolatry.
come under the conquerors government, that he purge it from idolatry and all
salse worship, so much as in him lies. A mixture of religion or a linsie
woolsie worship, the Lord will not tolerate, and what man dare take upon him
then to do it? The suppressing of all false worship, may be pressed upon Kings
and Magistrates, Reasons for suppresing falso worship.
wheresoever they have right to command, by these five reasons: from Gods
strict commandment in that behalf, from the nature of God to be worshipped,
from the office of the Magistrate, from the practice of Idolaters, and lastly,
from the evil that ensues upon idolatrous worship.

Then to the first (for in every particular I would be brief) God plyeth this
point again and again upon his people, and the rulers thereof; namely, that
they should break down their images; Exo. 23.24 and 32.
that they should make no covenant with them, nor with their gods; that they
should not suffer them to dwell in the land; Deu. 12.13
they should make no mention of the names of their gods; tha^ they should
destroy their places wherein they served their gods, ye^ the graven images.
Deuteronomy. 7.3.
Again thou shall not stricke any convent with them. What can be more more
plainly said against tolleration? for herein is forbidden, as one says well,
not only their gross idols, Tota eorum conversatio prohibita est.
or superstitious rites and ceremonies in the true worship of God, but
generally all conversation is forbidden with them as naught.

If any plead against this, that the charge concerned the Jews against the
Canaanits, in particular; I answer, observ^ but the reason of the charge, and
it will tell you that it concerns all Gods people in the case of idolatry,
or superstitious worship, the rule must need be as general, as the reason of
the rule: Exe. 23.23.
but the reason both in Exodus and Deuteronomy: concerns all; therefore so does the
rule; They shall not dwell in the land (says the Lord) least they make thee to
sin against me: for thou will serve their gods, which shall be a snare unto thee.
And again, thou shall not make marriages with them, thy daughter thou shall
not give to his son, and his daughter thou shall not take to thy son. Mark
the reason: for he will turn away thy son from after me. Have not woeful
experience taught us in this land? and were we not like to be taugh^ (like
fools) in a deeper and more dangerous instance^ Of the generality of this
instance; If any can say of his sons heart that an idolatrous daughter cannot
turn it away from God, then he might go match him with such an one: but the
former were to contradict God, 1. Ioh. 5.12 De corona militis. cap. 10.
therefore he may not do the latter. Babes (says S. John) keep your selves
from idols. That is as Tertullian says) ab ipsa effigy eorum. From any
relic, or show of them, all which should be abandoned. In precept John
forbids these four things; The making of Idols; the using of Idols; Lib.
2.8.
the keeping of them in the house or land; (for all must be put away, as I have
showed:) And lastly, we are to avoid the users of Idols; they must be
abandoned. Take heed that none spoil, or make a prey of you. Col. 2.8.


As for the Papists excuse, that they are no Idolaters it is but a covering of
fig leaves, as the word of God, the wirtings of the learned, both ancient and
modern does fully manifest, wherein they are discovered to be the very worst
sort of Idolaters. Page 685.
Look Master Perkins in his treatise of idolatry of the last times.

The second reason may be taken from the nature of God and true religion, which
is one, as God is one, one faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
one God. There be many false religions, as there is much counterfeit Pearl:
but one true religion, Lib. 4 de Divin. institut.
compared to the Union or Margarit. This appears by the Etymon of religion,
which is so called as Lactantius; a religando, from tying the soul unto God,
non a relegendo (says he) as Tully would have it: Nor a relinquendo, as the
Atheist would have it. Relgio est qua se ^^nima deo ligat. 1. Sam. 4.4
So Augustine runs upon the same ground. Religion is that whereby the soul
is tied unto God; and so Isidore to the same effect. This unity will endure no
competition: Dagon and the Arc cannot stand together: Yea God will have no
partner in his Worship: because he is a jealous God. In that land where God
dwells he will endure no worship but his own. Having commanded the Israelits
to root out all idolatry and superstition, Deuteronomy. 12.4.7.
he shows them that he will choose out a place where he will put his name,
and there he will dwell, and thither should they resort: As if the spirit of
God should say, where he dwells, there must no Idols dwell. Yea let Kings and
Princes persuade themselves, if they suffer idolatry in the place where he
has put his name, he will be gone from them and the place. It is an
Athiest-like conceit of carnal wretches, and gross Papists (as I have heard
from some of them,) That a man may be saved by any religion, as though God
would be pleased with any thing.

The third reason may be taken from the office of the Magistrate, or supreme
power, whose office as it is to estabish true Religion, and to maintain it; so
he must extirpate the false. Moses beat the golden Calfe to powder; Ezechiah
brake the brazen Serpent; Josiah and Iehoshaphat, played their parts in this;
and where they left any relict it is (deservedly) laid upon them as a fault:
but the high places they took not away. That point of separatism against this
is very unsound, whereby they would abridge the power of the Magistrate in
reforming of religion. Their evasion likewise, from the instance of the Kings
under the Law, is of no worth: for Christ himself as a King reformed the
Temple, Sic Chrysostom and Augustini.
and that as the Learned observes two several times; first, at the beginning
of his course, Ioh. 2; and lastly at, or toward the end of his course, Non
verbis solum sed verberibus etiam. Esa. ^9.33.
Math. 21.12, not only by words, says Cyril, but by strokes also, did he
reform the abuses, and that as a Magistrate, as all the Learned observe. Yea,
that Evangelicall Prophet fore-telleth, that Kings under the Gospel, shall be
noursing fathers, and Queens noursing-mothers to the Church. Now fathers and
mothers must as well abandon that which is naught from their children, as
maintain that which makes for their good. But since it does relish too much
of Anabaptisme, I would have them let it go. Hence likewise that groundless
reason, against the truth of the Churches of England, falls to the ground: that
they are false, because they had no call but enforced constraint by the sword
of the Magistrate: the Magistrate, as I have proved, in abandoning false
worship, and establishing the true worship, does nothing but what his place
injoynes him: if he be tied to the former, he is tied to the latter, Contraia
sunt sub eodem genere.
because contraries are under one, and the self same logical genus: Neither
by this means (as they mistake) were the Churches called; but by the pains
taking of the Ministry: Witness that course taken both in the reign of K.
Edward, and in the beginning of the reign of Q. Elizabeth; would they but in
sobriety difference the weakness of being, from the nullity of being; and the
purity of a thing, from the truth of a thing, they should come off the
quicksands whereon they have set themselves. The judiciously sincere, neither
for fear, favor, gain, or any by respect, makes their Churches worse or better
then they are indeed; neither do they attribute more or less to the
Magistrate then is due: Est vindex utriusque tabulae.
And as he is the Protector and Acquitter of both the Tables from abuse; so let
him have his due, but let him look to do his due, and let him not hearken to
those Matchivilian heads, who give too much to him, as the former give too
little, persuading that he may tolerate any religion so it be for his profit.
Matchiavil relig. Maxim. 2.
A more dangerous Principle then this, is not hatched in hell; and whatsoever
Prince is persuaded of this (as one faith well) will in the end prove a very
mocker of all religion. D^scourse against Match.
Nature it self will evince the falsehood of this position: for as Nature
teaches that there is a God: so likewise that there is but one God (for
otherwise he could not be perfect, since perfection and unity are reciprocal)
by just consequence then it must necessarily follow, that there must be but one
Religion, and that of Gods own appointment.

Some Civilians, who (for the most) are too much Matchiavalized, loving the
profits better then the Law, labors to palliate this with utilitie, matter of
fact, and necessity: And for instance they bring Sultan Solomon the great Turk
(a fit example indeed) who being moved by the Mufty, (or chief Pope) and the
Cadilesheiri (or Arch-prelates) together with some of the Bassaes, to abandon
the Christians, Jews, and all of diverse religions; or otherwise to force them
to Muzilmanize, that is, to profess Turcism: The Turk looking out at a
window, pointed them to the variety of the flowers in the garden; whereunto
(says he) I compare diversities of religions in my Dominions, which are rather
useful then hurtful, so they live in obedience. The like, they tell us of
Alexander, Severus, Traian, and others: but what be these to Christian Kings
and Rulers, who have not so learned Christ? They must walk by Laws and not by
Examples; neither must God loose the least jote of his honor, for their
greatest gains. As for necessity, in regard of disturbance, all wisdom is to
be used in avoiding of it, and all fair means used to reduce them to the
truth: but disturbing must not be avoided with sin. It is a clause worthy
the observation, and by the Popes themselves placed in the Canon right, though
not observed, Reg. 1. de Regiminis number. 6.
but ill abused; That it is far better that offense or disturbance should come,
then the least truth should be forsaken. Is a King a noursing father, and will
he suffer a plaguey or leprous child to be in the house, or lie in the bed with
his child that is sound? Will he suffer poison to lie strawed about, where his
child may reach it? This were to murder his child, and not to play the
parent to it. Will a King suffer foreign Kings to erect their Laws in his
Dominions, and permit his subjects to obey, some one, and some another? No, he
would scorn it, and hold them Traitors that should motion it: and will he put
that upon God, and force him (as it were) to bear, that he will not bear
himself? Surely, the Lord will not bear it.

It was a princely part, and a royal resolution, worthy the imitation in
Edward the sixth, a Sun^shine over-clouded by the sins of this land in the
very rising: he being requested with his Council by Charles the fifth, then
Emperor, to suffer the Lady Mary his sister, to have a Mass in her house; the
Council sitting about that and other things, sent D. Cranmer, and D. Ridley to
persuade the King to grant it. When he had heard what they could say; he so
learnedly and gravely did refute it, out of the word of God, that with
astonishment their mouths were stopped. Then they fell to him with false grounds
of policy; as the loosing of the Emperors favor, the hardening of his sisters
heart, the discontenting of Popish subjects: to whom he replied; that they
should content themselves; for he would spend his life and all that he had,
rather then agree or grant to that, which he knew certainly to be against the
truth. Yet for all this they would not leave him, but pressing him further, he
fell a weeping, and willed them to let him alone; Fox. page 1179.
He had cause to weep indeed, but they greater: Where they should have
preserved him from sin, they were made the means to corrupt him. The
Prelates, and pleaders for Conformity, have no great reason to brag of these
men, (as they were Bishops not of Gods making,) for whilst their heatts were
deceived, and their eyes vayled with the bewitching honors, and glorious
shows of Pabel, against the light of knowledge; they proved, as you see,
enemies to the cross of Christ; therefore God pulled them out of their rags, and
cast them in the Furnace, and then they proved his friends indeed; and so may
some Prelates prove, if God bring them to the stake: But to the matter; for all
that they could do, such was the zeal of that holy Saint and happy King; that
Lady Mary could have no Mass at that time.

To conclude this reason, men would have thought, that the union of Britains
Kingdoms would have cut short the increase of Babel his Kingdom; and that the
Foxes should have been forced, either to change their skins or holes: but we
see, for our sins, by neglect of authority, that, to the dishonor of God, the
defacing of his Gospel, the grief of his people, and indangering of life,
crown, and dignity, they are so hugely increased in both Kingdoms and in
Ierland, that, in their own conceit, they are grown too hard f^^ us: it is most
just with God if we spare the Cananits, that the Cananits should vexus.

The fourth reason may be taken from idolaters, who to our shame are zealous of
their false worship. The Lord may justly upbraid us with such, as he did his
people Israel; hath^ nation changed their gods, Ier. 2.11.
which are yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which
does not profit. So the Lord may inquire of us, whether heathen Rome, and
Antichristian Rome, do tolerate any worship but that which is of their own
appointment. The Laws of old Rome, forbade any strange Gods to be worshipped
amongst them, that is, as Tully expounds, Cic. de leg.
privatim adscitos, of men's private device; but by the Senats public
appointment: so new Rome is as strict, in that they will have no mixture but of
their own making; instance the Tridentin excommunications; witness likewise,
with many others, the Doctors of Doway, upon the Lords forbidding of mixtures
of seed, Lev. 19.19.
cattle, and garments: here all participation (say they) with heretics, and
schismatickes is forbidden. Philip of Spain said, he had rather have no
subject, then subjects of a diverse religion: and out of a bloody zeal,
suffered his oldest son Charles to be murdered by the cruel inquisition;
because he seemed to favor profession, for which, Non pepercit filio suo, sed
dedit pro nobis. Hieron. Catina.
that mouth of blasphemy the Pope, gave him this for his panagyr, that he had
not spared his own son but had given him for them.

As old Rome, called the Christian religion, a new religion; so new Babylon
calls the ancient truth a new religion, or heresy; and therefore they hold
it a damnable thing, to have any thing to do with it, expecting but a day when
they may race out the remembrance of it: As for our drawing nigh unto them in
superstitious rites; they flout us to our face, and tell us in a bravado, that
let us come as nigh to them as we will, they will not come one hairs breadth
nigh to us; yea they asperse our religion with this, Quo vadis page 13. Heylin.
page 249.
that if it were true we would never bland it. How bitter then is the friut of
D. Hall, his correspondencie with popery, for which he pleads in his
treatise of travells, and urged hard for conformity with popish ceremonies, by
Heylin in his Geography. As for the Papists applauding of our leiturgie (as he
speaks there) it is but a sorry praise to it; when they reckon with him, they
will pay him for this, as they do in the Epistle to Spalatoes recantation
(where belying him falsely with the name of an unlearned Minister) they flout
him for his brag, In the honor of the married clergy. page 55.
that the English Church was honored with a Dalmatian pall put upon a Bandogg
indeed. I know the Doctor knows them well enough, and that there is no peace
with Rome, who have sworn themselves deadly enemies to the gospel and the
Professors thereof. It is the oath of the Kinghts of the holy Ghost, ordained
by Henry the third of France, Anno 1570. that they should persecute the
Hugonits.

Now I come to the last argument, which is, the evil ensuyng upon the
toleration of any false religion. The Lord tells the Israelits that if they
destroy not all the idols of the Canaanits, that his angershould be kindled
against them, Deuteronomy. 7.4.
and he would destroy them suddenly. How angry was God with Iehosaphat, for
having any thing to do with idolatrous Achab: therefore he rebukes him
sharply, and threatens him fearfully by the mouth of Hanani the Seer; 2.
Chron. 19 2.
should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord: therefore
is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. And falling in the same fault again
in joining with wicked Ahaziah King of Israel; he tells him by the mouth of
Eliezer; because thou have joined they self with Ahazia, the Lord has broken
thy works. 2. Chron. 20 37.
If the Lord were thus angry for joining in civil affairs, how angry would he
have been if he had admitted their idolatry, or matched with them?

The most part of the Kings and great ones, Application
they either forget God altogether, or they think he is not the same God. I
would therefore have them to cast but their eyes upon examples of later times,
and see how the Lord has met with tolerators of false religion. Henry the
fourth of France begun well, but he held not out; whose tolerating of others
(though upon extremity,) and embracing of popery, for a kingdom, though from
the teeth outward; caused the Lord (as one said well to him) to smite first at
his tongue, wherewith he had denied him, and at last to smite at his heart, by
one of the furies of the same hellish religion, which for the world, he was
content for a time to tolerate. How did Q. Mary pay Cranmer and Ridley, for
pleading so hard to the King, that she might have a Mass. Men must not think,
first to serve their own turns, and then to serve Gods turn; to go on with
policy (making religion dance atte^dance to it, which indeed should serve
religion) is to set the Ass upon Christ, and not Christ upon the Ass. The
disturbance, and distraction, of the Germans, which weakeneth them exceedingly
against the common enemy; arises especially from the toleration of diversity
of religion. No thing (as one says well) does more combine the minds of men
together, then unity of religion: and nothing more dis-ioyneth them, then
diversity of religion. And it were good (me think) for the united Provinces,
to make up their union with unity of religion. And I may say boldly upon my
former grounds, made good by instances, that they endanger themselves most by
toleration of diversity of religion. Besides the multitude of idols in their
houses, whereof they make no bones, (though thereby they keep life in Popery)
what a confused chaos of heresies, what a State renting breach of Schismatic
divisions, with a hotch-potch of opinions are to be found with them: wherein to
their blemishes they are holden the Antesignans, or Ringleaders through the
world; so that it is grown to a proverb, If a man had lost his religion, he
might find it at Amsterdam. Which proverb. I think may rather be inverted thus:
If a man bring any religion to Amsterdam, he had best take heed he loose it
not; for reason and experience makes this position good; that a place of
opposition is not so dangerous to Religion, as that place where for Religion,
every man may do what he list. They must not think that their manner of
government, or necessity of trading, or any other thing, will serve to
tolerate this toleration, against the Law of God and nature: the office of the
Magistrate, the example of the enemy, and the evil ensuing on it, I wish they
may observe and ponder; together with the aim of their cruel enemy, (who
looks for more advantage out of this evil, then out of any other thing.)
Where there be many Apes, there be but a few men: Many weeds, a little corn: So
a small deal of true religion, where is so much diversity of religion. Where
there is a Cachexia, or evil habit of humors, there is but a little good
blood; so an evil habit of corruption, takes away the life of true Religion,
in which indeed consists the life of true policy. I pray God they may look to
it; and that he would open our hearts from the head to the foot, to look to it
at home, where Popery is as freely practiced, as if it had public toleration,
and that by connivency, which God will not wink at.

And because matching with Idolaters, sets up the greatest gate to idolatry;
and by consequence lays us open to Gods heavy wrath, as God himself does
witness: Deuteronomy. 7.4.
They will turn away thy sonn^ from following me, that they may serve other
gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy you
suddenly; We must shut that floud-gate if we will not have the plague come in
and consume us. I wonder how men can hold up their faces to speak for such
Matches. They are first flatly against the Word, 2 Cor. 6.12
be not unequally yoked; which the Doctors of Doway quote in their Marginall
note upon Levit. 19, to condemn all matches with schismatics and heretics:
For confirmation whereof they cite Theodoret. Secondly, the Lord taxes such
Matches as a high measure of sin, instance in Ahab, of whom it is said; as if
it had been a light thing to have walked in the ways of his father, 1 King
16.31.
he took to wife Iezabel who served Baal. Thirdly, of the evil effects of
these Matches; we need not go no further then our own Nation. It is reported
in our Histories of Vortigern, who Anno 450, at the persuasion of Hengist,
brought in a multitude of Saxons, and married Rowen daughter to Hengist:
Intravit Satanas in cor eius Math. Westmonasteriens pa. 156.
of whom it is said, that the devil entered into his heart; because, being a
Christian by profession, he matched with an Infidel, which was a plague to
himself, and his, and all the whole Nation. As for that Countrygentleman
Moderator, I will say no more but this, that he makes a pretty show, if there
were no Bible: but of the two places he quoteth thence, the last marreth all
that he has done: 2 Chr. 28.9
For sure it was a part of David's admonition to Solomon, that in seeking the
Lord he should shun and abhor all Idolatrous Matches; for David hated all those
that held of superstitious vanity. And as Solomon forsook the Lord in this
crossing Gods command, and his fathers counsel, so he and all Israel smarted
for it. I am sure that this place well understood, and well applied, is worth
all the rest that he has said: Yea, if his moderation be but laid in the
balance, with principles of humane policy, it will be found lighter then
vanity: And if he know no more of the Spaniards nature, practice and projects
against us, then he has delivered, he is but a Country Moderator indeed. I
would but entreat him to take notice of the judgment, of as wise, as great,
and as good a King as any lived in his age; concerning matching with the
Spanyard. Lewis the 12, of France, who for his goodness was called pater
patriae, being much importuned by Anne his Queen, Ex lib. facete dictorum.
Commentar. Aenae Silvii de dicts ac factis Alphons.
to match his daughter Claudia (after wife to Francis of Valois) to Charles the
fifth, son to Maximilian, made this wise answer, You may as well desire (says
he) the Cat and the Mouse to agree in one, intimating thereby (says the
Author) that it was impossible for the Spanish and the French at any time to
agree; and all men know it is less possible, for many respects, for the
English and Spanish to agree, especially as things go now. If he would peruse
Guicciardine but a little; whom he cites for their praise, he might see the
Spanyard painted out in his colors; as also in other Histories, both foreign
and domestic, as in their pride, Atheism, Cruelty, Filthiness, Fidefragie,
Avarice and Beggary: yea, in one of their own Writers, that they are loved of
no Nation; and yet we must dote upon them. I was taken thus off the way a
little, by reason of this occurrent, but desiring of God, that that Match may
never be, I return to conclude the point against Toleration, with that
threatening of Christ against the Angels of the Churches of Pergamus and
Thyatira, if they suffered any longer the doctrine of Balaam and Iezabel, which
he hated, he would come against them, Rev. 2.12.
and give them according to their works: So indeed will he do with all, both
Ministers and Magistrates, that tolerate false Religion.

CHAP. XL. Of the moderation of the Conquerours passions, and of his Temperance.
I Come now to the second particular of the Conquerours carriage; namely, the
moderation of himself, which brancheth out it self in these two things; (...).
the moderation of his passions, and temperance in the use of things: in the
command of these, does a man conquer himself, which indeed is the greatest
conquest: for what shall it profit a man to overcome all others, and to be a
slave to himself, that is, to his own corruptions: but if a man can overcome
himself he cannot be conquered. Where the soul is free (says Plato) and is
the Commandresse of the Passions, there is the bravest victory. Vincere posse
hosts, haud parva est gloria regni;
At se posse ipsos vincere, mayor ea est.
To conquer foes, its glory great to Fings;
Themselves to conquer, greater glory brings.
That speech of Claudian to Honorius the Emperor, is worthy the noting; where
he shows him, that if he could conquer from one India to another, and all the
world should obey him; yet if he should obey hi. inordinate p^ssions, as fear,
lust, and wrath, he were no free man. -- tunc omnia iure tenebis
Cum poteris rex esse tui.
Then holdst thou all by right,
Whilst King thou art of thy self.


In a word, as Seneca says; He overcommeth twice, that overcommeth himself.

Excess of passion was a foul blemish to Phillips victory; vaunting himself
of his great victory at Cheronea, over the Grecians, he grew to such a height
of pride, that Archidamus Agiselaus his son, took him wisely down with this
cooler; Rhodig ii. 6 cap. 26.
That he could not see his shadow to be any longer after the victory, then it
was before the victory. A fit answer indeed; for this exorbitancy of passion is
from want of knowledge of a man's self. That divine Oracle should ever be with
us, (...).
Know thy self. Augustus Caesar, Severus, and other Heathens, were so eminent
in this excellent Motto, that it commended them more then all their victories:
and though they had but the rules of nature, and mere Morality to direct them;
yet they may make many a one blush that lives under the light of the Gospel.
Charles the Great, was not so truly great, from that Majesty and Dominion
wherein he excelled, as from that care he had, that he and his, should
behave themselves worthy of so great victories; as may appear by a speech
worthy of himself, made to his soldiers after the victory in that long war
against the Lombards and Saxons; Heroes vocabimus, (...) socit regum.
wherein he calls his soldiers by the name of Nobles, and ^ings fellows,
and wills them to carry themselves as Kings over their own corruptions, and
that they should not deface that glory gotten in war by drunkenesse,
scurrilitie or beastliness, of which if they should keep themselves unspotted
and carry themselves toward women, and orphans, as became generous spirits,
he would not only maintain them, but he would also account injury done to
them as Les-majestie against himself: but if they should let loose their
raines to disorder, they should turn their glory into shame, and his bounty
into punishment. Aeneas Silvius lib. 2. Commentar de rebus gestus. Alphonsus.
Romans 12.21 Question.
I would have all conquerours, both Generals and soldiers; to take a pattern
our of this. To this I may add that carriage of Frederick the Emperor, after
his victory over the Gunzians in Hungary: We have done a great work (says
he) my soldiers; but their remains a greater; namely, to overcome our selves
by brid^ing our avarice, and desire of revenge.

To apply with the Author, had the now Emperor and his, learned of him, the
blood and outrage of their victories, had not made so loud a cry in Gods ears,
as at this day it does. It is a good rule for conquerours; Application
be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good: Romans 12.2.
And it were a greater glory for some to conquer their passions, rather then
Pulpits.

To come to later times, Jews the 12, was eminent in this virtue; and Henry
the 4 of France, is for this much extolled in a Poem by Stephanus. And not to
detract from General Norice, it was the crown of his commendation, wherein it
is said that Henry the 4, did not disdain to emulate him. If a question here
be put, whether Christians may rejoice in the victories over their enemies or
no? I answer, all things concurring to make the victory lawful, without
question they may rejoice in their overthrow, especially as they are Gods
enemies. Psalm. 58.11 12.
The just shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, and he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked, and when the wicked perish there is shouting
joy: Pro. 11.10.
But this must be as they are the enemies of God, therefore the heaven and the
earth, and all therein, are said to sing for joy, at the spoiling of eastern
Babylon; Ier. 51.48.49
because she had caused the slain of Israel to fall. So at the fall of
western Babylon, beyond her in impiety and cruelty; heaven, and all the holy
host, shall rejoice over her, Rev. 18.20
when God shall avenge them upon her.

The second branch of selfe-government, consists in the temperate use of such
effluence of things, as in their conquests many times they meet with all; as
the beauty and bravery of their captive women, the delicacie of their fare;
for this Scipio was much commended, and it was great Alexander his greatest
grace, that he would not so much as look upon his captives, the wife and
daughter of Darius, but with good deliberation. But his last did not answer the
first: for after that he had overcome all, he was overcome of cups, which
marred all, and lost him more glory then ever he got. Drunkenesse in a King is
a capital sin. As the corruption of a fish begins at the head, and so goes
through the body; so the drunkenesse of a King makes the land reele, and
therefore woe to the land whose King is a drunkard. Philip after his victory,
falling foul on cups, began in his drink to insult over his Greek captives:
but Demades, a captive, took him boldy up; thus, Art not thou King Philip
ashamed, whom the Grecians have chosen General, as another Agamemnon, to show
thy self like a bibbing Thersites? at which freedom of speech, Philip taking
up himself, and not his captive, cast his Crowns and Garlands from his head,
and his rich robes from his back, and for very shame and sense of disgrace,
done to himself, by himself, did set free Demades, and all the rest of the
Greek captives. Behold in this a looking-glass for great ones, how incident
it is to them to err especially in puffing-up victories; but it is more then
Princely to correct themselves at the check of their vassals. We have too
many Philips forgetting themselves, and their places in their carriage of
success, but too too few Philips humbling themselves with shamefastness, when
by their inferiors they are rebuked. The delights and delicacies of proud and
luxorious Capua, Hanibilem armis invictam voluptate vicit, and enervavit Capua.
wherewith Hanibal was taken, when he had taken the town, did him more hurt
then all the Roman forces. To this effect there is a pretty saying of Hanibal;
that he being invincible by Arms, was overcome with the pleasure and plenty of
the place. Asia undid Alexander, and Julius Caesar was slain with good
success: for as Authors observe, he being capable of all things, and fortunate
in every thing, grew so insolent of his victories, that usurping the
priesthood, Sueton.
he would needs be Deified; he spoiled the treasury, and growing sacrilegious:
perfidious, and lustful, he ruled all by lust, and not by law.

Now I proceed to the third maine thing; namely, their carriage toward the
conquered. First, they must show humanity, in humando corpora captivorum, in
giving the slain to be buried, or causing them to be buried. To that end, the
Armies entered conditions, as Authors mention. Appion records how Asdrubal,
at the request of Scipio did bury the bodies of the Tribunes. It was an
evidence of yielding amongst the Grecians, if they demanded their bodies to be
buried. It was counted (as Tacitus writes in his Annalls) great cruelty in
Tiberius, to forbid the burial of the dead, with whom the cruel brood of Rome
deserves to be ranked, and that in the first place; who not only deny the
burial of the dead, but with all inhumane abuses do injury the bodies of the
dead: they come nothing short in this of the old typical Babel, hindering (as
the Psalmist says) the burial of the Saints bodies, Psalm. ^9.2.3.
giving them to be meat to the fowls of the heaven, and their flesh unto the
beasts of the earth, but the Lord will one day (as it is there) render them,
sevenfold into their bosom.

Secondly, they must not envy their captives but as they are Gods enemies, and
so they must hate them with a perfect hatred. It is reputed as a foul fault in
the Athenians, and Lacedaemonians (otherwise the bravest soldiers in the
world) that they hated captives with an irreconciliable hatred, Alex. ab Alex.
lib. 4. page 2.3.
which was in the end their only overthrow.

Thirdly, they must not, like vulturs, or Harpies, reioycingly glut themselves
in the sight of bloodshed, as the Dragon and the scarlet whore of Rome does;
she must be drunk with blood, ere she bid hold, or say it is enough.
Instances of this unquencheable bloud-thirst in them, I could give you tomany;
take the carriage of Charles the 9, in the massacre of Paris, for a scantling
of the rest: Beholding the bloody bodies of the butchered professors, and
feeding his eye upon a woeful spectacle, he breathed out this bloody speech:
how good is the smell of the dead enemy; Quam bonus est odor hostis mortui.
which speech it seems he had from that beastly and cruel Vitellius, who
having overcome Otho, went into the field full of slain bodies, and
notwithstanding (as Tacitus says) of the fearful spectacle, and filthy
corrupt smell; yet delighting in it, he used the same saying, Lib. 2. hist.
Hanibal Scotus.
that a slain enemy smelled well, but a slain subject better. Tyrants must
have blood though it be of their subjects. Yet for all this cruelty
unbeseening a man, much more a King toward his subjects, that fury of France
wanted not a popish helhound, to commend his cruelty in a set oration: but as
he lived a man of bloods, so he made a bloody end. Another instance we have in
Queen mother, of the house of Guise (who was the contriver of the Parisian
massacre) she confessed that she delighted in nothing so much, as in the
slaughter of Professors of the Gospel, although they were her own subjects.
To these we may join our own Queen Mary who could never be satiated with
the blood of her subjects, yea she had preyed on the life of her own sister,
if the Lord had not restreyned her: and which is mounstrously unnatural, she
meant if she had lived, to have taken up her fathers bones and burned them. In
this, popish Rome is worse then heathen Rome, who had written in their Capitol
for moderation of victory; parce victis, frange superbos, spare the conquered,
and bring under the proud. Epaminondus may be a pattern to all in this; who
having rejoiced for his victory at Luctris, came forth the next day amongst his
soldiers, all evil put on, and with a sad countenance; the cause whereof
being demanded by his friends; I did please my self too much (said he)
yesterday, with conceit of the victory; but thinking on the blood that is shed,
I chastise my self to day. Agiselaus, after his great victory at Corinth,
seeing a great number of Corinthians and Athenians lying slain, was so far
from rejoicing or growing proud of the victory, that in sorrow he cried out;
woe is me for Greece, Plutarch. in Lacon. Malo unu^ civem servare, quam mill
hosts occidere.
who in civil combustions has lost so many brave soldiers, as might have
conquered all the barbarians, (for so they termed other nations.) It was a
frequent, and a worthy saying of Antonius Pius, for the which Capitolinus
commends him much, that he had rather save the life of one subject then kill
1000 enemies.

Fourthly, they must not abuse the conquered captive, detracting from him, and
taking arrogantly to themselves that which does not become them. This did
cruel Adonibezeck, who cut off the Thumbes of 70 Kings, and made them gather
their meat under his table like Dogs. So Tigranes, King of Armenia, caused
four Kings to wait on his table. Sesostris had his chariot drawn with Kings;
and Tamarlan carried Bajazet about with him in an iron cage. That dishonorable
and hateful contempt, done upon the supposed body of James the fourth (found
dead, as they said, in the field of Floudon) was both void of generositie and
humanity: but because he took Arms against Julius the second, his usage
could not be bad enough. Yea Thomas Howard, Earl of Surry, Commander of the
field, being puffed up with the glory of the day, forgot his distance excedingly
in the adding to his Arms; for where before he gave the white Lion, he gave it
then upon the red Lion, tearing him as it were with his claws. Rer. Scoticar.
lih. 13. page 422.
But this his insolency is thought to have been plagued in his posterity,
whose ends for the most part, and that in both sexes were stigmatized with some
note of disgrace. Borbon and Lanoy carried themselves more nobly toward
Francis King of France, being taken at the battle of Pavia: for supper being
prepared; Lanoy and Alphonsus Vastius did serve the King with Basin and Ewer;
both they, and Borbon could hardly be entreated to sit down, Bartholomeus
Chasaneus in Catalog. gloriae mu^di. Pars 9.19. Consid. in fine.
but still they desired to attend him at supper. The like, or greater
generositie, was showen by Prince Edward, the mirror of manhood, toward King
John his captive, before whom he stood uncovered, and would hardly be entreated
to sit down at supper.

Fifthly and lastly, they are to keep quarters with captives being taken. For
to cast off prisoners, and put them to the sword is against the laws of Arms;
though Turks and Papists make no bones of this amongst the rest of their
cruelties; yet far be it from any so to do, that professes Christ truly. And
thus much for the conquerors carriage toward the conquered.

Amongst many motives that I might give for this moderation, take only this,
that the conqueror sometimes may come to stand in need of the conquered, who
as they will remember moderate usage, and repay it with good; so they will
requite tyranny with evil. Historians tell us how the Lacedaemonians, the great
Masters of Arms through all the world, having so great an overthrouw at the
battle of Luctris, that they were forsaken of all their confederates, and had
no refuge but to betake themselves to the Athenians, against whom they had
warred, and whose Walls they had raised; yet for all this they received them
very lovingly.

The fourth main thing follows, how to demean themselves in the use of the
goods or possessions of the conquered. It is true, that the spoil is theirs,
but the good creatures of God they must not spoil. The Lord gives a strait
charge against this in Deuteronomy: when thou shall lay siedge to a city and take
it, thou shall not destroy the trees thereof, and thou shall not cut them down;
only that which is not for meat thou may cut down. By this prohibition
God restrayneth the waste, and spoil which soldiers usually make in war; and
teaches them thereby, that there is a kind of mercy to be manifested toward
the creatures, specially those that serve for the maintenance of man's life.
This respect had Christ to the creatures, when he caused his disciples to take
up the broken meat, after the people had eaten and were filled, that nothing
should be lost. It is reported of the Danes, Io. 6.12.
that with such cruelty and outrage, they made havocke of all where they came,
that they seemed not so much to conquer the land, as to consume it; not so much
to possess it, as to race out the remembrance of it.

Now I come to the last main thing required in the conqueror, namely his
carriage toward his own. That General will never deal well with his enemies,
nor get glory to himself, that deals evil with his own. As they have
bought the victory with their blood, and the hazard of their lives; Salustais.
Tacitus. Livius. Amain. Polyb.
their is no reason but they should be both commended and rewarded. It was the
custom of the chief Commander (as all our ancient writers do record) after
the victory, to go up to some pulpit, and there with a solemn oration to
commend the soldiers, according to every man's place, worth, and present
service; neither was that enough, barely to commend or give the^ thanks, but
with their praise they distributed diverse gifts. Is it equity or conscience
that all should fight, and one, or a few, carry a way the spoil? David was of
a more equal mind, who did not only willingly divide the spoil of the
Amalekits, to those that were in the fight; but also gave the 200 weak and
wearyed ones a share that stayed by the stuff; and that was made a statute and
an ordinance for Israel, as his part is that goes to the battle, 1. Sam.
30.24.
so shall his part be that tarryeth by the stuff: neither was there any wrong
done to those wicked men who grudged at it: for, first, they wanted not will,
but power to go to the battle: Secondly, they stayed by the stuff to keep it,
as necessary a piece of service as to fight, and that with as great danger as
those that fought, if they had been overcome: And lastly, they had but a
Geometrical share, not an Arithmeticall, or equal with the other. The like
instance you have in Moses, who according to Gods commandment, divided the
spoil of the Madianites (on whom the Lord had avenged himself) amongst the
soldiers and the people. Numb. 31.27.
This continued as a Law, 2 Match. 8 28.
and was observed by the Macchabees when they got any spoil. So that you see
it is the Lords own Ordinance; besides, reason and equity, does enforce it.

Amongst many other reasons for this enduring ordinance, David gives a
special one, which I would have Commanders to observe; namely, that the spoil
is of the Lords giving: 3 Sam. 30.23.
You shall not do so my brethren with that which the Lord gives us. Observe
here that David, the General, says not, gives me, but gives us. Should one
man, or a few, take that to themselves, that God gives to all? No surely,
David, out of doubt, as many brave Generals had wont, kept little or nothing to
himself. Alexander the Great reserved only hope; and our brave General
Norice was like that Bishop of Lincoln (a black Swan now,) Quod nondum deed
rat, se nondum credit habere.
that never thought he had that thing, which he did not give. The defrauding of
soldiers of their shares of the spoil, was severely punished amongst the
Romans. Marcus Salinator, a man of Consular dignity, was condemned by the
people for unequal division of the prey to the Soldiers. Front. l. 4. cap. 1.
The wrong in this done to the soldiers, when service is performed, makes
soldiers so loose in the performance of their service; where if they had but
hopes of better respect, and assurance of place and recompense upon their
desert, it would encourage them many times to stand to it bravely to death,
when they mind nothing indeed but shifting for their life. That speech which I
related of Charles the Great, to his soldiers; the war being ended, together
with his bounty toward them; showed him truly to be great. Those that will
have all to themselves, must fight all by themselves: Soldiers are out of
request when their service is done. It was a pretty saying, and very true, of
General Vere to the King of Denmark; that Kings cared not for Soldiers,
until such time as their Crowns hung on the one side of their head. It was the
sad complaint of Georgius Fronsbergius, a brave Captain, and one who had well
deserved, both under Maximilian the 1, and Charles the 5, and yet being much
neglected and forgot^en: Three things, said he, did terrify a man from a
military life; the spoiling of harmless men, the godless, and dissolute life
of the soldier, and the neglect of those who had well deserved. The times are
partly come, and are yet to come, that a good soldier will be worth the making
on. Yea, let those who look to live in safety, and to die with honor, make
(...) of them. There be such an Antipathie betwixt some and Arms, that the
very sight of a soldier, the ordering of Arms, the sound of a Trumpet, or
beating of a drum are as terrible to them, as thunder was to Caligula: others
again loves Soldiers, but only to make use of them: In the most of this
unhappy age, the esteem of Soldiers (be they never so worthy) dies and lives
with the necessity of their service; the causes whereof are, under-valewing of
merit, and unthankfulness. But States must beware, if they will be safe, not
to use their soldiers, as the Athenians used Themistocles, of whom he said
wittily; Illos non laudo homines, qui eodem vase pro calice and matula utuntur
Aelian. l. 13 de varr. Hist.
That they used him like the Plantan tree, of which they made both their
drinking cup, and their chamber^pot; they shook him off, and fet him on at
their pleasure, when they stood in need of him: But he told them at last, that
he could not like those men, that would first drink out of a vessel, and then
make their water in it. My counsel is to the United Provinces, that they would
cast back their eye upon the pit, out of which their life, wealth, and dignity
are dug; which is not the depths nor hell, (as that Popish pamphletter
suggesteth) but the blood of the valourous Britains; for the which, the Nation
should be precious in their eyes: if Xerxes held Themistocles (on bare hopes of
service) to be his rarest Jewel; how should they esteem of Britain, which to
them has been a field of precious, and profitable Jewels; whose worth they can
never value? Therefore as I would have them not to slight the Nation, so I wish
they may abandon all neglect and dis-esteeme of the soldier: For generous
spirits looks for answerable respect; yea, they who sow in blood, looks to reap
at least in honor, and account. A^^ Themistocles left Greece at length, upon
continuance of bad usage: So I hope they will take heed, that no such usage
from them, shall provoke their best friends to forsake them. And so much for
the carriage of the Conqueror.

CHAP. XLI. The carriage of the conquered in General.
NOW I come to treat of the behavior of the conquered; to whom I must
confess, it is easier to give counsel, then to undergo the burden: and
rules of directions are sooner given in this case, Vincitur ars vento, nec jam
moderator babenis utitur. Obid. lib. 3. Festor. Phillip. 1.29.
then taken. A tempestuous storm (as the Poet says) may countermand the Art
of the best Navigator, and put the stoutest Master from the Helm. Yet for all
this, in this greatest evil, there is matter to manifest the greatest
magnanimity: there is more worth and valor in suffering, then in doing: Unto
you, says the Apostle, it is given, not only to believe in him; but also to
suffer for his sake. Were not our glorious Martyrs the greatest Conquerours? It
is a great grace for a conqueror to carry, even the cup of victory: but a
greater glory for the conquered to drink the dregs of Martial displeasure, or
of his enemies triumph, with undaunted magnanimity. Victis solatio est, virtute
praestantis viri cadere.
It is some solace (as the saying is) to be brought under by him, who is worthy
to command: And this gave some ease to the heart of Mithridates, who after 50
years standing out, with the glory of many victories, at length was forced to
yield himself and his, to the mercy of Pompey the great; Non est turpe ab eo
vinci, quem vincere esset nefas. Veleius Paterculus.
yet contenting himself with this fair overture, that it was no shame to be
overcome of him, whom to overcome it was impossible. But as it is not in a man's
choice whether he will be conquered or no; so likewise it is not in his choice,
by whom he will be conquered; and therefore he must fit himself to carry it
well, whosoever lay it on; whether the enemy be like Pirrhus, contending only
with the Roman, who should command; or like the Samnite, contending with him
who should surviue, whatsoever it be, or by whomsoever, it must be born; so
that as the Comic says, it is the part of a man: Istuc viri officium.
not that a man should be taken, in this case, with a Stoicall insensibility,
and quaffe away all care, and wit, (...).
with drink and Tobacco; or cast himself fast a sleep with the opium of
delights, or suffer himself to be charmed with the enchantments of solatious
company, as though he cared not what God had done to him, nor what he would
do with him; this is to be under a double conquest, the latter whereof is the
worser.

A man therefore under the yoke, must not only suffer, but also do, and
devise how to redeem himself. To do and not to suffer, is with the Lion in
the snare to struggle, or with the fish to wrestle in the net; but to suffer
and not do, is with the sea-calfe, to play and sport themselves when all the
waves of God are going over them. God often by the hand of the enemy, as by a
Pursivant at Arms, fetches in bankrupt Tenants; that is, his own untoward or
backsliding people; and leaves them in the pursivants hand till they take some
course to satisfy for the arrerages. If a man in that case take thought of
nothing but strong drunk and Tobacco, a punke and ribauldrie, as sundry in
the fleet and Marshalsey do, is he not like to ly long enough by it? yea, it
may be while all his delights leave him, and he have neither inward nor outward
comfort; and the more unsensible one is of such a case, it adds the more to
the misery of his case. So when Gods people are in the hands of their enemies,
they must consider where they are, and cast about what to do. It is the lot of
Gods people, that are left alive in the Palatinate, and Bohemia, to be under an
Egyptian captivity; The Inheritance of God is laid wast and possessed by
Gebal, Amon, and Amalecke; they have consulted together against God and his
anointed, that his name and the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

A great part of this woeful calamity lies on their Princely cedars, who
with their branches are rooted up, and like a partridge they are hunted to and
fro, so if it were not that God out of the waters has raised a little hill for
them to rest upon, I know not whether Kielah and Ziph, would have affoorded
them any safe rest or no.

Now since all this is come upon your royal Majesty's, and you, and yours, yet
lying under, are the subject of the enemies insolency, to you and yours give
me leave to direct my speech in the application of this passage; (not but that
I hope the rule of the word, the long experimental knowledge of heavy
affliction, and the great misery of your poor distressed subjects, has caused
you both, to lay to heart the affliction.) But this is further to entreat you
to observe whence it is, look about for deliverance, get you a habit of
patience how to bear it, (...).
and be directed in some measure what use to make of it. Out of an earnest
desire of deliverance to you and yours, and all Gods distressed people, I am
bound to offer some rules to yours Majesty's consideration, which no doubt
being followed will work out your deliverance and therefore I presume they shall
neither be grievous nor unprofitable to your Majesty's.

CHAP. XLII. Of acknowledging the defeat to be from God.
TO begin then (with leave) the conquered in the first place, are to look by
whom they are conquered, or defeated; not I mean only the secundary means;
(for to that every one will look; every one will be sensible of that) but they
must look to God, as the first mover of it, the orderer of the means, and the
accomplisher of it. As the Lord dispose^h the victory to the one, so the foil
to the other. Amos 3.6
There is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done. Actions (says
Hanna) are not directed without the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.3
he kills, and he makes alive, he makes poor and rich, h^e brings low
and lifts up; Yea, many times he gives his own inheritance, and his holy
places, with the bodies of his servan^s, to be abused at the pleasure of their
enemies. Psalm 98.6. and 99.12.
Places are so plentiful for this, that I could be infinite. The Lord is said
to sell his people into the hand of Iabin; Judge 4.2.
he delivered them into the hand of Midian; and he sold them into the hand of
the Philistims; when the Israelites were smitten, they acknowledged that the
Lord had smi^ten them: 1 Samuel 4.3
Wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistims? That place of
Jeremy is very remarkable to this purpose. I will s^atter them (says the Lord
of his people) with an East wind before the enemy; Chap. 18.17
I will show them the back and not the face in the day of calamity. The
lamentations of Jeremy are a whole field of such matter; The Lord has trodden
under foot all the mighty men, Chapter 2.3.
he has swallowed up the habitations of Jacob, he has cut off the horn of
Israel. The Prophet Esaias to this purpose is most pregnant. Esa. 42.24.
Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not the Lord; he
against whom we have sinned? Again, Cha. 43.28.
therefore I have profaned the Princes of the Sanctuary, and have given Jacob
to the curse, and Israel to repreches. I have given the deerly beloved of my
soul into the hand of her enemies. Ier. 12.7.


The Heathens, men without God in regard of power, or Scripturall knowledge,
have been forced, upon their foyles, to confess so much. Mardonius the Persian
General, who stayed in Greece behind Xerxes, either to redeem his reputation,
(...).
or to rid himself of his life by some desperate attempt, having lost all; was
demanded by a certain Greek, how it came to pass that such a huge Army of
Persians were consumed and brought to nothing by a handful of Greeks; he
answered very modestly and pertinently, That that which God would have done,
none was able to avert, although men will not believe those that tell them such
things.

Fond (and confused indeed) are the opinions of the Heathens, of diverse Sects,
concerning the ruin of Kingdoms, and the overthrow of Princes. The Stoics
ascribe it to Destiny; the Epicure to Fortune; Methodius and Cardanus to
Planets; (...)
Aristotle to an asymetrie, or disproportion: but Pla^^ and Pithagoras, (to
whom Bodin. assenteth) do lay the blame on Numbers. And because some may
wonder what should be the meaning of this last opinion, I will unfold it, so
far as Plato, the chief maintayner of it, does unfold himself. As in numerall
notes in the strain of Music, Lib. 8. de reip.
there is a Diapason, which Art cannot transcend; so there is a diaposon, or
(...), that is, the highest-period of Kingdoms and Dominions, above the which
they cannot pass. The place of it self is so obscure, that Aristotle in his
fifth book of the Politics, and 12 chapter, passes it over: so does Proclus,
who illustrateth the other seven books with notes, but does not touch that.
That opinion is much like to another saying of his, Naturales sunt rerum
publicarum conversiones.
That the conversions, or translations of Commonwealths, run by the course of
nature. It is true indeed, as Kingdoms have their beginnings, increase and
height; so they have their declinings and their ruins. All that has a
beginning, has an ending, and as Philo says, the greater height of outward
bappinesse that a people attaineth to, the lower is their fall. As after an
inundation the waters are dried up, so States are emptied of their floods of
prosperity to the very channel. Experience makes good that of the Poet. --
sic omnia verti
cernimus, atque alias assumere pondere gentes,
concidere has --
Thus all things changed we see; some Kingdoms fall,
and some advanced.
Yet for all this, these Philosophers, and Sects, are a ground, in giving the
ground of this. But Daniel, a better Politician then either Pla^o or Aristotle,
Dan. 2.20.
gives the true ground indeed: Blessed (says he) be the name of God for ever
and ever: for he changes times and seasons, he remeveth Kings, and sets up
Kings. That which Heathen Writers, Military men, and others, do attribute to
fortune; namely, events of battles, victories, and foiles, Daniel does
attribute to God. Multum tum in omuibus rebus, tum in re militari potest
fortuna. Lib. 6. belli Gallie. Applicati^^
Caesar that great man at Arms, and man of great success, was greatly
deceived in the ground, when he gave so much to fortune: Fortune (says he) in
many things, but especially in military affairs may do very much.

It is not only their fault (for they knew little better:) but it is more the
fault of Professors, who know indeed the true ground, but in their carriage
they do not acknowledge the ground: they confess the ground, but in their
profession they follow not to the ground. Observe a courtly complement, with us
in England, wherein great Ones bewray their faultiness; in this kind they
denominate, the evil or good that befalls a man, or State, from fortune; He
has a good fortune, (say they) his fortune is undone: be their meaning what
it will, I would have them, as Austine counsels them, to change their words;
and (as the Apostle wills them) to use a sound form of phrase, 2 Timothy 1.13
beseeming Christian profession. Mardonius said well; It cannot be denied, but
all these foiles, and defeats, and outrages, and spoils, and desolations, are
of Gods own doing; but men will not believe it applicatiuely, or run the
right way, though it be not only beaten in their ears, but they see it
clearly with their eyes. Men in this are like the uncircumcised Philistims, who
though they knew and confessed, that the hand of God was upon them for abusing
the Arc; yet they would try whether, or not, i^ were by chance: Men thus
called by affliction to see the hand of God in it, they are like unto Samuel,
when God called him; they run many other ways, before they run to God; they
run to the bloody cruelty of one; to the innaturallity of another; to the
falsehood under fellowship of the third; to the pusillanimity of the fourth; and
lastly, to the conspiracy or concurrence of all the Crew against them, who
have vowed their destruction without a cause. It is lawful and expedient to
have an eye to all those, and to view every one of them in their kind; but
first of all we must look to the sin-revenging eye of God, (...).
and to his all-disposing hand of the very least circumstance of our troubles.
Hence it is that they are called the waves of God, and the arrows of God; yea,
God does afflict his own, that they should see his hand in it, and seek to him
for deliverance out of it. The Lord does threaten, that he will be unto Ephraim
as a Lion, and to the house of Judah as a young Lion; yea, he will tear and take
away, and none shall rescue him. The Lord here in effect does threaten to send
such enemies against them, as like roaring, cruel and devouring Lions, should
tear them all in pieces: but the Lord is said to do it, because without him,
neither foe, nor friend can do any thing. But what is the end of this? Is it
not that they might seek the Lord; Hos 5.14.15.
I will go and return to my place (says he) till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face; in their affliction they will seek me early. If a
man be wounded, will he rather look at the sword, then at the man that gave the
blow? If a stone be cast at a man, will he like a dog, run to the stone, not
looking to the hand that cast it? Or if it fall from a height, will he not look
up to the place from whence it fell? When Rebecca felt that strange unusual
struggling of the two twins in her womb (which prefigured the strife between
the godless and the godly) to know the cause of this, she goes unto the Lord;
Genesis 25.22
and she went to enquire of the Lord (says the Text.) To him indeed in our
troubles we should go, since it is his doing. Heavy and doleful was that
message that Samuel had to Eli, insomuch that he feared to show him the vision;
yet Eli would have it out of him, that he might know the Lords mind, which when
Samuel had delivered, he runs presently to the ground from whence it was,
and not to any by, or secundary, means by which it might be brought to pass;
for the Lord wants no means to accomplish that which once he does determine: 1 Samuel 3.1^
It is the Lord (says he) let him do what seems him good. He acquiesceth in
the good will of God, and embraces the judgment, though it were against
himself and his: he, like a well nurtured child, kisseth the rod, though it
were made for his own back. Then, in the name of the Lord, both King, and
Queen, and subjects, take notice of this, that the hand of God is upon you, and
upon us in you: it is the Lord that has done it, and so let us all
acknowledge. And thus much for the first particular.

CHAP. XLIII. The mooving cause of the defeat is to be observed.
A Second circumstance of the conquereds carriage, consists in the inquiring
and finding out of the moving cause of their overthrow: for though God be the
efficient cause; yet there is a moving cause without him, that provokes him to
give his own people into the hands of his enemies. Psalm. 94.
It is a question moved in the Psalms by David, why deals the Lord thus, and
thus with his people? why do thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger
smoke against the sheep of thy pasture? why withdrawest thou thine hand? and
why have thou broken down her hedges, so that all that they pass by the way
do pluck her grapes? Psalm. 80.12
The Prophet answers all these questions, by quitting God, and charging upon
his people the cause of all this; namely, their inquitie. When in the 79
Psalm, he has laid out the desolation of the holy temple, the bloody
cruelties committed upon the bodies of his saints, their inhumanitie against
the dead bodies, the reproach they suffered, and Gods wrath against them (which
was heavyer then all the rest) he lays down their iniquity to be the cause
of all; remember (says he) not our former iniquities against us; let they
tender mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low. v. 8. In all
the places quoted from the book of Judges wherein I have showed the overthrow
of Gods people to be from God) you shall still see their sin laid down, as the
moving cause, provoking God to deal so with them: Iud 4.1. and 6.1.
and the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord: so that
this phrase of speech is made a preface to usher in the judgments of God. This
was the matter of Abiiahs message to Ieroboams wife: the Lord shall smite
Israel as a reed is shaken in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of
his good land, and shall scatter them beyond the river; he shall give Israel
up: and what is the cause? 1. King. 14.15.16.
because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin and made Israel to sin. Where
observe the sin of the King and his people, to be the cause of their ruin.
This was prophesied of by Samuel to the people; if you shall do wickedly, you
shall be consumed, both you and your King; Sam. 2.25.
and so it came to pass indeed. In a place of Jeremy, the Lord sets down
the reason, why he would scatter his people with an east wind before the
enemy; why he would show them the back, and not the face in the day of their
calamity, because says he, my people has forgotten me. Ier. 18.1^
And to conclude; the Prophet Esaias, in the places quoted, lays down the same
cause; Cap. 42.24.
for they would not walk in his ways neither were they obedient to his law:
therefore he has powered upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle. So in the other place; thy first fathers has sinned, Cap. 43.27.28.
and thy teachers have transgressed against me: therefore, etc. I have
profaned the Princes and have given Iacoh to curse and Israel to reproaches.
The curse must always accompany sin, he spared not the soul of his ^eloved
when they sinned; yea, nor the son of his love, becoming surety for sin:
no prerogative exempts from wrath, but being in Christ; witness Gods
protestation concerning Ieconiah, the last and the worst of the line of Judah.
As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah, Ier. 22.24.
the son of Iehoiakim King of Judah, were the signet upon my right hand, yet
would I pluck thee thence.

Josephus deploring the unparalelled calamity of his own nation of Judea,
lays down the cause of their utter desolation; namely, the abomniable
impiety and iniquity of the Princes and people; which were grown to such a
height, that every one, in their place, did strive to outstrip another; De
bello Indaic. lib. 7. cap. 28.
in so much that if one should have gone about to have devised some new sin,
there was no place for him, they were all grown so cunning.

A fearful and incorrigible case, Application
and yet (woe is us) no worse in a manner then our own is, though we will not
know it: the fearful things, given out of this nation, both for sin and
judgment may make our ears to tingle, and our hearts to tremble; yea as the
same Author reports, and that in grief of heart, that if the Romans had not
come against them to execute the fiery wrath of the Lord upon them, he thought
a new deluge would have swallowed them up with the old world; Ibidem lib. 6.
cap. 16.
or fire from heanen would have consumed them with Sodom; for (says he) they
exceeded either of their sins. The like is related by one of our own Authors
concerning the last loosing of Hierusa^em to the Saracens under Saladine their
Commander. When the Christians had kept it 80 years, Gulielm. Neabrigens. rer.
Anglicar. lib. 13. cap. 14.
after the recovery of it by Godfrey Duke of Bullion, the height of their
iniquities whereto they were come, did so ascend in Gods presence, and made such
a shrill cry in his ears, that he cast them out again, making their civil
dissension, serve for the Saladines advantage. So that you see the cause is
within our selves: we need not seek it without: Ne te quaefieris extra.
it is not in God; for he delights to do good to his people: nor is it in the
wicked; for he hates them as they hate both him and his people: it is not in
the creature of what kind soever; for he made it good, and he loves every
thing as the workmanship of his hands: It is then the sin in our bosom, or our
bosom sin that makes him deal thus with us. As sin does separate the soul
from God; so it often separateth the whole person from Gods house, from
country, from wife, and family, from King from subject; and from what not?
Therefore in this our separation, we should search our sin, Lam 3 40
and every man know the plague of his own heart which has made the Lord to
plague us. Search your selue (says the Prophet) and turn unto the Lord.

But herein we are all faulty; men either search not at all, or they search
as though they desired not to find; they search, as me^ do for their bade
money, they know they have it but they would gladly have it pass for current
amongst the good money. Lastly, they search not for that which especially they
should find out. It was a very pertinent question of the Israelits when 4000
were smitten by the Philistines: wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day
before the Philistims? 1. Sam. 4.3.
But their answer was not answerable. O (say they) let us fetch the Arc of
the covenant that it may come among us, and save us out of the hand of the
enemy. What, were they smitten because the Arc of the covenant was not among
them? So they conceived, and would conceive no better: but the truth was,
their sins had caused the God of the covenant to depart, he went not out with
them, Samuel went not with them: these were they that laid both the Arc and
themselves in the mouth of the Philistim: and yet these were they, that they
never suspected till the battle was lost, wherein 30000 were slain, their
Priests were gone, Eli his neck broken, and which was worste of all, the Ark of God was taken; Then they began in their calamity to call a new quest of
inquiry, to make a new search, and to find out this execrable thing, namely,
their sin, 1. Sam. 7.^.
for the which (as it is said) all the host of Israel lamented before the
Lord. The like neglect, we may behold in the people of Israel going against
Benjamin. The first day they lost 22000; they lament indeed, and look about
them what should be the matter: but they go the wrong way; they fall to doubt
of their commission, as though there had been some fault in that; they supposed
they could not prosper, because they had lift up their hand against their
brethren, although God had bid them do it: but there was another matter in it,
that they were not a ware of, that was their sin, which questionless God did
punish by those two overthrows: First they were altogether become corrupt and
abominable in their courses and worship of God; insomuch that (as the Lord
speaks) every man did what seemed good in his own eyes. It is true, when
they heard of the beastly and abominable act of killing of the Levits wife
under their filthy lust, their hearts rose against it, they would be avenged on
all the whole tribe, if the transgressors were not delivered. This was all
well, but this was not all; they should have begune at home, and purged
themselves of spiritual uncleanness, and other sins that do accompany
that, and then they had been fit to have punished the beastliness of the
Beniamits. Again, for number they were so many, and the other not a gleaning
to them, that they made no question of the victory; so that they thought it
needless to seek to God (by humbling of themselves) for a good success. But
God for those met with them, and set them in the right way ere he had done with
them: for when after the second defeat, they got sight of their sin, and
humbled themselves for it; by fasting and praying they received a better
answer, with assurance of the victory.

Now give me leave to apply (and that in all humility. Application.
) The ground of your enterprise was good; the commission faultlesse; and the
end (for any thing I know) upright; yea, and the enemy Gods enemy; yet for
all this, thus far they have prevayled, and do prevail: the cause (I fear)
is want of reformation at home, and it may be too much presuming of worldly
forces and friendship, which the Lord would have to prove no better then a
broken reed. If the commission be good, and the parties disable themselves
from the execution of it, what fault is in it, or in him that gave it out. As
it is far from me to charge any thing upon any man's conscience; so I entreat
every man to charge his own conscience, as David did, and say, I am the man. A
general view or search will not serve: for so long as men keep themselves at
generals, they never find out that in themselves, which most displeases God,
but often mistake that to be no sin which is sin, or that to be sin which is
no sin. Men must not stay themselves in the Procatartick, or remote causes; but
they must dive unto the Proegumene conjunct, or essential, and imediate cause.
Empyrickes mistaking symptoms for the sickness it self, are fayrer to kill
then to cure: so in finding out some petty sins, some never look at the main
sins; like those that lop off branches of the tree, but never strike at the
root: and as by this pruning the trees grow bigger; so by daliance in search,
all grows worse and worse: therefore to the bosom sin, the darling-sin, the
seed-sinne, that is deer as hand and foot, cut it off, and cast it away. Let
every man be severest with himself, and favor himself not in the least sin:
that sin that he least looks after, and will not acknowledge to be sin, is
commonly the capital sin; as taking liberty to profane the Sabbath; going to
stageplaies, scoffing preciseness, petty oaths, abuse of the creatures, and
usury; these be National sins, and set open the gate to all other sins, and
consequently to judgment. On the first, my heart gives me to dwell, if it were
my place, and the Treatise would permit: for as it is the sin of Nations, so it
is the capital sin, though least thought on; the threatenings against the
breach of this commandment, the promise annexed to the keeping of it, the
backing of it with reasons, and fore-fronting of it with a remember, Zacor.
do necessarily imply all these lessons; as first, the antiquity of it, and
the continuance of it, that as it was from the beginning, so it should be
remembered to the end, Genesis 2.3: secondly, it discovers the propensity of man to
the light esteem of it, and to the breaking of it: thirdly, it shows, the
greatness of the sin, Ezech. 20.12.22: fourthly, Gods great desire to have it
kept, calling it the holy, honorable day, yea, and the delight of the Lord,
Es. 58.13. All these cords will pull down inevitable judgments upon all the
palpable profaners of this day, by their pleasures, or ordinary employments,
except they repent. This sin cries in England; and roares in Holland, where by
open shops, and other works of their calling, they proclaim, with open mouth,
their little regard of God, or his Sabbath. Judgment likewise hangs over the
head of all halvers of the Lords day, making it neither Gods, nor theirs, but
divide it: All Jewish translators of the Sabbath: all toleration from higher
powers to profane it, at which we may lay our hands upon our mouths. But I hope
the Parliament will redress it: likewise on all that dare proclaim it from
Pulpit, to be only a Ceremonial Law; and that the rest now enjoined is a
mere Civil Ordinance. The Papists press this as a mere humane Institution in
religious Worship. Spalato, a little before his departure, told a man in
dispute with him, that that Commandment was done away. Many Libertine
Ministers, and Prelates, in England, maintain the same in effect: and the worst
of the Ministers of the United Provinces concur with them in this point: for
though some press the keeping of it; yet they urge it not as a divine Precept,
but as a time appointed by a mere positive law for the worship of God; but this
crosses the nature of the commandment, being Moral; given from the
beginning, before the Ceremonial Law; written by Gods own finger; proclaimed
to all the people to continue to the end. It substracts from the number of the
Precepts, being ten, Exodus 34.18. Deuteronomy. 10.4, it oppugneth the practice of God,
which is for a president to us: It is against natural reason, and divine
prerogative, that God should not have a solemn time appointed for his worship,
and that he should not be the appointer of it. Hence it is, that not only the
Hebrews, but also all Greeks and Barbarians, did rest from work on the seventh
day; witness Josephus, Clemens, Alexandrinus, and Eusebius: lastly, it
afronteth Christ's institution, included in the very name of the day: Why is it
called the Lords day, Rev. 1.10, 1 Cor. 16.2, is it not because it was
appointed by the Lord, and to continue for the Lord? as the Sacrament, for the
same reasons, is called the Supper of the Lord. To make an end of the point,
let the Magistrates of London, and other parts, who have kept back their
authority from sanctifying of the Sabbath, look to the end, fire is broke out
already; but I fear if we will not ^earken to hallow the Sabbath of the Lord,
that the fire spoken of by Jeremy shall break forth in our Gares, and not be
quenched till it have devoured us. I might say much in this point, both by
reason of the commonnesse of the sin, and plenty of matter against it, but I
will only say this: Where there is no conscience of keeping of the Sabbath
sincerely, they have no ground to expect any good. As for Stage-plaies, they
are the devils chair, the seat of Scorners, the plague of piety, and the very
pox to the Commonwealth: but I have a whole Treatise against them.

And as for the other sins mentioned, it is counted but Puritanism to count
them sins; but so much the worse. As our Nation is a field of crying sins; so
the cry of some sins must not be discovered, but countenanced in a searfull
manner; who knows, but the things which we count trifles may be the special
matter of our controversy with God? A little other fire then God had ordained
might seem a small matter in the eyes of indifferency: yet it was such a sin
as made all Israel guilty, as appears by the sacrifices offered for that
sin, Levit. chap. 16; yea, it brought such a fire from the presence of the
Lord, as could hardly be quenched. These sins therefore must be taken by the
poll, and others of the like nature; as contempt of the Word, and hatred of
Gods people: and they must be beaten to powder, with the Israelites Calfe. Go
from a Tribe to a Family, from a Family to a house, and so to every man of the
house, till the golden wedge be found out. We must not trust our wicked hearts
with this work; for corrupt nature is blind as a beetle in the finding out of
sin; witness the Israelites, even then when all the plagues of God were
coming upon them, they said; What is our iniquity or sin against God? Ier.
16.10. Princes and people had need of good Seers, whom they must suffer to show
them their sin, that either they cannot find, or will not find; such was
Nathan to David: they must not count such, men of contention, and
busie-fellows, as the Jews called Jeremiah; but our evil age does not only
hide sin, but maintain sin.

There is also too much propensitie both in the bade, and also in the good, to
palliate sin, and to tranfer their troubles to other causes then to it. I
remember that Traian, General to Valence the Emperor, that mirror of
impiety, going against the Goths, he was defeated in the very first battle;
for which Valence upbrayded Trajan, at a feast, with cowardice and sloth, as
being the causes of the overthrow, but noble Traian, not enduring that
indignity, with freedom of speech told enduring that indignity, with
freedom of speech told the Emperor in plain terms, that he had lost the
day; for you do so war against God (says he, meaning his persecuting of
Christians) that you abandon the victory, and send it to your enemies: Niceph.
Calist. lib. 11. Cap. 40 Eccle. Hist.
it is God (says he) that overcommeth, and he gives the victory to those that
obey him; but such are your adversaries, and therefore you have God to fight
against you; how then can you overcome? Here you may see a pattern of a wicked
disposition well taken up, and the saddle set upon the right horse.

And not only do such bloody monsters as this, shift off their calamities
from their sins; but also Gods people, by falling in sin, and lying in sin,
may be tainted with it; witness, David a man otherwise after Gods own heart,
yet tainted with this. Amongst the rest of his tricks of legerdemain, when he
spun the spiders web of his implicit sin, this was one, to cover the murder
of Vriah, he uses a principal, experimentally known; the sword devoureth one
at well as another; make thy battle more strong against the city, and so
overthrow it. 2. Sam. 11.25.
David spoke the truth but not truly: for he knew that it was not common lot
that had cut off Vriah, but his own heart and hand, had caused him and others
to fall; yet he would daube over a filthy piece of business with a little white
plaistring; but when once he was awaked, he was so far from daubing as that he
charge himself more deeply with every circumstance, then any other could
have done; I am the man. And after the numbering of the people; when his heart
smote him, grieving at the punishment of the people, he takes the whole sin
upon him, and would clear the people both of the sin and punishment: Lo I
have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? 2.
Sam. 24.77.
let thy hand I pray thee be against me, and against my fathers house.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of quitting God of all injustice.
A Third thing in the behavior of the conquered, is this, since sin is the
cause, they must quit God of all injustice, how heavy soever their burden lie
upon them. David quitteth the Lord of all injustice, if he should adjudge him
to eternal death; Lament. (...) 18.
so does the people of God in the lamentations, being under the very rod of
his wrath; The Lord is righteous; for I have rebelled against his commandment.
By condemning of our selves, to acquit God, De summo bono. lib. 3.
is the readiest way to get an acquitance from God. Yea (as Isedor says) let a
man learn not to murmur when he suffers, although he were ignorant for what
he suffers: let this suffice to tell him, that he suffers justly, because
it is from him, that cannot deal but justly. Pompey was herein exceedingly
mistaken, who seeing all to go on Caesar's side, doubted not to say, that there
was a great deal of miste over the eye of divine providence: for with him that
offered nothing but wrong, to the common wealth all things went well; but with
him that defended the commonwealth, nothing succeeded. But Pompey blamed the
Sun because of his sore eyes. There be many in our age of Pompey his saucie
humor; yea arranter wranglers then he, because of greater light, and shows of
profession; who if their corruption be never so little crossed, or the Lord meet
with them in the crossing of a way, they will grumble against God, as though he
had done them wrong; or as though there were not in them for the which the Lord
might not only cross them, but crush them; but let them know if they change
not their note, the Lord will note them for his enemies, and thurst them out
for wranglers.

CHAP. XLV. Of humiliation for sin, and forsaking of it.
FOurthly, as the conquered sees sin to be the cause of his evil, and therein
clears the justice of God; so he must be humbled for sin, and so forsake it,
that (God reconciled to him) may be on his side. It shall nothing prevayle men
to see sin as Pharao did, and never to mourn for it; or to mourn for it as
Achab did, and not to forsake it. Israel, after their second defeat, humbled
themselves, and mourned exceedingly. So Joshua, when the people that went up to
take A^ fled before their enemies and were smitten to the number but of 30
persons, fell on his face, mourned and cried unto the Lord: but what meant
Joshua (might some say) was this the courage of so great a General, thus to be
daunted for the loss of 30 men? was that such a matter? might it not be a
chance of war? no there was another matter in it. It was not the 30 men, nor
3000 that would have so much dismayed Iosuah, he wisely foresaw that all was
not well at home, and therefore he would not on again, till the matter was
cleared, and the execrable thing was found out. To be brief, the Israelits
under the yoke of the Philistims, found out their sin, and mourned for it. It
is said in their humiliation that they drew water and powered it out before the
Lord, (that is) they shed tears abundantly before the Lord. 1. Sam. 7.7
The roaring Goliahs of our age scorn a stone out of this running brook, to
beat the brains out of their roaring sins: oh! mourn and cry? Application
that is womanish. Well I am sure there was more true worth and valor in in
one little David, then in all the roarers in Ram-alley or milford-lane; and yet
he mourned, wept, and cried, and roared for grief of sin; but not as they do.
Four motives of mourning in Gods people defeated.


For four things the people of God are to mourn, being defeated: for their
sin; because they grieved God by it: for the want of Gods presence: for making
him depart from his inheritance: for the defacing of Gods glory, by the wicked
in their ruff. For the first: many will mourn; but rather for the punishment
of sin then for the sin it self: when the worm of conscience begins to know,
and the terrors of hell present themselves to them, then they cry and roar as
though hell roard for them; but they are just like Mariners, when the storm is
over; or like fellous, they cry rather for the sentence given against them,
then for the felony committed. And some will cry for their sin, but rather
because it is hurtful and shameful, then for grieving of God by it; as if a
man by his lewdnes cast into some loathsome disease, regrateth the sin, for the
disease it has brought upon him; and not because thereby he has offended God:
but David cries out, on himself and his sin, especially for the offense done
to God by it; against thee, against thee, only have I sinned, Psalm 51.
and have done that which is evil in thine eyes. As for the want of Gods
presence (so other things go well with them) it is the thing that the most,
least regard: but for the godly, they make more of it then of all the things in
the world; yea nothing without this will suffice the godly: give them this
(with whatsoever) they can be content: the good things or hid treasure of this
life will serve the wicked well enough, without this, many say, who will show
us any good, (that is for the belly, back, possession, or height of ambition:
but lift thou up over us the light of thy face (Jehovah:) for that is more joy
to me then all the riches of the world wherein worldlings most delight. And
herein is a main difference between the child of God, and the wicked; let
Ismael live and be great, and let Isaac be the heir, with all the troubles
that belong to the executorship; let Esau have pottage, and let the blessing
go where it will; let Saul be honored before the people, and let him be an
offcast from the Lord: but let all this be put together, it is but trash in the
eyes of the godly in comparison of his face. Observe their desire in the
burden of the 80 Psalm: where, in their captivity, still they desire; oh God
return us, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved: their
deliverance, and all the happiness that may follow it, will not be worth any
thing to them, without the amiable looks of Gods countenance. So that as
Absalon seemed rather to make choice of death, then not to see the Kings face:
so Gods people had rather die, or endure any sorrow or calamity under the
countenance of a reconciled God, then live Methusalahs age, and enjoy what the
world could afford, under the frowning looks of a displeased God. Yea, there
is no temptation so sharp, no plight so dolorous, no fright so fearful, nor
agony so in expugnable, as the angry countenance of a forsaking God: for this
makes a man apprehend and conceive of God, as a God inarmed against him for
his destruction. This the people of God conceive of their state, as it
appears by that patheticall expostulation in the aforesaid Psalm; how long
will thou smoke, or show the tokens of an angry countenance against the prayer
of thy people? verse. 6. What makes the wound of conscience so unsupportable,
but that the Surgeon denies to look at it, he lets it ranckle and
fester, till who can bear it? yea, if the spirit of God should not support his
own by the finger of the spirit (though unsensiblie) the best should be at
their wits end, and Saul's impatiencie should drive them to desperate courses:
But in this, he differenceth his own from the damned, that as his one hand is
over them, so his other hand is under them; he supporteth them wonderfully,
when they conceive nothing less, and by a secret instinct extorts prayer from
them, even in the fearful agony of their souls distress, when their prayers
seem to be rejected of him: but it is nothing so with the wicked, in their
distresses from God his justly conceived wrath: for either they seek not at all
for the appeasing of Gods angry countenance, or with lost labor they leave
presently of, and run to the devil directly, or indirectly, for the alaying of
the same. I touch these things but briefly, leaving the further enucleation to
accurat theologs, and sound soule-phisitians.

Lastly, for the glory of God, trampled under the foot of pride; we should be
most moved of all, since we provoke him by our sins to forsake his own
inheritance, and to leave his own cause, to his own dishonor unmaintained.
This lay heavy upon Eli, who when he heard of the loosing of the day, the
slaughter of the people, and the death of his sons, could sit still and bear
it out; but when he heard of the taking of the Arc, he could sit no longer. So
Phineas his wife, made more of the loss of the Arc, then of all the rest,
then of the people, of her father in-law, then of her husband, or whatsoever?
yea her rejoicing for the son she had gained, was swallowed up in sorrow; so
that she left a character of her killing grief in the name of her son,
calling him Ichabod, where is the glory, or there is no glory. It is the
special matter of the complaint of Gods people in their greatest desolation,
that the heathen, in an insulting braverie; did dishonor their God, upon the
seeming denial of his presence, and providence over his own people; yea many
speeches in the Psalms has reference to the thoughts of the wicked concerning
God; Psalm 79.10 Retsach. Murder for a murdering weapon.
why shall the heathen say where is their God? yea David shows how he was
affected in this case, that the reproachful words of the adversary were as a
dagger thrust into this bones, with a murdering weapon in my bones, Psalm. 42.11
my distressors do reproach me when they say unto me all the day long, where is
thy God. When Hezechiah heard how cursed Rabshakah had blasphemed and reproched
the Holy One of Israel, 2. King 19. (...). Hipp. Aphoris.
how grieved was he in heart, he got him to the house of the Lord, spread the
letter before him, and humbled himself in prayer. It is a principal in
physic, that when two evils or sicknesses concur together, the greater
takes away the senoe of the lesser. Experience did instance this in a man so
oppressed and pained with the gout, that he could neither stir foot nor hand,
but feared the very touch of a fether: but being taken with a cruel fit of the
stone, he forgot the gout and run and stamped in the chamber, as though he would
have beaten it down. To an honest servant, dishonor done to his Master goes
nearer to his heart, then the cut of a sword: the true child of a father had
rather loose his life then suffer his father to be dishonored.

This then, Application
by it self, were matter enough of humiliation: why should the brats of Babble
say where is the God of the Calvinists (as they call them?) No, should not this
pierce our hearts while thus they say of our God? but does not all, or the
most, lay this especially to their heels, that all should lay to their heart:
witness the security of all; the avarice, oppression, ambition, and
time-ferving humor of some; the epicurish, and beastly life of others: give the
men of this world gain, honor, office, yvorie beds, wine in bowls, lascivious
Music, joviall company, and beastly songs, lordly prelacies, and fat livings:
Let Joseph carry his afflictions as well as he can, and let the Lords honor
lie unlamented in the dust: but woe be to them that are at ease in Zion; Amos
6.1.
the Lord suffers sometimes himself to take wrong, to see how men will take
it, but when he sees that none regards it, he will quit himself by the power of
his own Arm, and when he rekoneth, with the coward, and the careless, he will
pity them as little as they did pity him. Yea, what reckoning can our State
make, who helps to deface the honor of God, by suffering our people to serve
Gods enemies, against those that fight the battles of the Lord: in this is a
greater mass of mischiefs then we are aware of; for beside the setting
subject against subject, blood against blood; yea, brother against brother
(which is worse then toleration of duels) it smites at Gods cause, it makes his
honor bleed, it heartens and hardens Gods enemies, it grievs the heart, and
weakens the hand of Gods forces, it proclaims that we are not Gods friends
indeed (what show soever we make) and it threatens the wrath of God against
us. I cannot but with grief and fear, make use again of Gods anger threatened
against Iehoshaphats sin of this kind; Should thou help the ungodly, etc.
therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. Let us humble then our selves
unfaynedly; let us afflict our selves, and power out our hearts before our God,
and do no more so. Let us sow in tears, for this especially, if ever we mean
to reap in joy. Gods honor in the dust, and all the rest of the former
motives, calls us to mourning and baldness, and girding with sackcloth. If we
will not seek God with sorrow in affliction, we will never seek him: It is no
time to hang our hearts upon the merry pin, when we should hang up our harpes
upon the willow trees; and if we do, the Lord has threatened us (as I have
formerly showed) not to purge this iniquity till we die.

Let us do as the Israelites did: when the Lord did rebuke them by his Angel,
for not overthrowing of the Canaanits altars, and that therefore he would not
cast out the Canaanits; but they should be as thorns in their sides, Judge. 2.2.
and their gods should be snares to them; all the people upon this lift up
their voice and wept, and from their weeping called the name of the place
Bochin: so let us weep much, for we^ have much matter of weeping: but we must
not only weep bitterly for sin, but we must abandon sin, there must be a
total change of the inward and outward man; we must cease to do evil, and
learn to do well: the golden Calfe must be beaten to powder; yea, and the
powder must be drunk, as Moses made the Israelites to do with the golden
Calfe. Diverse reasons whereof are given by the Fathers, partly to put away all
impressions and relics of idolatry, partly, to show the vile and base esteem
that we^ should have of Idols, as of things to be carried into the draught; and
by the bitterness of the water they might partly be admonished of the bitter
curse whereunto all by nature, without Christ, are subject, and partly how sin
by the bitterness of repentance, must be done away. I will not, with some of
the learned Chemists, take this act of Moses as an instance of Chymicall
projection: but I am sure that out of it we may pick the true projection of
repentance, Ezekiah must break the brazen Serpent into pieces. Joshua must find
out the excommunicate thing, and consume it with fire: for so long as it is
with us, God will not be with us. Non unum tantum vitulum, sed multos habemus.
As Ferus did wish for the Romish Synagogue, I wo^ld we had some Moses (says
he) to take away the evils: for we have not one golden Calfe but many: so would
to God every one of Gods people would reform one; and that Moses and Aaron
(the Magistrate and Minister) would both reform themselves and others, by the
due and holy employment of their several powers, in their places; and every
one in the so doing must cast out his beloved sin. Samuel showing the
Israelites the way how to return, lays down a good and perfect rule in this
case, 1 Samuel 7.4
which will never deceive us. If you will return to the Lord with all your
hearts, then put away the strange gods, and Ashteroth from among you. What was
not Ashteroth a strange god? Yes, and the greatest Idol. Why is it singled out
then? Because it was their beloved Idol. So every one has his Ashteroth, his
beloved sin, which though it seem a little one to himself, like Zohar; yet it
is the greatest of all: Ashterah.
it may seem an Ashterah, a sheep, but it is indeed a wolf in sheeps clothing.
At this then must we strike, and neither at great nor small so much as at this;
He that conquereth this overcommeth (...): but where this bears sway, no sin
is truly overcome. And so much Samuel intimates by the speech, as if he
should explane himself further: You say well, you will return to God, you will
amend what is amiss; if you will do it indeed, this is the right way to work,
put away Ashteroth: and so must we do, if we mean that God shall hear us and
help us.

The cause of Nehemiahs diligence in reforming of the Sabbath, after the return
from the captivity, was not only conscience of obedience; or because the
sincere keeping of the rest of the commandments, depends much upon the
keeping of this; but also, as it is plainly in the Text expressed, because it
was Isreal's special sin, and the ground of other sins, for the which
especially the Lord had plagued them. Did not your fathers thus (says he) and
did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon the City; Nebem. 13.18.
yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath?

I wish to God that the United Provinces, and all other that profess the
Gospel, would look to this. The Pharisaicall Papist, being zealous of his
Idoll-daies making the Lords day (being his own commandment) of none effect,
does much insult over us that we hold it a moral commandment, and yet do
yield so little obedience to it, together with this, that we retain some of
their devised holydaies. The like amendment I might press of many other
sins, though I cannot touch all in particular. The Lord touch our hearts with
the sense of every particular. That Cardiack life of swilling, sweating, and
swearing, Bibere and sudare, est vita Cardiaci.
must be done away. David and all his, must not only turn away his eyes from
beholding the vanity of Stage-plaies, and other idlements; but he must whip
out, with Augustus that counterfeiting rabble that God never made. The
abhorring or liking of Stage-plaies was holden amongst the Romans for a note,
of a bade, or a good Emperor. I will not trouble this Treatise with the
discovery of these hypocrites, only hear a little of that which one (once much
affected with them) sounds out against them in a retreat (for so the Treatise
is called) he professes, on his knowledge, that he found Theaters to be the
very hatchers of all wickedness; as brothels of baudry, the black blasphemy of
the Gospel, the Sabboths contempt, the seat of scorning, yea, even of God
himself, the danger of the soul, the disorder and cankar of the Commonwealth.
He instanceth in his own knowledge, Citizens wives confessing on their
deathbeds, that they were so impoysoned at Stage-plaies, that they brought
much dishonor to God, Page 43.
wrong to their husbands and marriage bed, weakness to their wretched bodies,
and woe to their undone souls. Bodin, the Civilian, calls them, the schools
of filthiness, Turpitudinis scholae, and vitiora^ ^e^tinae.
and sinks of sin; insomuch that they are not worthy of a chaste ear, nor of
an honest man's presence. But I hope in a Treatise only of that subject, more
fully to discover the sin, and to set them forth in their colors; wherein I
shall be able to prove, that the Stage Player, and Stagehunter, breaks all
the ten commandments in an eminent manner. The Stage is one of the Jesuits
schools, from which these vile Varlets have cast so much dirt upon the face of
the King of Britain, and of his children, with their Issue, that I think they
should be as hateful to them, in a manner, as calumnious devils, for they are
(...), or devils indeed: As for the counter-railing of that prostituted Crew,
it stands neither with grace nor wit, to make devils on our side Antagonists to
other Devils: it is also a bad requital by the States, of all Gods mercies, to
grieve his spirit by those plaguie plays: yea, it is fearful on the Lords day
to make them a part of princely intertainment. It was the observation of an
ancient Hollander in Leyden, upon the insurrection of the Armenians; that he
feared God would being some great evil upon them, for the Stageplaies that did
so abound; for he remembered that before that firebrand Duke de Alva was flung
amongst them, that this plague was begun amongst them. The Lord give them and
others to rid the land of them. The Lord threatens to be gone, and he will be
gone indeed, both from Camp and City, except we put away these evils from
before his eyes.

But to conclude this point: up and do as you have heard, and the Lord (no
doubt) will be with you, and delight to do you good in your deliverance. I
will not, as some do, pawn my soul for assurance because it is not mine to
pawn, but I will assure you on a better pawn, namely, the promise and practice
of God, whose promises are all Yea, and Amen; and his practice like himself,
unchangeable for ever.

The book of God is so large in this, that I need not be any thing large in
the proof of it; take but that one place of Samuel mentioned, where after that
Israel had humbled themselves, and got their peace made with God; and Samuel to
cry mightily to God for them; the Lord takes the work of their hands, he
incountreth with the enemy, by thundering from heaven upon them, 1 Samuel 7.
the earth trembled under them, the lightning blasted them; all wrought for his
people against them. Our God is the very self same God, and they our enemies
be the Philistims; Would we become such as this people, all the creatures of
God should be inarmed in zeal, to take vengeance on our enemies: Yea, I am
persuaded, that if the enemy should see us take such courses, it would daunt
(...). more then thefeare of any forces that we can make: if they should see us
taking up the controversy with God, and growing great with him, it would make
their hearts tremble, as the Philistims did when they heard the Arc was
brought into the Camp. It is reported that at the siege of Mountabone, the
people of God using daily humiliation, as their service would permit, did sing
a Psalm after, and immediately before their sallying forth; with which practice
the enemy coming acquainted, ever upon the singing of the Psalm (after which
they expected a sally) they would so quake and tremble; crying, they come, they
come: as though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon them. Oh that we
had hearts to seek the Lord, and surely he would be found, and will be seen in
the Mount, whenever we seek as we ought: and so much of this point, wherein I
cannot be too large to those who mean to mend.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the generous behavior of the conquered in regard of his enemy.
NOW it follows how the conquered thus reconciled to God, should demean
himself in regard of his enemy. It is true indeed, that a man especially in
this case must always walk humbly with his God; yet in respect of his enemy,
he must resolve, even in his greatest extremity, on true fortitude, and
courageous carriage. Extremity may change the greatest State into the furthest
point of opposition; but it can never make a noble mind base, nor captivate a
generous soul; Miserum quanquam fortuna Sinonem finxit, etc. Homo quadratus.
though in an inthralled body. Crafty Synon could brag so much of himself,
that howsoever fortune had made him miserable; yet of a base and lying
disposition it should never make him. A truly magnanimious man must be like a
four cornered stone, on what side soever he lights, he can lie: he can show
himself as truly noble in the depth of adversity, (...).
as in the height of prosperity. What remarkable examples have we in the
Heathens of this kind! Agiselaus said of himself; I do so use my self, that
in no change I am changed. When all things went with Caesar against Cato, and
the case grew so desperate, that his friends counseled him to submit himself
to the clemency of Caesar; he answered, That it was for the conquered and
delinquent so to do; Plutarch. in vita Lacon.
but Cato had behaved himself so all his life, that he was never, neither
conquered nor taken; meaning that he was always a free man howsoever. The
Scottish Alexander, in his trivmphant prize of Poetry, (for so I may call the
work) brings in Darius almost conquered by the Grecian Alexander, yet with
this brave resolution if all should come to the worst. And shall this tongue
inured for to command;
return as now to be a base intreater?
So long'st this sword does homage to this hand,
I Will not acknowledge in the world a greater.
This tongue inured for to command does scorn.
to breathe base words, to escape a minutes pains:
Let them obey who to obey was born;
for Darius this indignity disdaines.


Such was the princely carriage of Francis the first; and such an inbred
Majesty did he show in his countenance, carriage, habit and discourse, that
the hearts of Borbon, and the rest of his enemies, to whom he was captive, were
so ravished therewith, that they honored him with no less observancy, then if
he had been in the top of his prosperity. Homer much commends Ulysses, when
by shipwreck being cast on shore, he had nothing to commend him but his
carriage: Such is the force of virtue, it will manifest and extol it self.
The noble behavior of Daniel, and the three Children, did so grace them in the
eyes of their conquering enemies, that of Captives they became Commanders. A
King indeed, or the truly Noble, will ever be like themselves, neither will
they for any ease or fear, embrace any base or dishonorable conditions. The
pusillanimity of some has vassalled them more, and done them more dishonor,
then all their own adversity, or the power of the enemy. King Perseus being
taken by Paulus Aemilius, fell on his face before him, and holding up his
hands, with womanish cries and tears, did deprecate his offense; whom Aemilius
beholding with an austere countenance, told him that he was a miserable man
indeed, and more worthy to be a captive then a King: only this, he was sorry
that the Romans should contend with such an unworthy adversary; in whom as
there was no worth, Plutarch. in vita Aemil.
so he had no glory by the conquering of him. The like is related of Tamerlane
to Bajazet. The more wicked and cruel the Conqueror is, the conquered must be
the more wary of conditions: such be Rome and Spain; with whom there are no
conditions to be had with Gods people; but dishonor and extirpation: just such
as Naash the Ammonite would put upon Iabesh Gilead; namely, the thrusting out
of all their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11.1.
that he might reproach them. It is their professed cunning (to their shame)
above Turks and Heathens, to murder and massacre by equivocation; witness
the usage of Malastate, by Paul the third, who causing him to be slain under
his unsafe-conduct; excused himself thus; That he gave him leave to come, but
not to go. Whence one observes, Molineus de abusibus Paparum.
that it is more safe dealing with the Turk, then with the Pope. They do not
contend, as the ancient Romans did, for command and glory, making the conquered
their friends; or as the Turks do at this day, to bring people to tribute,
and Civil Obedience; but to bring them and theirs to slavery, dishonor, and
utter ruin. They are such as Marcellus, of whom Hanibal said; That he was such
an enemy as was never quiet, whether he conquered, or were conquered: So
whether they give or take conditions, they are never to be trusted, as by their
horrible perfidie and monstrous cruelty, to all the world appears.

If I were worthy to entreat your Majesty; Application
I would on my knee beseech you and others, to admit no condition from them
unworthy of your state and cause; yea to look for no good of them, except it
be against their wills. You and yours are the prey that they would tear in
pieces: what good the lamb may expect of the woolfe, or the sheep of the
Bear, such may you expect of them. Therefore since God has hitherto preserved
you; trust him till he lift up your horn: for there is no peace to be had with
the wicked, says my God. But, I mean, if your Majesty will give me leave,
that you shall have a whole treatise of this subject, wherein their dealings
shall be set out in their colors. It is the very singer of God that keeps
the United States from any conditions with them, but such as are made at sea,
and sealed with great ordinance. As for the King of France his conditions to
the Protestants, when they see the King, they had best trust in God, and look
to themselves.

As the conquered is thus to respect their own honor, Touch n^ idolatry.
so especially they are to respect the honor of God, in matter or manner of
religion, that neither for fear of death, nor desire of deliverance, they
admit any point of false worship. The three children are a good pattern
herein, that preferred obedience to their God, before place and preferment,
before the Kings favor, yea and to life it self. Amongst many other insta^ces
of this nature, I read of some in the Scottish history pertinent to the
matter in hand. When the castle of Saint Andrews was taken by the French,
there were may of good fashion put into the French Galleys; but the chief men
of birth and place as the two Liflyes, the Lord of Grange, and others, were
committed to strong holds in France, wherein were Captains; by whom they were
much pressed to hear mass: but they replied, that though they had their
bodies in keeping; yet they had no command over their consciences, neither
would they do any thing against their consciences, if the King himself would
command them. Those that were in the Galleys were no less resolute: for being
arrived at Nanses, and the great Salve being sung, a gaudie picture of the Lady
was offered to them to kiss; amongst the rest a Scottishman being urged, he
meekly desired them not to trouble him, for he knew it was one of the devils
jewels, and a cursed idol, and therefore said he, I will not touch it. But the
Patron, and the Arguisier, with two officers, having the chief charge of all
such business, thrust the idol on his face, and put it between his hands,
whereof when he saw he could not be rid, he took it very orderly in his
hands, and looking advisedly upon it, he flung it into the river, and said, let
our lady now save herself, sure she is light enough, let her learn to swim.
After which they urged no Scottishman with their idols. Let men keep
themselves from idols, and God will keep them, if it were in the midst of a
fiery furnace. I cite these the rather, because a great many of our
Mirmaid-Professors think outward presence at Mass very lawful, though it be
not enforced; and for such vain toys they esteem them as they are; if a man
be compelled, who will hazard his life or liberty for such a small matter? but
let me tell such, that he that will save his life so, shall loose it; and he
that will loose his life rather then dishonor God in the least thing shall
save it. The Israelits in their captivity are straightly enjoined to quit
themselves of the customs of the nations; that is, not to defile themselves
with any of their Idols, though they were to obey in all things lawful. Yea,
when they should see the heathens dote upon their idols, they should boldly
say unto them; the gods that have not made the heavens, and the earth, they
shall perish from the earth, Ier. 10.11.
and from under the heavens. I wish that the afflicted in the Palatinat and
Bohemia, may so quit themselves, for they be in great danger: and so much for
this particular.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the patience of the conquered.
THe conquered in the next place with his generous behavior, must join
continued patience, which is able to beat into powder the hardest adamant of
affliction; yea here indeed is the proper place of patience, and in this, it
has the perfect work. Nunqua^ est patientiae virtus in prosperis nota. lib.
11 Moral. Romans 5.3.
The virtue of patience (says Gregory) is not known in prosperity: Therefore
the Apostle sets down patience as a fruit of tribulation in the godly.
Tribulation works patience. Lactantius hence gives a reason why good men
come under the power of ill men; namely, that they may learn patience, and
have occasion to exercise Necesse est iustum viru^ in potestate esse hominis in
justi, ut patientiam capiat, patientia enim malorum perlatio est. de Divin.
instit. lib. 5.
patience: for patience has his proper work in evil, not (as Seneca says,
very diuine-like) Incommoda non sunt optab^lia, sed virtus qua perferuntur.
Epist. 68.
that we should desire evil for the manifestation of our patience, as to be
overcome by the enemy, to be forsaken of our friends: but if those evils fall
upon us, we should desire herein to manifest our patience.

For the better pressing of you, in your present condition to the practice of
this duty, give me leave to unfold briefly these four heads, wherein the
sum of this duty, both for knowledge, and practice does consist; namely,
The sum of pa^ience c^nsisteth in 4 things. Ignotinuil^ Cupido.
the excellency of it, the necessity of it, the motives to it, and the means
to come by it. For the first, we must first of all know what true patience is,
we cannot otherwise desire it; yea we may cozen our selves (as many do) with
a show or shadow of patience without any true substance; therefore I do not
mean by patience an apatheticall s^upiditie, or sencelesnes, whether stoicall
or natural, whereby men become like blocks under the burden, by setting a
press upon their hearts; neither that seeming patience from the teeth outward,
which some in their troubles proclaim to men, yet with an inward grudge, as it
were, or dislike of Gods hand, which Gregory terms well, Velamentu^ furoris,
non virtus mansu^tudinis Homil 35. in Luc. 21.
a veil of fury, not a virtue of patience; nor last of all that mere moral
virtue of the heathens wherewith they were so highly gifted, and did so
manifest the same in their lives and deaths, that they may make us ashamed: but
by patience I understand, that fruit of the spirit, or that grace of God,
whereby his children do bear, and outbeare every thing willingly and
constantly, that the Lord does lay upon them, and that in obedience to his
will; so that it differenceth the godly under the cross, not only from the
openly wicked, raging and reviling, but also from the best, merely moral, or
civil men of the world, whose outside of patience makes so glorious a show to
the world.

What (says Melancthon) is the patience of Socrates, or Marius; or (as Austin)
of Fabricius, Scipio or Regulus in comparison of the patience of the Saints?
even as the chafe to the wheat or base metal to the purest gold. It is true,
they endured and that to the death, but as Melancthon; it was a bare outside;
their was no life in it; it wanted faith for the ground, Gods honor for the
end, consolation for the friut and effect: There be none of those three in
philosophical patience, and therefore Austin says well of this subject, that
a man can have no true virtue except he be justified in and by Christ, Contra
^. l^g. lib. 4
neither can any be justified but he that lives by faith; such were neither
Scipio nor any of the rest, and therefore their patience and all other virtues
were but glistering sins. Natural men may, by the law of nature, both do
and suffer things contained in the law: but if themselves be not under grace
what shall it profit them if they would give their bodies to be burned in the
fire; Yea the patience of the heathen, as it is without consolation; so if
their sufferings be prolonged, it holds not out to the end: for a spirt or fit,
if they be put to it, they dare emounter with death and torments (yea in this
they have proved desperately patient; but through long continuance their
resolution fails them, and through impatiencie of disgrace, they become self
murderers. Examples are frequent; for all, take that one of Mithridates; who
for the space of 50 years (as I showed) had always the better of of the
Romans, and had given them many great overthrowes he possessed Asia, took
their Legates and proconsuls and cast them in bonds; at last being overcome by
Pompey, at first he set a very fair face on it, seeming to content himself,
that it was his lot to be vanquisted by the greatest Commander in the world,
and one whom he thought worthy to command the world: but for all this (his
patience wanting root) it could not grow, he was in a kind of fever, wherein
men be cold without, but hot as fire within; Epialis Febris.
which fire of impatientie he quenched with his vital blood, shed by his own
hands. And Pompey himself after his overthrow, grew impatient against God. But
Christian patience, the more it is tried it is of the better proof. Yea; this
makes the sufferings of the Saints, not only to be easy, but also to be
comfortable, which indeed is a paradoxe to a natural man. It is strange to
him, that a man should pick any comfort out of sufferings, which are so bitter
to flesh and blood; therefore the wicked (as Tertullian observes in his time)
did deride the martyrs, that they would suffer fire and faggot for they knew not
what. And so the worldlings of our time, Apologet. cap. 46.
wonder that Gods people will for some trivial controversies of religion (as
they call them) loose goods, possessions of inheritance, honors, and
dignities; put wife and children at random, and hazard life it self; what
comfort (say they) can they have in this? yes, much every way. if they be in
Christ: The worldling is a stranger to the nature of this patience.
for their tribulation brings patience, and patience brings comfort, and
the worth of this jewel the cock on dunghill does not know.

As there be two kinds of Antidotes against poison, namely, hot and cold, so
against tribulation, and temptation there be two sovereign Antidots, prayer
and patience, the one hot, and the other cold; the one quenching and the other
quickinng. And this may serve to give a taste of the excellency of patience;
for having so many things to handle, I can give but a taste of every thing.

As for the necessity of patience it will appear if you look upon it self,
or our selves, on the cross, and the issue we expect.

As for it self, since it is the sovereign medicine against the evil of
trouble it must needs be necessary. Magnum malum est, non posse far malu^.
Bias.
That man (says one of the Sages) is twice miserable, that in his misery
wants patience. Secondly, if we weigh the cross; it is very heavy, and
except it be corked with patience, we are not able to keep head above water
under it. Heb. 12.11
No chastening (says the Spirit) for the present seems to be joyous but
grievous. Again if we respect our selves, either in our weakness, or our
drossines, patience is necessary, for to support the one, and to purge out the
other. Affliction is the purge; but patience keeps the place of nature, (...)
it sets the medicine kindly a work, and is the chief workman; otherwise
the Physic would kill us. Sometime a man is dispossessed of his own heart by
sudden impatience ere he be aware, and therefore he had need to possess
himself with patience. Sometimes the heart is tossed like a ship on the waves,
against which the Apostle inarmeth the Thessalonians; 2. These. 2.2
be not soon shaken: by patience again it is established. Sometime it is
weak and faint, and by the power of patience it is strengthened. Observe the
outbursts of the best of Gods Saints, 1. King. 19 4. Iere. 15.18.
and we shall see that we have more then need of patience. Eliah desires
that he may dye: Jeremy quarreleth with God for deceiving of him; Job 3.3.10
and Job curses the day of his birth. Lastly, if we look to that which we
look for; namely, the promises; Heb. 10.36
for ye had need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
may receive the promise.

As for the motives of patience with follow in the third place, they be many; a
few whereof I will lay down. First, the author of the cross should move thee
to patience, and that is God, whosoever is the instrument. The Arrow is sharp
indeed, but who shot it? The burden is heavy, but who laid it on? Then bear it
with patience, and let that ease the smart. Psalm. 39.39.
The Prophet David with this did hedge himself in from impatiencie: I am dumb
and will not open my mouth, because thou have done it: And thus he carried
Shemies curse, 2 Samuel 16.10.
Let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him curse David. When God did
consume with fire the sons of Aaron, it is said that Aaron held his peace;
Lev. 10.3.
no man can have power over any of his, except it be given him of God.

A second motive thou may take from thy self, comparing that which thou do
suffer, with that which thou deservest to suffer: it is the mercy of the Lord
that we are not consumed. Thus David compares his troubles with his trespass,
and lays down the one as a reason why he should bear the other; Deliver me
from all my trespasses, put me not to the reproach of the fool: then it
follows; I am dumb; as he would say, It is thy doing Lord, and thou might
justly lay more upon me for my sin; whereof I beg pardon, and then lay on me
what thou will, so thou give me patience. Gregory has a fit speech to this
purpose, Our sufferings shall be the more easy, In Registr^
if we call to mind our sins in our sufferings.

Thirdly, consider the nature of the cross, as it is qualified to the godly;
the worst that it is, it is but a furnace to try the gold, and purge out the
dross. Will not a man suffer the Physician to purge out his corruption? Or the
Chyrurgion with patience, to corrode and cut out the corrupt flesh? This life
(as Austin says) is the furnace, affliction is the fire, Iubeor ege tolerare,
norit ille purgare Super Psalm. ^^.
the godly are the gold, with a great deal of dross in them, and God himself
is the skilfullest Artist; then let him purge and try while he will; let him
make the fire of what height he will; let me as gold lie still in the hand of
the Workman, till he take me forth: The dross shall be purged, but thou art
in no danger to be consumed. The wicked are but hewers of wood, and bringers in
of fuel, and plays the scullions to cleanse and scour things; but the great
Artist of heaven looks to the fire himself, that it shall not be one degree
higher then it should be: Yea, the cross being sanctified, makes the vanity of
all earthly things so manifest, that they see no help in any thing, save only
in the Lord of heaven and earth. There is more good under affliction, then we
are aware of: to judge it by the taste, or to censure it by the outside, will
never bring patience: but consider it in the effects, as it is, (namely, a
bitter medicine, out of the sweetning hand of a good father, as it is
sanctified by the power of Christ, to all that are in Christ, both by power and
participation:) and we shall not only be patient in it, but also bless God
for it. It opens the ear, it clears the eye, it makes great with God; as
sickness it clears the body; it quickneth the spirit, as blowing does the
fire, although these seem at first to suppress them. In a word, as many good
medicines are picked out of rank poison; so out of the rock of affliction,
grows a sovereign Panacea; Yea, as one poison is antidotary to another; so
the poison of affliction expels the poison of sin. Sub medicamento positus
ureris, secaris, tlamas; non audit ad voluntatem, sed ad sanitatem. Super Psalm.
21.
Let man know (says Austen) that God is a Physician, and tribulation is the
medicine, and that for our souls health: Thou art under cure, thou art seared,
thou art cut, thou cryest, God hears; but how? according to thy weal, not
according to thy will. Out of the experience of all this David concludes, that
it was good for him that he had been afflicted. That good that David found in
the cross, made him him be patient under the Cross.

Fourthly, consider what the God of patience has born of us, and how long he
has born with us; yea, what heavy things he has suffered for us; (if so be
we be in Christ:) Should we think much to suffer a little for him, or rather
for our selves (for we have the good of it?) To the sufferings of Christ I may
add the sufferings of the Saints, fulfilling the latter sufferings of Christ
in the flesh: Iam. 5.10 11.
Take the Prophets (says the Apostle) for an ensample of suffering, and of
^ong patience. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end
the Lord made, who left us an example that we should follow his steps.

Fifthly, the excellency of patience may make us in Jove with it: like an
expert Chemist, there is no matter so bad, but it will bring good out of it. It
is the sostest and most sovereign ligature to all the fractures of the
soules-qualities, as understanding, will and memory; it marshals all the forces
of these faculties in the due order; it leads them into the field, it
disciplinateth them at hand, in the end it makes them too hard for any adverse
forces to deal withal; and this (I take it) is to possess the soul with
patience: it scorneth fortune, it weakeneth crosses, it increases fortitude,
it sweetneth all bitterness, it makes good the promises: In a word it makes
a man (as the Apostle says) perfect and entire lacking nothing. Iam. 3.4.


The sixth and last motive may be taken from the contrary vice, namely,
impatiency; The evil^ of impatiencie.
which is worse then adversity it self: for this is the evil of punishment,
at the worst; the other is an evil of sin, at the best, and a remedy worse
then the disease: when this meets with a cross, there is a cross indeed. It
makes a man misconsture Gods meaning, mistake his own estate, neglect the best
courses, and take the worst; it weakens soul and body; it makes the burden
unsupportable; it gives great advantage to his enemy: for a man cannot desire
a weaker enemy then an impatient man; because he is overcome of himself. In a
word, it makes his estate desperate, and his case hopeless of recovery.

Hence I come to show the means how to obtain patience. First, The means of
obtaining patience.
in the time of prosperity think upon the cross and provide for it:
Unexpected calamity makes men beside their wit. David, by misreckoning of a
point, mist the haven, Psalm. 30.8.9
and ran upon the rocks: I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved, thou
have made my Hill so strong; but thou did hide thy face, and I was suddenly
moved. In unexpected evils a man cannot ply himself to patience, he is so much
distracted, and therefore it is an only mean for patience, in prosperity to be
thinking what to do if adversity should come. Things here are subject to
change; no day but it has the own night; the cleerest Sunshine is often
over-clouded on a sudden; and the hottest season has lightning and thunder. As
a Seafaring man in the fairest weather looks for a storm; so in the height
of worldly happiness, let men look for some disaster, that they may the
better bear it when it comes. Jobs affliction was heavy, yet the lighter by
this, that the evil was come that he feared. Our Savior endeavoring to
in-arm his Disciples with this patience of proof; fore-warneth them of the
great persecutions, and close trials that were to come upon them; namely, that
not only their professed enemies should cast them in prison, and bring them
before Rulers, but they should be betrayed even by their own parents, brethren
and kinsfolks, and they should cause them to be put to death: But what remedy
against all this? Christ's promise, and their patience: Luke 21.19
in your patience possess ye your souls: He forewarneth them of the
persecution, that their patience may not be to seek; he discovers the evil,
that they might have the remedy at hand.

A second mean to obtain patience, is the fitting and framing of our selves to
the burden. There is cunning in portercraft, as well as in King-craft. As
there is cunning, as well as strength, to the bearing of a burden; so there
must be patience, Cedamus, lev^ fit quod been fertur onus Ovid. 2. Amor.
as well as fortitude, for under-going of the cross. To this the Poet speaks
prettily and pertinently.

The cunning carriage makes the burden light.

If I mistake the terms of the mystery, I hope the company will excuse me: For
it is not for want of practice, but of theoricke: for the better carriage of
the burden, as it must be well bound: so all the parts of the cross must be
compacted and bound up together: for if one part hang from another, it is very
troublesome: Secondly, it must be well laid on: a butthen well bound up, and
well laid on, is half carriage to the bearer. Thou must willingly lay thy
shoulder under the burden, and thy neck under the yoke, and thy yoke shall be
easy, and thy burden light. This is that assuescing, or inuring of a man's
self to the bearing of the burden, that the Prophet speaks of: Lam. 3.27.28
29,
It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth; he sits alone
and keeps silence, because he has born it; he puts his mouth in the dust
if there may be hope. Where observe, that a man inuring of himself to the
carriage of the cross, becomes a cunning carryer, and his cunning in
carriage makes him a mirror of patience. An old Cart going still without any
noise under the burden, may be a good Hyerogliffe of this cunning, where as a
new Cart unused to loading makes a huge noise: so the old beaten porter to the
Cross, Maluit tolerare quam deplorare.
had rather endure it, then deplore it. Thirdly, he must go steady, with his
joints straight, and a stiff neck: for if his joints bow, and his neck budge,
he will, as the Poet says, fall under the burden. Sustineas ut onus, nitendum
est vertice recto,
Ac flecti nervos, si patiare cades.
With joints out-stretcht thy burden carry straight,
For if thou budge, thou fal'st under the weight.
So if a man wag to and again, and struggle and strive under the cross, he
weakeneth himself, Pondus ip^^ la^^atione incomodius fit.
making the burden heavier, and at last he cashiers both sortitude and
patience. To this point Seneca speaks well; the burden by rolling to and
again, becomes very heavy.

The last point in the carriage that gains patience, is cheerfulness: a
cheerful heart makes a strong back. Alexander Aphrod. gives a reason, why
porters under their but thens go singing; because the mind being delighted
with the sweetness of their music, the body may feel the less weight under
the burden. Problem. 1. Numb. 78.
So the Apostle wills us to count it exceeding great joy when we fall into
diverse temptations.

A third mean to obtaint patience, Iam. 1.2.
is to attend upon the reading and hearing of the word, joining thereunto
conference and meditation. This is Salomous tower out of which this armor of
proof is fet; and therefore the heathens had none of this, no more have our
pictures of professors, make what shows they can: for where the power of the
word works not, Romans 15.4.
there can be no true patience. Whatsoever things were written before time,
were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
scripture might have hope. Apoc. 3.10.
So it is called the word of patience, not only so called because it does
exhibate to us the patience and long suffering of God; but also because it
works patience in us as a friute offaith.

The last mean, is prayer by which we do entreat the God of patience to
grant us patience. It is not natures gift; though men by nature will make a
brave flourish; it is the gift of God; to you (says the Apostle) it is not
only given to believe, Philip. 1.29
but to suffer. Affliction of it self works not patience but rather
impatiencie; yea, the word cannot work it without the working of the spirit,
and therefore if any be afflicted, let him pray; namely, either for deliverance
from the cross, or for patience under the cross: and let a man know this,
that patience to bear the cross is a greater gift then deliverance from the
cross.

The last thing of patience, is the true use of it, which in regard of the
fourfold object is fourfold. First in respect of God: we must not so much
as in thought, murmur against him; but approve of all he does. The second in
respect of the devil; if he by Gods permission torture or tempt, we must be
patient till the Lord rebuke him. Thirdly, in respect of our selves, if the
prick of the flesh buffet us we must by patience bear it, if by prayer we
cannot remove it. Lastly, in respect of others; if they be good we must have
patience with their faylings; if bad be patient though they prosper, and bear
if they persecute. Two things especially do further the use of patience;
removal of sin, and fixing of our eyes on Christ: both these, as useful to
the third, Heb. 12.21
are laid down in the Hebrews: Let us lay a side every weight, and the sin
which does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is
set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith. And so
I end the point, desiring the God of patience to grant you this patience, and
give it to have a perfect work in you.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Hope of the Conquered.
FOurthly the conquered with this patience must join hope: for that is the
sheet-Anchor by which a man may ride, be the storm never so great. Without
this, patience is cold, almost in the fourth degree, and that is but a little
from poison. The hopes of the godly indeed may be exceeding low, and their
patience may be much weakened; yet on better resolution, they re enforce
themselves to endure the worst and to hope the best. David said in his fear,
every man is a lrar, even the Prophet that had promised the Kingdom; Ps. l.
116.11 and ^1.2^.1. Sam. 27.1.
yea likewise, that he was cut down, or as the Greek transiateth it, cast a
way; yea he said in his heart, one day he should perish by the hand of Saul:
but this was his frail fear as he confesses, and appears by the sequel of
his flying to the Philistines, which he should not have done: but for all this,
he reareth up his hope, Psalm. 31.23
and continues his prayer; yet certainly thou heardest the voice of my
supplication. You may see hope and patience commonly joined together; the one
being the fruit of the other: Romans 5.3.
patience brings experience, and experience hope. Jeremy commending the
carriage of a patient man, shows us what is the stay of his patience, Lam.
3.29.
namely, Hope; he puts his mouth in the dust if there may be hope. To sum
up the common place of hope as I have done of patience, it shall not be so
expedient: for he that has patience shall know what hope is. I come therefore
to ply it to the particular object, (for I desire to make an end.)

As hope is the anchor of the soul; Heb. 6. Application
so (distressed Princes) I desire you and yours to come to this Anchor, which
in the greatest storm and tempest will never come home. (...).
By this you may all ride when winds blow and waves rage; if heaven and earth
be shaken this will hold. But because groundless hope is no better then an
Anchor without ground groundless hope, says the Poet, for the most part
deceives,) I will point out the grounds of your hope in this great bufinesse,
and but briefly point at them; because I may have occasion to handle them more
at large. First consider the goodness of your cause, of which I need not much
dispute, for it will maintain it self in the end. A better cause there can
not be then Gods right, and man's right. All Gods people (that have scanned it)
are persuaded of the equity of it, which shall one day manifest it self as
clear as the Sun shine at noon day. This was it that maintained David's hope;
for as he often commends the goodness of his cause to God; so he brings in
his hope much depending on the goodness thereof; Judge me o God, and plead my
cause against an ungodly nation and unmercifull: Psalm. 43.1.
In consideration whereof he checkes his drouping soul, and awaketh it up to
wait upon God; wait hopefully for God; for yet I shall confess him. verse. 5.
Where observe, as he makes hope his Anchor; so the goodness of his cause is
the cable that he rides by. Bernard has a pretty saying to this effect; if
the cause of the war be good (says he) the end of the war can never be
evil; Si boun fuerit causa pugnae, exitus malus esse non poterit: neo bonus
iudicabitur finis, ubi causa non est bona. Sermon. ad milites Templi. cap. 1.
howsoever for many causes it may be long first, and may be much at under in
the mean time; neither can a good end (says he) come of an evil cause.

A second ground may be taken from the nature of hope it self, which is to
maintain a man when all other things fail; this sweeteneth and replenisheth
the labor of the husbandman, it conforteth the mariner, when he sees no
land, releeveth the patient, when the physician has given him over, and
inlargeth the heart of the captive, in the darkest prison. This sustained David
in all his troubles: David acknowledged that he had fainted if this had not
been: Psil. 27.^3.
I had fainted except I had believed to see the goodness of God in the land of
the living. Where, by the land of the living, he meant even this world wherein
men live, and in particular that land of Canaan, the seat of Gods Church. This
so supported Job, that he would trust in God though he would kill him. This was
all that Alexander reserved to himself. This is pictured like a beautiful
virgin, for the continual beauty and vigor that is in it. It is compared to
brass by the learned, for the durable and impenetrable nature of it. This is
it that caryeth us above hope; namely, of carnal reason; This is both staff
and lantern, when all sight and sense of all secondary means fail; yea this
is never higher elevated, De divinia m^seratione tum ampltus sp^ra^dum, cum
^^esid^ humana ^^fecerint. Hexam.
then when our State in all men's eyes is at the lowest; yea so low that the
blasphemous wicked will not stick to say, God cannot restore him; or at least
God will not restore him. Ambrose gives a good direction from the nature of
hope manifesting it self in greatest extremity, we should most of all hope
(says he) in divine help, when humane and secundary means fail us: so long
as there is life, there is Du^ sp^^es s^^^a.
hope; yea if it go so hard with us that, as Seneca says; We can hope Qui
nu^^il po^est s^e r^ed d^speret n^bil.
nothing, yet let us despair nothing.

The third ground is from the succefle of hope in most desperate cases;
therefore it is said of hope, that hope makes? not a shamed. Which phrase is a
Hebraisme, denoting unto us the certainty or things hoped for, to be
accomplished. Where first he puts a difference between hope in God, and
hope in man, or humane things; the latter proves no better then a broken reed,
by which when a man is deceived, he blusheth at the folly of his confidence:
but it is not so with that hope that is in God. It likewise meets with the
worlds misconstruction of Gods cause in distress, and the miserable case of
his people, when they see them deprived of their state, their lives hunted like
a Partridg, how they are forsaken of their friends, and made the object of the
enemies wrath; then the world flouts them, Gods enemies whet their teeth on
them, drunkards sing songs of them, vile Varlets bring them upon the Stage,
exposing their names and persons to all manner of contumelies, and open
mockery. Is not this shame enough? No, says the Apostle, all this is nothing:
where hope is, all the devils in hell cannot make a man ashamed: for the things
hoped for shall not deceive him.

It is true, that in temporal deliverances, and vindicating his cause from the
calumny of the enemy, he has not promised by this or that particular man; yet
it is enough to every particular man set a work, that he will do it by him or
another: and why not by him as well as by another? Let him wait on therefore,
it is enough that the Lord will do his work. Genesis 48.21
Israel said to Joseph; Behold I dye, but God shall be with you, and bring you
again to the land of your fathers. Was not David's case desperate in all men's
eyes, and in his own; his hope almost forlorn, his heart sunck in his belly?
Yet the object of his hope was made good. Isreal's hope was very low for coming
into the promised land; and yet the Lord did not fail them in any good thing
they hoped for. I might instance this in Joseph, Job, Mordecai, and others. But
to be short, Let us come to our own times. How have many worthy men out of the
sparks of hope raked up in the ashes, made a brave fire! how have they been
lifted up out of the dust; and their horn exalted on a sudden! I will instance
but in two or three. Antonius Grimanius, by noble prowess and virtue, rising
from one degree to another till he came to be Procurator for S. Mark in
Venice; but being defeated by the Turk in that Sea Fight at the Sporades,
through the fault of the Gally-masters, that came not up to the fight: he was
falsely accused to the Senate, brought in chains to his answer, condemned to
banishment, and his greatest enemy Melchior Trivisan set up in his place: but
having lived in banishment till envy was extinct, by the Senate he was called
back with a public decree, Integritatis and virtutis ergo.
intimating his integrity and virtue to be the cause of his restitution; and
being made one of the Senate, and Procurator, as he was before, he went in a
great Embassy to Francis of France; and lastly, Iovinian. in elog. illustrvir.
after the death of Lauderanus the Prince, he was chosen by sway of consent,
in his place.

One more of Matthias Hunniades, the thundering son of a lightening father
against the Turk: who being cast in prison by Viadislaus King of Hungary and
Bohemia, was sent into Bohemia to be executed: Vladislaus dyed of a poisoned
apple (as it was thought) whereupon by the Hungarians, partly affected with the
merit of his father, and hopes of his own valor against the Turk, and partly
by the labourious soliciting of his friends, he was chosen King of Hungary;
whereof to give notice they sent messengers with letters, to Pog^brachius, King
of Bohemia, with whom Matthias was prisoner, which he receiving at supper,
presently raised Matthias from below where he sat, and set him above himself;
willing him not to be dismayed, for he had glad and happy tidings for him,
which after supper he would reveal; and so he did, saluting him King of
Hungary, and he gave him Katherine his daughter to wife.

Where first observe by the way, how absolutely free, an elective power the
Hungarians and Bohemians have in the choice of their King, which the said
Matthias in a great battle, made Frederick the Emperor to know. Secondly, it
shows how strangely it pleases God to exalt from the very grave to the
thron: for when he looked for nothing, but every hour when he should have lost
his head, he was made head of the people, and had a Crown set on his head: so
that the saying of the Wiseman is made good: out of the prison he comes to
reign; Eccles 4.14 ^ carcere hic ad aurea decore multo culmina transcendit.
whereas also he that is born in his. Kingdom becomes poor.

From prison some to golden State,
with glory great ascends.
If we look back upon the Romans, men without hope; yet under such hope as
they had, did raise their states from hopeless ruins to the highest pitch of
worldly glory. What strayt was Massinissa, King of Numidia put to? Who for his
own right, with sore wounds upon him, was forced to swim a river, having no
followers but four, whereof two were drowned. He lived in a Cave, till his
wounds were healed by herbs; and setting to his work again, some forces being
gathered to him, he was encountered again by Siphax; and by him overthrown, so
that of 6000 there escaped but 70: but at length, by the help of the Romans,
under the conduct of Scipio Africanus, he was not only restored to his own
Kingdom, but possessed also the Kingdom of S^phax, Valor. Max.
for his fidelity to the Romans, who after, lived in great prosperity and
Majesty; having 50 sons, he dyed of a good age, namely 100 years.

After the battle of Cannas, the hearts of the Romans were so shaken, that
despairing of recovery, they consulted of the forsaking of Italy: whereupon
Publius Scipio a brave young Noble, drew his sword, and swear he would kill the
first man that refused to take the oath, which he himself would take; namely,
not to forsake the Commonwealth: So that the rest for fear, and partly for
shame, following him in the oath, stood to it, Front. lib. ^. cap. 6.
till they had raised their State to incomparable greatness. It was a
desperate part in Lucius Paulus, the Consul, at the battle of Cannas, to
reject a horse by Lentulus whereon he might have escaped; but he scorning to
surviue victory, sat him down (being wounded) on a stone, till the enemy came
upon him and slew him. But Varro his Colleague was of another heart, and showed
greater constancy of hope, in reserving his life to further service for his
Country, Idem.
for which the Senate thanked him much, that he did not despair of the
Commonwealth.

I will conclude the point with one instance not unworthy our memory; namely,
of Robert le Bruise King of Scots, whose strayts were as many, and case as
desperate, and calamities as great, as any I read of; his wife led captive;
his four brothers, all worthy men, put to death; his whole friends and family
partly slain, and partly spoiled of all they had; and made the subject of
calamity; himself deprived of great inheritance; yea, of a Crown and Kingdom,
and forced sometimes with one, and sometime by himself, to live like a wild
man in the Mountains amongst the beasts; and whatsoever he attempted for a long
time miscarryed; yet in all his misery and penury he sustained himself with
hope, and as he did not doubt but one day he should be King indeed: So in all
his distress, he did or spoke nothing unworthy of a King. He put not hand to
himself with Marcus, Brutus, or Cato, he cried not with Casar when his
Companies, and dearest and nearest were lost. His happy success in the end did
answer his noble and hopeful expectation: for he was not so low, but God
exalted him as high. When once he rose all went with him, victory and glory did
still attend him, he was happy in his Issue, in his friends, in his subjects,
in the esteem of all Nations, and most of all in his temperance, equity, and
freedom from revenge. In the time of his prosperity, for his providence and
care, in peace; and valorous magnanimity in war, he might well be called the
father of the country; yea I think verily and am able to maintain it, that
if he be compared with the best Kings, that we read of in histories, he shall
carry the laurel from them all. The illustrious Hamilton enjoys to this day
the honor, and inheritance conferred upon his ancestor (being an Englishman)
by that mirror of Princes; the glory of whose Majesty he maintained, both by
word and sword in the court of Edward the 2, where he killd one of the Spencers
for his contumelious opposing of King Robert his due deserved praise. As I
desire of God that Kings now living would pick a pattern out of him; so my
souls desire is, out of my love to that magnanimious Prince of the forefaid
family, that he would remember whence he is fallen, and return to do his
first works; yea, that he may never give his soul rest, till he wash out with
tears the stain of his unadvised service against Sion.

If all these will not serve to establish; then take one for all from the book
of God: when good Mordecai was upon the very pinnacle of Hamans contempt, just
over the gulf of imminent and inevitable death; his hope maintained him still,
and made him stay by it, at the Kings gate, in despite of Haman: the issue was
answerable above expectation; for he was taken out of the lowest pit, and
carried on the wings of the highest honor; but Haman his cruel enemy was
thrown from the cloudie sphere of his swelling pride, into the bottomless pit
of shame, and confusion: so let all the enemies of God secret, or open, perish,
and let the horn of those that love Sion be exalted.

The fourth ground of your hope is from the enemy with whom you have to deal;
namely, the beast, the Dragon, and the false Prophet, whose ruin the Lord of
hoasts has vowed and determined. It is a great advantage to know our enemies,
but a greater incouragment to know that our enemies are Gods enemies, and God
their enemy; so that they cannot stand. What your enemies are, and what
attempts they shall make, and how certainly, and suddenly they shall fall, it
is clear in the Revelations. It is true indeed, you have monstrous enemies
unparaleld by any other; Sagitta disbolt. Hon. 3. in Psalm. 38. Imo peior
Diabolo. Hom. 8. in Esech.
namely, the devil, the Imperial force, giving the devil or Dragon for his
Arms, and the Pope or Antichrist, whom Origin terms truly; the arrow of
the devil, yea and worse, in a manner, then the devil himself; whose chief
instruments be these hellsh furies the Jesuits, these shall gather together all
the waters of the whore on which she sits: but the Sunshine of the Lords
wrath shall dry them up: her flesh shall be given to be eaten, and she shall
be made naked; her wound shall not be cured; she shall be burned with fire,
she goes to utter destruction. And for the more certainty hereof, it is set
down as though it were already done; Rev. 16.17 and 18. cap.
It is done, it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great city. I might
bring a world of proofs, both from the ancient fathers, from the Sybills, from
their own Prophets, and others, that fearful and final shall be the fall of
Rome. That Roma, as the Sybills say, shall be (...) a ruin indeed: but the thing
is so clear to those that have read any thing, whose eyes God has not
blinded, that to deny it, is both to contradict God and man.

It has been often to me matter of wonder, above all all other their
oppositions of the truth, how they could deny this: but I am persuaded the
learned of them, withhold the truth of God in unrighteousness. Otto
Frisingensis an ancient Author, who lived 1161, speaking of the ruin of Rome,
as it has been the head of all both for dominion and sin; so in Gods just
judgment it shall be measured to, as it has measured to others. I could cite
Hildegard, Abbas, Ioachimus, Chrisostom, Bernard, and others; but I rather
reserve the larger handling of it to another treatise. Beda has a pretty
verse to his purpose: Regna ruent Romae, ferro, flammaque, fameque, Romes
Kingdom falls, by famine, fire, and sword.

Which to refer to the Goths and Vandalls were impudency, since that was
long before.

To apply it; Applicatiin,
lovers of Rome, and lookers toward Rome, and all that love to be peddling with
it, and under-propping it secretly, look to it: for the day shall come that
they shall cry alas for it, and shall perish with it. As for those that set
their heart and hand against it by prayer or sword, and hate all communion with
it; yea, every patch of it, or garment spotted with the flesh, let them go on
and prosper, howsoever it may be, (nay it must be, through fire and water;) yet
the day shall be theirs.

There is a Spanishfied popish pamphleter, endeavoring to malign the State of
the United Provinces (erected and maintained by the finger of God) who
disswadeth all men from the maintenance, protection, and partaking of, and with
the Hollanders, and that by sundry calumnious idlements, rather then
arguments. He draws one from the fatal end of all such as have undertaken
that business, beginning with Monsieur de Lemmay, and ending with the late
Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, aspersing like a black mouthed Cur, as much
he can, the life and death of a famous nursing mother of virtue and religion;
giving up also his virulent gorge upon that rightly renoumed Prince of Orange.
To which I answer; First, that as unnatural and violent death, does not
always argue an evil life; so it does not prejudice the goodness of the action
in hand, and therefore he is a greater calumniator then argumentator: again if
this without further limitation be a good argument, then all men have reason to
forsake the maintenance of Babel, whereof he is a brat: for who have led such
monstrous lives, and made such prodigious ends, as the maintayners thereof? yea
I shall be able to prove punctually, that never a man that has put his hand to
the maintenance of that Babilonish altar (carry it as cleanly as he could) but
the Lord set Ieroboams mark upon him, in one kind or other: but that I refer
to another treatise. To the party himself, I will say no more now, but that
by way of retortion which he puts upon Sir Ralfe Winwod; namely, if he had
been as good an Englishman, as a Hollander; the Cautionarie Towns had not been
released: so, had he been as good an Englishman, as he is an arrant traitor,
The affairs of Holland. page 71.
and a spaniolized sycophant he had never profaned with aspertion the ashes of
his native Sovereign; nor presumed to suggest false matter of jealousy
against the King of Bohemia.

The last ground of hope (or rather the first, though I put it in the last
place) is the love of God in Christ Jesus. This is the procatartick cause of
hope; Spes bona praestat open.
this is the ground whereon the Anchor is cast: where this is there must be
hope, and where hope is, there is both help and assured good success. Romans
5.5.
Hope makes not ashamed, says the Apostle: because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts. This is a good ground indeed, this will never let the
Anchor come home: all the other grounds are made good to your Majesty's; your
faith, and the spirit must make good this to your souls, which is the ground
of grounds. Without this, all the other are nothing; as the Apostle says;
neither circumcision, Gal. 5.6.
nor uncircumcision prevayleth any thing, but the new creature in Christ Jesus:
so neither a good cause, nor the nature of hope, nor experience of help, nor
the wickedness of their enemy, will do any good without this main good, the
assurance of Gods love.

So long as men walk (says the Prophet Jeremy) after their own devices, and
do the imagination of their evil hearts; so long they say, and can say no
other, that there is no hope: Ier. 18.12.
What hope can these men have of good success to their courses, or to see the
face of God with comfort, that crosses God, and themselves, and his people, in
all their courses: God shows what came of Zedechiah his hopes; Shall he escape
(says the Lord) that does such things? Ezech. 17.1^.
Or shall he break the covenant and be delivered? All Gods people this Summer
have refreshed themselves with the hope of the English Parliament; but except
they make sure Gods favor by the zeal of his glory, the amendment of life,
and the removing of the plagues of the Common wealth, and expulsion of the
Canaanites: I fear our Parliamentary hopes prove the failing of our hearts, or
at the best, they be but like odors, they refresh a little, but they do not
feed.

Therefore let me not be thought too bold in entreating your Majesty's, and all
the sons of hope, again and again, to make sure this love unto you, and that
not only for the eternal good of you and yours, but even for the glory of
God; for the weal you wish to Zion, for the hatred you bear to Gods enemies,
and for your desire of Babels fall; get but the first and all the rest will
follow; a sure evidence whereof is newness of nature and life: If any man be in
Christ he is a new creature; 2. Cor. 5.17
then be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and get a new soul, new body, new
apparel, new armor, new language, a new house, and all new; and without
doubt, for old injuries and contumelies, you shall have new words of courage,
with means unlooked for to redress your wrongs: For the railing of the vile
and wicked, you shall have the new praises of the Saints: for your old
fail-friends, you shall have such new ones as will never fail you: And lastly,
for your old defeats and overthrows, you shall triumph in new victories: so be
you new, and all the old things shall pass away, yea all things shall become
new. The Lord will not do his own that good they desire, until he make them
good; because if he should, they should get no good but hurt by it. The Lord
tells Judah, that they should bear the punishment of their iniquity; but why?
That they may go no more astray from me (says the Lord) neither be polluted
any more with their transgressions, but that they may be my people, Eze. 14.10
^^.
and I may be their God. I cite the place, because it is worth your observing.
I presume to press this petition upon your Majesty's; because I take you to be
of the generous mind of Augustus, who loved plainness so well, Senec. lib. 6
de Benef. cap. 30.
that he much lamented the death of his servant Barus, who would ever tell the
Emperor his Master, the truth. A rare Jewel indeed, and a truly princely
mind that made so much of him. It was a good saying of Hierome of Sicilie, that
none that spoke freely to him, did importune him, or was unseasonable to him.
So I hope this free and plain speech, concerning so good and necessary a duty,
will not be unwelcome to your Highnesses.

The last point of the conquereds carriage, Action with all the former
necessary.
consists in action: patience without hope is apoplectick, and hope without
action paralitick. Charles the wise, came rather to the ruins of an estate,
then to the state of a Kingdom; yet under hope he so labored, and that with
good and happy success, that he repaired his ruins, beyond all expectation,
so that for his wisdom and industry, he might well be called, the restorer of
the Country. The like industry we may see in Francis: In his captivity he
carried himself prince-like and patiently; yet he neglected not the working
out of his deliverance, and that upon good terms, whereat that old Fox, the
Chancellor of Spain, was much offended, insomuch that he would not seal to
the conditions. The like I might instance in David, who in the very depth of
his troubles, never ceased with prayer, to use the secondary means, until at
last he saw, that which he hoped for; namely, the goodness of God in the land
of the living. Nothing is too hard for labor; for it overcommeth every thing,
and without it we have no promise of good success. One Industria^^ adjubat
Deus. Spes bona absque labor, nihil utile parit. Stob. S^^. 119.
One says well, God helps industry. That which the Heathens fondly said of
fortune (because they knew no better) may fitly be said of God; when we pray to
God, let us put to our hand. Socrates had wont to say; As a woman cannot
conceive without a man; so the best hope can bring forth no good, without
labor. It is true indeed that the Psalmist says, If Jehovah build not the
house, in vain do the builders thereof labor therein; if Jehovah keep not the
City, Is. 127.1.2
in vain does the keeper watch: But it is as true by the Text, that we must
both watch, and build, else God will not watch over us, nor build for us.
Democritus was asked by one, what an industrious man did differ from a
sluggard; he answered, as much as the godly differ from the ungodly, (namely)
in hope, intimating thereby that Sluggards can have no hope: because they will
not labor. Then once again, gracious Sir, fix your hope; to hope add
diligence; abandon sloth, cashier trifles and Triflers, as unworthy of your
person; and unfit your estate and condition; be either doing or devising things
worthy of a King, for you have many lookers on: as industry is good for the
body, and good for the soul; so negligence is naught for both: standing water
is quickly corrupt, especially in an evil air. In a word, as diligence
overcommeth all, so laziness undoeth all. As the sweet Rose grows out of the
sharp pricks; so shall sweetest fruits grow out of your bitter labors. It
was a good resolution of that King, and a fit president for the wise to follow;
If he overcame, he carried himself, as though the next day he might be
overcome; but if he were overcome, he set himself to it again in hope for
to overcome. Is seu victor erat, tum crastina bella timebat:
Is seu victus erat, tum crastina bella parabat.
Cast your eyes upon the indefatigable labors of the Worthies, as on David,
Josiah, Joshua; and others, as Vespasitian, Charles the Great, Maximilian,
together with their happy success, and they shall lead you on, both to the
like labors, and like success. Fear not, nor faint not, but continue to the
end, and without doubt you shall see your desire upon your enemies, to your
glory and their shame.

All that loves Zion, would gladly see our Parliament in this predicament of
action; all predicaments without this are no better then bare predicables, or
secundary notions: if men must be doing, even when they are almost undone; it
is supine negligence for men not to do, to keep themselves and theirs; yea,
and the whole State from being undone: It is easier indeed (as a father says)
to say, then to do: Dicere quidem est ficde, agere autem difficile. Chrisost
homil. 2 ad These. Sermo ab action remotus, res imperfecta. N^ziens. de Basil.
Magorat. 20. Ad agendio^ nati. lib. ^^ de fini^.
but (as another says) saying without doing is but a lame; yea, a lost labor;
and therefore he commends highly Basil the Great, that he was ever as furtherly
with his work, as with his word. This is Princely indeed; for as we are all
born (as Tully says) to do, so they especially who are of high place and
authority. To say much and do nothing, does not relish of the English wit nor
worth; whose noble ancestors for doing, have been too plaguie fellows, and
enemies of State, terrible as an Army of Banners: It has often been to me a
matter of wonder how our Ancestors, with so little or no light at all,
dispatched more work in a week, then we in a year; of which I conceive (with
submission of my judgment) these to be the reasons. They presumed of the work
done; and made the honor of their house, and the glory of their name, the
height of their ambition: but we in greater light, know that the work done
wilnot serve; and as for the assurance of Gods love (which should put confidence
in our hearts, and courage in our actions) but a few labor for it, and this is
the death of action: and they with whom Gods honor is not in the highest
esteem, never make a true account of their own honor: Besides this, our
ancestors had not such hellish pates, and hollow hearts to deal with, as our
Senate has. I wish they may work while they have light, for when the night
comes they cannot work if they would; as I have often showed occasion to be
the soul of action, so when action loses breath, the soul departs, and
returns no more. They want no laws for their warrant, nor patterns for their
practice, nor wit to apply them: Let them up then and do it, and God will be
with them: Shall the fear of Forraigns freeze the waters of our counsel, and
never a fire of zeal; nor even-down rain of courage, to thaw or dissolve them?
Shall the profane oppose piety, and maintain ungodliness, and never a
Nehemiah to take an order with them? Shall Snakes eat out the belly of the
Commonwealth, and still be kept alive in our bosoms? Shall the eye of our high
and honorable Senate be dimmed, or dazeled with a white Rochet? Shall, by him
the Scepter of Christ be trampled under foot, to the casting away of souls,
and his soul not pay for it? Let me speak freely, let them take heed how they
let Benhadad, (that is, men committed to their keeping) go, lest the lives of
them and us, go for their lives, whom the Lord has appointed, either to
destroy us, or to be destroyed. Shall a two faced Ianus, or a man with a heart
and a heart, dance in a net, or go masked, and no body see him, nor unmaske
him. I hope they will pardon my freedom of speech; for my boldness is no more
then my fidelity, love and service binds me to. The fire of sin flames
through all the land; and the fire of judgment is kindled in every corner,
except some bestir themselves to quench it, we shall all be consumed. The Lord
give resolution and action, to those that are in place, to arise for Sion; for
be they sure if they sit still, deliverance shall come to Zion another way, but
they and theirs shall pay for it. As for the Hollander, I hope he will be still
in action; but I would have him to do as much for God, as he does for himself;
and as much against sin, as he does against the enemy, for that is the way to
undo the enemy: It were better for them to be cast in the mould by a plain
and round dealing ministry, then to be battered by the Popes four corned
Canoniers; or the Arminians sacred minions, the Prelates: These be Hawks of
prey, wherewith the Princess of Parma and Granvil, thought to have seized upon
them in the beginning of their troubles; and they have ever and anon been
threatened with them since: Let them leave off provoking God, lest they be
plagued with them, as others of their neighbors be; and let them take heed of
that Romish Dictatorship of constant Moderation; which is the next step to
Imperious Hierarchy.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the end of War.
NOW I come to the very last point, concerning the end of war, which I have
reserved to the end of the Treatise, and will shut it up in a word or two:
(...).
For a great book is called, a great evil. The end of it is Gods glory, peace
and public good: Evil ends may undo good causes, annihilate good means, and
frustrate the most probable expectations. Iehu had a good cause, (...). Maius
bonum est sinis, quam quod non est finis. Arist. lib. Rhet. cap. ^. Horat. in
Art.
and used lawful means, but his end was naught, and that marred all to him. It
is true the work of the Lord was done; but no thanks to him, who in seeking of
his own ends, made his own work the main work, and the Lords the by-work. The
end (as the Philosopher says) is the special good of a thing: Private ends in
war are the greatest enemies of the public good: -- fuit haec sapientia
quondam
Publica privatis, secernere sacra profanis.
It was the wisdom once for to perferre,
Public to private, sacred to profane.
Si st^dium pecuniae suftuleris, aut quo ad res feret minueris. Orat. 2, de
Ordin. Reip.
Salust has a pretty rule for the ordering of men's affections in military
courses: Thou may bring a great deal of good (says he) to the Country, to
the State, to thy self and family; to all those that have any correspondency
with thee, if thou remove desire of money, or at least, let is not have
dominion over thee.

I am here occasioned to direct my speech, once more, to the Lords of the
United Provinces; that as public good is the end of their war maintained; so
in raising means for the maintenance of war, they would prefer the public
good to the private; which is not observed (as I think) in the still increasing
of excize upon victuals; for this course injureth a many; as Commons,
Tradesmen, Travelers, yea, and the soldiers, whose blood maintains the war,
and the private profit redoundeth to a handful; so great ones saving their
purses by this disproportionable dealing, they who have least, and labor most,
they have often the most eaters, and pays most. Methinkes a Geometrical
proportion were a great deal juster, then an Arithmeticall; and that the
strongest horse should carry the heaviest load. I speak plainly, and out of
love to the State, which many ways may be hurt by this inequality. By-respect
and sinister intent, is like a strange fire, which blows up the work, and
brings vengeance on the Workman: it a close kind of hypocrisy, and therefore
the Lord will certainly plague it: instance that requital of Iehu his
pretended zeal in the destroying of the house of Ahab. First, it was the Lords
own work, and Iehu had his warrant for it in the 2 of the Kings; chapter 9. v. 7.
Thou shall smite the house of Ahab thy master, etc. In the second place observe
his great show of zeal, and ostentation of uprightness of heart in the
execution of it: Come see (says he, to Iehonadab) my zeal for the Lord: but
selfe-respect marred all, for he wrought for himself, and not for God; he
looked more at the Kingdom, then Gods command; and therefore he who saw the
thoughts, and hollownesse of his heart, requites him in his kind, He avenged
the blood of ^ezrel upon the house of Iehu, Hos. 1.4. They who now and then can
afford their hand and tongue, to lend Gods cause a lift for their own
advantage, will discover themselves when their own ends are served; yea, God
will uncase them, walk as closely as they can. As I often cast mine eyes upon
the over-clowded estate or defaced beauty of the Scottish Church, I was
occasioned to call to mind, the prompt endeavor of the great Ones, to ruin
Babel, and to rear up Jerusalem: It was a good work indeed, if it were well
done; but as they made the Ministers coat too short, and their own too side; so
I fear, that the sweetness that they found in Gods bread, (as one called it)
and Babels spoils, made them stand so stoutly to it; but these being raked out
of their budgets by the long-necked-crains, that are come from the
Egiptian-lake, the most of them, looks upon the cause now as though they had
lost their purses. And last of all, to give a touch upon our English Plantators
in Virginia, I advise them especially to examine the ends and the means; for
all knows the issue is worse and worse, and like to prove stark naughts:
therefore both the end and the means stands need of rectifying.

The Lord himself gives a good direction to this same effect, that such as
had planted vinyards and married wives, they should not go to War; the reason
is given, because the thougths and cares of these things should not entangle
them, and hinder them from fighting of the Lords battles in the field, by
leaving their hearts at home; 2 Timothy 2.4
No man that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that
he may please him who has chosen him for a soldier.

As the special end of War is peace, Bellum ita sustipiatur, ut nihil aliud
nisi pax quaesita videatur, l. 1. Offi. De^ertandu^ manu est: Ibid.
(so as Tully says) War must be so taken in hand, that it may appear that
nothing is so much sought for as peace. It is true as the same Author has it,
when necessity requires (as I said) that men must fight, and prefer death it
self to slavery or baseness. And this was the end and aim I am persuaded of
his Majesty, to preserve in peace, the people of God, and the practice of
religion, as appears both by his declaration, and his omitting to take his
enemies at advantage in the beginning, for which they have given him a cruel
requital; yet as his ground was good, so his end was good. Let them talk of
peace what they will, they have no such end, except they give all the
conditions, and then that peace is no better then slavery. Look but to the
Spanish practice: Is he not like a Moule once in, never out, if he can choose?
And if the fox be unkennelled, he leaves ever an evil smell behind him, yea,
and litters of cobs that pesters the Nation: or he is like the winding-Ivye,
which shows a natural appetite to help it self by cleaving to other things,
but it undoes all other things whereunto it cleaves. Great Britain had best
look to her Vine. Private gain and by-respect was one of the three Romish
plagues, I pray God rid our land of it.

Thus far I have engaged my poor labors in the troublesome war of this
present time: desiring God, who sits above as Judge and Moderator of all
men's actions, and sees and hears the tears and prayers of his distressed
people, that he would awake us all to repentance; finish the afflictions of his
children; and fling the rod in the fire:

AMEN.
Errata.
LET me entreat thee (^ourreous Reader) to bear with errors from the press,
as some literal faults, defects of Accents, or Points, misplacing, or wanting
of a word. Three Greek words in the Margin has likewise faults in them. In
the Epistle to the Reader, page 2. line 1. for treatise, read this treatise:
Page 49, Marg. for alumoniam, read, alimoniam: Ibid. for virtus read victus:
page 87, l. ult. for that like, r. that it is like: page 159, l. 13, for ebary,
r. chair: page 186. l, 20, for for, r. far: Ibid. l. 32, for 1180, r. 11800:
page 208. l. 18, for the better, r. to the better.

FINIS.

