THE TEARS OR LAMENTATIONS OF a sorrowful Soul.

SET FORTH BY SIR William Leighton Knight, one of his Majesty's Honorable Band
of Pentioners.

AT LONDON Printed by Ralph Blower. Anno Dom. 1613.

A Declaration by the Author to the religious and devout.
I Have published these Himnes and spiritual Sonnets, not in vain affectation
or ostentation of my own skill, which ingeniously I confess to be but small
and mediocrious: but only in an unfeigned affection and earnest desire that
the humbled hearts (together with mine) may reap profit and consolation by
singing or reading of them. If thou art not skillfull in Music, then may
thou read them or sing them in the common and ordinary tunes beseeming such a
subject: But for them who either delight in Melodious Harmonies, or else are
themselves skillfull in Pricksong, I intend (God willing) likewise to divuldge
very speadely in print, some sweet Musical Airs and Tunable Accents, whereof
some of the plainest sort are mine own Airs and the rest are done by expert
and famous learned men in that science and faculty, as hereafter in the same
book appertayning to this shall be expressed, to which tunes all or the most
part of all thiese songs, Hymns or Sonnets are at the pleasure of all those
that delight in Music, to be sung or played, as shall be most pleasing unto them.

LECTORIE IN LIbrum egregij Militis Gulielim Leighton. Thomas Burt. Verbi sacri
Concionator.
Hiliad's of Books, and Iliad's full of pains,
In Riming royot spent in this age quicknes,
(Neglecting grace, respecting Godles gains)
Ar Symptoms of this worlds most deadly sickness
What witty spirits, their spirits have even exhausted
In lustful lays? and precious time have wasted?
But hear behold (against the common course)
A bird of Paradise heavenly Hymns does carpe,
By sense of sin and conscience true remorse,
This Knight in Keye of grace tunes David's harp:
And (though in lowly and submissiue verse)
With his laments the highest Heavens does pierce.
Tears, prayers, plaints, may draw, move, mollify
The ruthles most relentles, hardest heart,
Tears, prayers plaints, heart, soul and mind, with cries
Here offer, sacrifice and still impart.
Hear's fainting, falling, dying, and reviving,
Hear's death on death, and yet life everliving.
Against all temptations hear's th'apologie,
Hear is a stay against all desperation*
Against all souls sickness hear gives learned Theology,
Cure, comforts, cordialls, preservation.
Yea in this book (a Paradise divine)
Are all herbs for souls, meat and Medicine.
The matter meeter, manner, man and muse,
Do show zeal, love, faith, hope and true devotion:
Sad Elegies and Enargies to use,
(Even as God's spirit in us shall make the motion)
To conquer sin, flesh, world, death, Devil and Hell,
Through Christ. And bid this wicked world farewell.
FINIS.
Thomas Burt.

A Farewell to the world.
SAd soul (my form infused by my Creator,
must sigh out groans, and grieves cause cannnot speak:
And since it long, has bin ye worlds spectator,
It must reveal things seen else heart will break.
And cause she finds by experience,
That best is worst that all the world can do.
I world renounce and all the confidence:
I put therein or ought that longs thereto.
And Mundane, men whom this worlds God, bewitches.
That hold your selves incircled with all pleasure,
Of honor, fame, renown and all earths riches,
Shall see it is naught but dross, her gold and treasures:
Leave of for shame, yea in your souls behalf,
To fall down and adore this golden Calfe.
Is not that gone before time that is past?
That that is present pleases but a moment:
Thou know not what will come nor how it will last:
Things present of things past are but a Comment.
We soonest loose the things of greatest price.
Age, weakness, strength that we in youth assumed:
That soonest kills, soonest does entice,
What seems most durable is soon'st consumed,
The things we most do hate, w^e most do use,
And what we most do love, we most do lack:
What we should do, to do that we refuse:
Through worlds allurements, thus we work our wrack.
So that an hundred years though God does give,
We may not say of them we one do live.
Hit takes from us our good, no good bestows;
Hit stealth our time, and no time can restroe:
Hit makes us sad, but cannot help our woes:
Hit makes us rich, in grace to make us poor:
Hit does accuse before complaint be made:
Hit Judgment gives ere parties both be hard,
Begins to flourish and forthwith does fade.
His joys are gone, ere any joys appeard:
Hit bids us spare to spend, and spend to thrive:
Hit fawning faines, when most it seeks to kill,
Hit bids us joy, yet us of joys deprive.
Hit falsehood proves, yet most seems to fulfill,
Thus does it take, yet seems still to be giving,
Hit makes us win to loose, and save to spill.
Us killes and buries whiles we are yet living
Pure joy have none (vain world) it is mixed with sorrow,
Thou have no peace, with discord thine is mixed,
Thou have no love, suspicion does it worrow:
Thou have no rest, thy rest to fear is fixed:
Thou have no plenty, for thine's penury,
Thy plenty is exhaust by penury.
Thou have none houour it is killed by vaineglory,
Thou have no wealth thy wealth is injury:
Have no staid state for all is transitory.
Possessions impeachment does disturb,
Lordships have care and love has jealousy:
Estate his greatness, Prince and people curb.
Religion pure is counted heresy:
So that thou have no good, nor peace at all,
To rise to thee, It is to rise to fall.
Unto the ambitious honors thou do offer,
To innouatours thou will give the change:
To turblent spirits thou do office proffer.
To men irregular thou give leave to range.
Thou wealth bestowest upon the covetous,
Malicious men have vengeance for their will,
And dainty fare give to the gluttenous:
Unto the wrathful mind and power to kill:
And aged men thou fillest full of Choler,
To young for ill give opportunity
Thou fillest the bones of grieved men with dolor,
Lust, ire, and vice, in superfluity,
Are thy chief instruments and working tools,
Vain hope's the b^ite by which do catch vain fools.
Falshood's thy doctrine, make men promise much,
But naught perform (thou call'st it policy)
To laugh and bite, to give and yet to grudge,
To right pretend when it is but fallicie:
To help, to hurt, to lend, to gain, to pray,
And to blaspheame, to pardon, not forgive:
To seem and not to be, nor do as say.
One way profess, an other way to live:
To cull and kill, to kiss and to betray,
Thou hang'st our harpes of joy upon thy Willowes,
First make us sin, and first do us bewray:
Thou calm'st our sea, then drown'st us with the billows.
So diametricall is th'opposition,
Have in thy self, in each state and condition.
Peace makers hateing strife they most are hated,
Rich men wax rich by making poor their pray:
Unjust gain'st just, by th'uniust animated.
The blessed soul's deba st by cursed clay,
The courteous mind by all men is surcharged,
The Innocents, poor wretches are condemned:
Monsters of mischief are by thee enlarged,
Fools are received, wisemen are contempned,
So that preposterous all thine order is,
And all things are done, not as don should be,
It Is thou that lead'st all mortals to their miss:
Thou ruld'st the roast, all must be ruled by thee,
And as thy ways are all prepostrous,
So all their Issues shall be proved disastrous.
Nay further in thy delectations,
No man does hold his fit and rightful name:
But by strange change of Appellations.
Thou would them change, they should not be the same,
(Vain world) rash Roisters thou call'st valliant,
The fearful fool thou nam'st him patient:
Thou sai'st he is secret that is ignorant.
The busy body thou call'st diligente,
The subtle, wise, the unthrift liberal,
The meek a moan, the babbler eloquent.
Vain glorious gallants and blood suckers, tall.
And so turnst right to wrong, and wrong to right.
Turnst sweet to sower, and day thou turnst to night,
In thee therefore is no security,
Thou subject art to maledictionn:
What though that worldlings praise thy purity,
Yet I must give thee valediction,
Farewell vain world thou art the common Cheator,
Of all that trust thee, topsie turuy turning,
All states and people every living Creature.
Thou shall at length consumed be by burning:
I purpose so to live as I shall die,
I Will die to live yea while I yet draw breath:
Though I live in thee, of thee live not I,
To live from thee it is life, in thee it is death:
I Will carry nothing with me that is thine:
Nor leave behind me, ought that I call mine.
Finis.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince CHARLES, Son to our Sovereign Lord the
King
WHen I had written these Lamentations (most worthy Prince) for my exercise and
contentment, for which I had likewise made sundry notes and airs, I was
desiered by some of my best friends to publish my whole endeavors therein, and
being very willing to give such men as delight in Music perfect contentment:
some of the most excellent Musitions this Age can afford, have in their love to
me composed (for the better grace of my poor labors) most full and Melodious
Music; which I Purpose by Gods assistance, to Dedicate with all convenient
expedition unto your Highness: and if these my Lamentations, shall any way
merit your Princely regard, I shall all ways vow my future services unto
your Highness, and will not cease to pray that your high understanding, admired
by all men in these your tender years, may increase and beautify your days,
with all piety, and Godliness.

Your Highness. Most humble servant. William Leighton.

TO ALL THAT ARE IN Any distress, Affliction, in Crosses, imprisonments,
troubles of mind or body. Peace, and Salvation, in Christ Jesus. To the Reader.
I Vide, lege, Tace.
GEntle Reader, the unfeigned zeal, and duty I owe unto the most free, and
honorable service, and glory of almighty God, has bred a restles desire, and
doubtful dilemma in my troubled thought, so that every sense stands a mazed
with doubt, whether I were better to make known the least part of my unfeigned
and true, repentance, and mine experience, of afflictions in rude, and
vnpollisht lines: or else lay open the plain demostrations of my weakness in
this my rash presumption. But the deep affection I have, wishing the good of
all the Faithful: And chiefly the praising, and magnifying of the mercy of
Almighty God, has overcome all difficillities. I confess my too-too much
insufficiency to attempt to show mine own infirmities in matters of so great
consequence, and of so high a nature. yet I hope the gratiousnes of your minds
will answer the goodness of my meaning, and that you will rather blame the want
of Art, then want of heart. A further motive that sets forward mine attempts in
this business, was the due consideration of afflictions, and whence they came, I
wayed that God may find sufficient cause in all men (because all men are
sinners) yet does he work in his punishments, by a geometrical and not an
Arithmetic^ll proportion: laying upon the strong, the heavier burden, and on
the weak the lighter, and on no man more then he can well bear, I considered
the end wherefore the Lord did the same. And I found that they were for
instructions, not distructions, and that he does often try us by the cross to
make us true to his crown. And from this, by reflection, looking back to my
self, who have had a woeful, large, and long experience of imprisonment,
troubles, crosses, sickness, and afflictions, and have past even the Alphabet of
Calamities, to make good use of them, and to lenifie my grief, I composed
thiese swanlike songs. And because Bonum quod Communius eo melius, and every
good gift is of it self difusine I thought it the duty of brotherly love to
make common to all that was comfortable to me, being assured that my rudenes,
and rashness in thiese my willing labors, can not spot or stain the richnes
of beauty and Gods most pretioas and blessed works: on which I have
endeavored to employ my mean capacity in this mine exercise, where the
foundation of building is good, the fault is in the Artificer, if the work
want uniformity, or Corespondencie. For his erring in proportions can no way
impeach, or derogate from the true substance, and sound ground work, of a sure
foundation. A little or small spring from the first head cannot stop the
curraunts of great floods, or the maine waves of the Ocean Sea. These Cantons
are but drops taken out of the fountains of Israel, though the book be but
as a wooden dish, it will serve the poor man's turn to drink in, and quench
his thirst. The rest I leave to the flowing streams of the grave Divines, as
fragant flowers out of a pleasant garden, being grosely gathered, and unorderly
placed, yet retain their beauty, and savor, and the fault in unorderly
placeing is to be found not in the flowers, but in the gatherer: lay the fault
of any error herein to the man, the manner and meeter, no to the matter, In
love is no labor, therefore my labor is nothing, and yet wy labor exceedes
my learning, and my will my skill Paynting is fit for ragged wales, not for
fine Marble. And often times smoth filed tongues are joined to defiled hearts:
God knows, toward him my souls sincerity, and toward you mine hearts
integrity. If thou art curious, be courteous, and do not discourage: if
learned though thou see the fault be many, let thy louo be more: In all give
God glory, to whom be all glory for ever, and ever, Amen.

Tibi et mihi, quod bonum tibi, quod malum mihi, laus Deo.

Thine in perfect love, and imperfect labor William Leighton.

To the true devoted Reader.
ALL curious quaint, abiliments exiled,
In humblest habit, now my verse compiled
Like a poor Pilgrim all alone I stand,
Taking my journey to the holy land:
And feign would have, since thus thransported hither,
All sorts and sects associate me thither,
But all (alas, woe worth) do me disdain,
and one my Palmers weed, with scorn complain
Vp-brayding me, that I sometime of yore,
Triumphant virtues vestures viuely wore:
which though those lines a prisners pace do walk,
Which whilom did in Courtly measure stalk.
To open view, now they expose their faults,
Though like a weakling yt on crowches haults.
The fading flower of those youthful times,
Now rest of power, bewailes her ruthful crimes.
And ruminating on a sea of sin,
Bewraies without, what her betrays within:
Then with my Poems, plain wreck't dispense,
Devoured in zeal, is often distrac't in sense.
Let not the rashness of demolish't Time,
Explode my harshnes, and unpolished rhyme:
Nor shun me now, though I like lowly Ioh,
This leprous Corpse of sin with rags enrobe.
But sit by me, read me and turn me over,
And with thine vngments, gently salve my sore.
within this Port, we will Anchour safe from rocks
From swelling billows, rageing gusts and shockes.
Til Thetis, Halcion, Neptunes, storke does hail
Then shall our Gallion spread a loftier sail,
And from outrageous storms and tempests stand,
For safe arrival in the holy land.
Idillion in eximii Millitis, Leightonis laudem.
THese dulcid lays which here thy Muse does sing,
sound most melodious to ye heavenly King
Thy zealous Emulation here aspires,
To Parallel thy self in Angels quires:
If such ambition from thy Muse can glide,
Be more ambitious, it is a heavenly pride:
Still with this Emulation thee inuest,
For it is a habit that becomes thee best.
And as thy self, thy self do most control,
Seeming afflicted with a wounded soul:
Know for thy comfort, thus Jehovah cries,
Offer to me a living sacrifice.
The^ these Oblations are more pleasing notes,
Then flesh of Bulls and many thousand goats.
To him that says in his Divine behest,
Give me thy heart, then shall thou please me best.
Better then he who all at once exhausts,
Chiliads of Hecatombs and Holocausts.
Nor weigh's he Psalms composures pricked by art,
Till first the Psalmists soul be pricked in heart.
The^ yield thy simphonies, which best accord,
With David's harmonies that pleased the Lord:
As when the women sung this sweet Idillion,
(Saul slew his 1000. David slew his million.)
Hold on thy course, and be assured at last,
Heavens will raise thee some Encomiast,
That like Apollo's Pean shall disperse,
The sacred diapason of thy verse:
In spite of Zeallesse Zoylus all abroad,
And make proud Momus chaunt his palinode.
Ed. Cook.

In laudem authoris and presents operis sui, Antonii dyat Arm.
All evil deeds in darkness do delight,
the perfect good surmou^ts ye Sun shine bright:
The cardinal virtues, yeald to the^ their right,
Do virtues lead, that are Divine in sight.
The former frame to honesty of life,
The latter are to souls salvation rife.
The former has our author lately shown,
In Goulden verse and matter choycly apt:
The Latter leading unto heavenly thrown,
Will be applauded as the only, that
Does joys angelical and eternal bliss,
By sweet repenting bring from dark abisse.
Names do the Nature of the man declare,
Leighton our authors name from true light flows:
To bliss the way to show he does not spare,
His name eternal therefore each man knows.
God grant the soil where these good seeds do fall,
may bring forth fruit to rid the soul from thrall.
Unto the troubles and sorrows of the worthy Knight Sir William Leighton.
Christ's yoke is sweet, see how it works the Heart,
with steam's of sigh's, with throw's of suppcation,
Say Well-i am, when griefs Leight-on my part.
soul's are sublimed, in fire of tribulation.
No marvel Marble weeps on gloomy day:
Since grief yeeldes Hunny dewes, grief to allay.
Io. Layfeilde.

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Leighton Knight. his endeared friend and
kinsman, concerning his divine Lamentations.
EVe^ as some curious Image wrought in gold
is a rich object, stately to behold:
And we not only do the wealth desire,
But do as much the workmanship admire.
Yet if it turned be, to a use profane,
What men did love, as soon they loath ye same:
For all the cost and curious Art bestowed,
Is counted base, if worship to it be showed.
So stately posey often is put in use,
To sing laciueously her own abuse:
And being rich and curious: often times,
Is wronged with base and foul unchristian rimes.
Then Poets all, this heavenly verse come view,
Which bringes sweet Art and ripe conceits to
And does thereby your Poetry refine:
And teach it how for to become divine, you:
A second David here souls health does sing,
And thereby honor does to Poets bring.
Here is no forged tale of love or lust,
To sot the simple, and deceive the most:
No ticeing baud, or foul abusing scoule,
No Art of love, but Physic for thy soul.
He that the Cardnall virtues late did bring,
For to use conference with our mighty King:
Now likewise bringes a lively verse to win,
Faith unto all, that all may hate their sin,
The flintie eye this worthy Knight does move
To shed salt tears fore-wronging him above.
And as himself, so is his verse likewise,
Most Divine, Noble, Civil, good and wise:
Then let no blasting tongue abuse the tree,
That bears fruit to save thy soul and thee.
Ar. Hopton.

Music is then Divine, and not but then,
when words and notes in aptnes do concord,
Composed so by zealous cunning men:
as words and notes both praise ye heavenly Lord
Such Music is Divine, and none but such,
be conceit and cunning ne'reso much.
And such is worthy Leightons true intention,
whose heaue^bred Muse, and Musiqu; do conspire
Both to Demonstrate his Divine invention:
and to Illustrate his most just desire:
Oh, let not then his pattern be neglected,
who has Gods praise, by Notes to him directed.
Luke Jones.

I Inlaudem Authoris.
THis is the second time thou have appeared,
in public print, well willing worthy knight
First thy Tryumphant virtue, highly reared:
thy fame above our Modern Poets flight.
For why? those lines (in serious wise I write)
do with such general learning richly shine,
As if some blessed, or Caelesticall spright,
possessed had, that heart, and soul of thine,
But in this second work, much more Diuiue:
thy Lamentations woefully composed,
thou do thy thoughts, in such low verse combine
as wondrous skill thou have in the^ disclosed.
That me^ may see, thou can write high or low,
in both so well; as none thy worth can show.
John Lepton.

THE TEARS OR LAMENTAtions of a Sorrowful Soul.
A prayer unto Almighty God, to prevent, prepare, and dispose our hearts
rightly, unto prayer.
Lord teach me how to pray.

Luke 11. 1. Verse.
O Loving God and Father dear,
I humbly thee beseech and pray,
For Jesus sake my prayers hear,
and harken what my soul shall say.
My heart and thoughts, Lord sanctify,
thine holy spirit inspire within me:
Me from corruptions mundifie,
and let thy loving mercies win me. Psa. 51. 2.

Oh let me ask and have of thee,
let me by faith my suite obtain: Luke. 51. 9.

Thy loving favor show to me, Mat. 7. 7. 21. 22. 11. 24. John. 14. 13 I am.
1. 5. 4 Mat. 6. 13 Luke. 11. 4 22. 4. 1. Peet. 5. 5. 8.

all other favor is but vain.
Restrain my vain imaginations,
prevent by grace Satan's intrusions,
Let not him taint my cogitations,
nor blind mine eyes with false illusions.
Which are th'nticements and the baits,
of that great ghostly enemy,
That still for worldlings seeks and waits:
within which rank, poor wretch am I.
But as my mouth and lips have said,
words of a faithful servant true, John. 3. 5. 6. 7.

So let my soul of Christ crave aid,
with inward spirit to live a new.
For now my poor soul is a-fraide, Ephesians. 5. 16. Collo. 4. 5.

and time misspent alas I rewe,
To thee I run imploreing aid:
within me do thy spirit renew.
O Lord I see the bloody wounds,
of thy sweet son my Savior, John. 20. 27. 28.

I see thy mercies there aboundes:
and promised by thy favor.
And therefore I by sinful deeds,
that er'st lived careless in despair, Iam. 5. 16. 17.

Do fly unto those wounds that bleedes:
and pluck down grace by force of prayer
Oh in that grace grant me to live,
and in that grace grant me to die, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. John. 1. 17

And when I die, Lord grace me give,
to reign with thee perpetualy.
A general confession of sins.
OMnipotent and gracious Father, Mat. 15. 24. Luke. 15. 14. 1. Peet. 2. 27. 1.
John. 1. 9. 5. Iam. 5. 16.

from thy ways have I strayed and er'd
Like a lost sheep and followed rather,
Mine hearts devises and prefer'de.
My foolish fancies fond desires,
and broake the laws set down by thee
I have not done what thou requires,
but done those things that should not be.
No health's in me, but thou O God,
have mercy on me sinful wretch,
Spare me, oh spare me, hold thy rod:
that to offenders thou do stretch.
I do confess my faults restore me,
that do repent (for Jesus sake)
That promised ever is before thee,
which thou in Christ to man did make.
And grant for his sake live I may,
a godly right and sober life,
To thy names glory still for aye,
possessing heaven that shuts out strife.
All laud and praise be to thy name,
for ever and ever now and then,
To whom all nations sing with fame,
sweet psalms of joy,
Amen, Amen.
A Morning meditation.
I Laid me down to rest, and slept, Psalm. 3. 5.

and in the morning rose again,
God me sustained and safely kept,
and by his grace did me maintain.
His Angels pitched, me round about, Psalm. 90. 20

sleeping and waking keeping me,
Both coming in and going out,
they guarde me with security.
Lord here my voice in morning bright Psalm. 5. 3, Psa. 59. 16. Psalm. 92. 2.

when I my prayers do direct,
And wait till thou the God of light,
do here and help me with effect.
O Father full of power and might, Luke. 18. 10. 11.

mercy and love, how dare I cast:
Mine eyes into thy heavenly sight,
If thou remember my sins past.
How can I think or hope for good, Luke. 18. 12. 13.

here in the earth to come from high,
Having so much thy laws withstoode,
And sinned against thy majesty.
Thou in thy power and knowledge deep
lord see the wicked ways of mine, Prou. 15. 4. Psa. 138. 7.

Whether in sin I wake or sleep,
they are all open to thine eyne.
My vain corrupt and evil deeds,
my imperfections more and more,
With my pollutions which still breeds,
thine anger worse, then was before.
Thy judgment, I might justly fear,
if thou should note what is don amiss Psalm. 93. 16 Psalm. 126, 2

Thou might in torture be severe,
but thou give rest, sleep, peace and bliss.
And have me rais'de up by thy hand,
for only thou preseruest me, 1. Kings. 17. 6. Dan. 24. 33

And me defend'st by sea and land,
a wake or sleep (I serving thee)
whether I walk, work, eat or drink
or what ere else, do what I will, 1 Corr. 10. Collo, 3. 17

Thou blessest all that I can think,
without thy blessings all were ill.
For I a creature weak and faint, Psalm. 6. 3. 11. Psalm. 50. 10.

subject to dangers that are rife,
And closly works my soul to taint,
in this corrupt and evil life.
I lie alas in night and blindenes,
and have no watch me to defend, Psa. 33. 20.

Yet am preseru'de by thy kindness,
from them that ill to me intend.
Whose owlish eyes do shun the light,
who lay their traps and snares in dark
But thou defend me with thy might,
and with bright eye their work do mark Psa. 120. 4.

Thou dear kind Father full of love,
regardest thy weak and little ones,
Thy many mercies do thee move,
tinuiron them soul, blood and bones.
O gracious God I give thee thanks, Psalm. 2. 9. Reave. 12. 9. Reave. 20. 2.

for all thiese mercies maniefold,
Save me from all the perilous prankes,
of sin, and of that Serpent old.
Forgive me mine offenses Lord, Mat. 3. 8.

with true repentance Lord me right,
Let thanks with life reformed accord,
with true obedience in thy sight.
I am inclined to vanity; Psalm. 51.

to slide into one sin or other,
No day nor hour true peace find I,
since first I came from womb of mother.
With many foes I am beset, To. 7. 24. Gala. 5. 6. 17.

corruptions in me daily fight,
Which workeing of thy graces let,
and gain'st my faith use all their might.
Wresting my will and settled mind,
rom true sincerity to sin,
From good desires to be inclin'de,
to deep despair and die therein.
To make one trust in blandishment,
of wi^ked world my soul deceauing,
And in my souls sad languishment,
of comforts all my soul bereauing.
I fly unto the sanctuary,
of thy dear care and providence,
Assured I shall not miscarry, Psalm. 16. 8. Iam. 1. 3.

when I depend on thy defense.
Keep me therefore O King of Kings
as precious Apple of thine eye,
This day me shroud under thy wings,
for by thy saving health live I.
Teach me the truth, me knowledge give
and wisdom with all humblenes,
Obedience, zeal, and faith relieve,
my soul with hope in all distress.
Change me from sin to sanctity, Psa. 13.

from the nights darkness unto light,
Let my cold zeal, most ardent be,
to serve the Lord both day and night.
Teach me justly to execute,
my outward calling, give success:
And happy issue to my suite,
and all my lawful labors bless.
To brethren love and equity, Psalm. 89. 17.

to me and mine in godly care:
With heart and mind true piety:
to God alone let me repair.
And let thy holy spirit so nourish, Psalm. 1. 3. 4. 5.

and govern me, that more and more,
I may increase, bear fruit and flourish,
in godliness and goodness store.
Until thou shall cut off this life,
that is corrupt with deadly sin,
And by Christ's merrites end the strife,
of mortal wars my soul lives in.
And draw me then with cords of love, Osa. 11. 4. Canti. 1.

to thee and thy Tuition,
To new Jerusalem above,
and give me there fruition.
Off thee, and those that reign with thee,
with Christ and all that in thy word,
Thou promi'st me; grant this to me,
for the same Christ his sake, O Lord.
An Evening Meditation.
I Will lie me down to sleep in peace, Psalm. 3. 5.

for thou Lord only make me dwell
In saftie with great quietness,
and do ill dreams from me expel. Ephe. 5. 14.

My body to innormitie,
is subject, without rest and sleep:
Because of mine infirmity,
my life and health it cannot keep. Psalm. 89. 5.

Good father all sufficient,
my loving God, I yield thee praise:
For this days blessings to me sent,
and guiding me in all my ways.
In that thou have this day now past,
me strongly guarded with thy hands
With love refresh't me. first and last, Psalm* 108. 16. 106. 12.

with mercies more the^ sea shore sands
That have me brought to this days end
(black night and darkness drawing near)
Wherein all creatures rest attend,
and lay them down t'il day appear.
I finding my debilitie,
poor creature, run to thee Divine:
Oh strengt'h mine imbecilitie,
and aid this soul and body mine.
Thou have me made of matter gross,
and brittle substance out of clay: Psalm. 51.

Which still is subject to the cross,
a tennis ball for worldlings play.
He wanting comfort cannot live, Psalm. 9. 12.

(after great sorrow and much grief)
Therefore I do my body give,
and soul to thee, Lord grant relief.
O Lord I do thee humbly pray,
(as thou art fountain of all rest:)
Be thou my succor, help, and Stay, 1. These. 5. 7

let me by thee this night be blessed.
Consider me in my weakness,
and let thy careful eyes behold:
My miseries, and my distress,
to cry for mercy make me bold.
And since it is time that night now brings
of bodies rest, and quiet sleep:
Oh shadow me under thy wings, Psalm. 16. 8. Psalm. 56. 2.

let thy protection safe me keep.
Look over me with watchful eyes,
when this corrupted flesh of mine:
In flumbering sleep, and dulnes lies, Mat. 5. 13. John. 11. 11

deprived of sense with closed eyne.
Vnnable, my poor self to save,
from dangers of the darksome night:
Keep me my bed, else is my grave,
and I shall never see the light.
Lord thou that only make me dwell Psalm. 120. 4

and in sure saftie to abide:
(Thou watchest over Israel)
watch over me, be by my side.
Thou art my Castle, and my fort, Psalm. 18. 2.

my Sword, my Buckler, and defense:
My Rock, my Refuge, and Comfort,
save me from force and violence.
Alas, without thee what am I?
a beast that rightly nothing knows:
A senceles block a silly fly,
that no good do, nor no good shows.
Thy loving favor Lord extend, Psalm. 3. 5.

over the house, wherein I rest,
My bed with Angels Lord defend,
my spr'it by thy spr'it, be possessed.
Oh, lie me down in rest and peace,
in rest and peace, O let me rise:
In rest and peace, O give some ease,
from torments, troubles, tears and cries.
Let not the sleights of sin deceive,
nor wicked practice overtake me:
Let nothing me, of hope bereave,
Oh, do not thou (though all) forsake me.
Lord I am poor, Oh make me rich,
with those great riches of thy blessing:
My soul, my soul, is black as pitch,
let pardon follow my consessing.
In hope of this, I lie me down,
depending on thy providence:
I care not if the world do frown,
for I am safe by thy defense.
Lord let it be, for I am thine,
my rest make sweet and comfortable:
To thee I do my self resign,
lord grant all this, for thou art able.
FINIS.
A Nosegay gathered in the holy Paradise.
ALmighty God which have me brought,
in saftie to this present day:
Keep me from sin, in heart and thought,
and teach me what, to do and say. Psalm. 1019. 112.

Prosper me Lord, in all my works,
help me with thy continual grace:
Keep me from Satan vilde that lurkes,
to trappe my soul in every place. 1. Peeter. 5 8.

Almighty Lord, and God ofloue,
direct mine heart, and guide my ways:
Amend my miss, my mind remove:
from all that from thy glory straies.
Thou that of wisdom, art true sprung
and fountain of felicity: Reave. 7. 17

Let mercy mere, my prayers bring,
by faith in me, to sight of thee.
Thou which art Author of all peace,
and the true lover of concord: Ph. 4. 9.

Keep me from foes, that never cease,
to take my life, from me O Lord.
Thy service is most perfect free,
to know thee, it is eternal life, John. 17. 3.

Reach out thy helping hand to me,
against my foes, that gain'st me strive,
O God from whom all good desires,
from who^, all just works do proceed:
Whose counsels wise, all men admires,
assist me in the time of need.
O Lord whose power and quality,
is sinners trespass to forget:
Being ti'de and bound with chains loose me,
of sin for pity, I entreat.
Assist me in this mortal age,
what change or chance so e're befall
From Satan, sin, and enemies rage,
Lord still defend me from them all.
Almighty God which give us grace
now in thy name to pray to thee:
And promiseft in any place,
when Ioynes together two or three.
Tho'wilt give and grant what they request
now lord do the desires fulfill:
Of us thy servants, as seems best,
and most expedient to thy will,
In this world knowledge us granting,
of thy pure truth and sanctity:
And after death, let our new being,
belife with thee eternally.
O God that noe time do despise,
the sighing of a contrite heart:
Nor the desires of sinners cries,
in troubles anguish, grief and smart.
Assist our prayers in distress,
and graciously vouchsafe to hear:
When sudden evils us oppress,
and subtle craft of foes us fear.
Let the^, oh Lord be brought to naught
and by thy goodness scattered be:
That so to us noe heart be brought,
we may give thanks, and praise to thee.
Oh God of mercy we thee pray,
to look on our infirmities:
And all those evils turn away,
which we deserve continually.
Grant that in troubles and sickness,
we put our trust and hope in thee:
And serve thee in true holiness,
of life and praise thy deity.
Through Christ the only Advocate,
and mighty Lord of all mankind:
To work Gods love, from wrath and hate,
toward his elect to be most kind.
Oh God to whom all hearts are seen
and hid desires are plainly known:
My life reform, and mind make clean,
my spr'it, inspire, to be thine own.
That I may love thee perfectly,
and magnify thy holy name:
Through Christ my Savior worthily,
and all the world confess the same.
Lighten my darkness Lord I pray thee
from this nights dangers me defend:
Let not flesh, world, nor devil dismay me
keep me both to, and in the end.
Thy mighty hand, and arm protect me
thy mercy in Christ, be my salvation
Lord ever let thy word direct me,
and thy spr'it give me consolation.
The peace of God which far exceedes
all understanding of man's wit:
Preserve my soul from wicked deeds,
and guide mine heart, to do what is fit.
Finis.
A particular confession of a sorrowful sinner.
MOst mighty and al-knowing Lord Ier. 11. 20. Ier. 17. 10.

true spring of consolation:
I do confess with heart and word,
thou art my preservation.
I have offended grievously,
by my transgression don gain'st thee,
And have drawn down a weight on me,
of thy great Judgments wilfully.
Under which burden cannot I, Luke. 18. 13

but faint and fall in woeful sort:
Unless thy hand and thy mercy,
through Jesus Christ do me support.
Thou know good father I am weak, Psalm. 6. 3.

and cannot bear thine heavy ire:
Not knowing what to do or speak,
or how to save me from this fire.
Unless thou point me out the way,
with thy wise spr'it me directing: Psalm. 24. 5. 9 10. 26. 11. Verse

Unto the devil I am made a pray,
were not thy power me protecting.
Not every one that hears thy word,
can understand thy wisdom great: Mat. 11. 50.

Nor every one that cri'th Lord Lord,
shall enter into heavens gate.
Who is not ledd by better line, John. 1. 13. Mat. 16. 14

then does proceed from flesh and blood
Er's from the truth, and does decline,
from right to wrong, to ill from good.
Whose end is death, though for a time,
seems sweet to please the outward man
That Is nothing else but dirt and slime,
or like a puff, in length a spanne.
As honor, riches, friends and health,
preferment life and worlds delight:
Esteeming these true happy wealth,
but the true bliss is out of sight. Heb. 11. 1.

They think that sickness poverty,
imprisonment and enymies fell:
And worldly crosses verily, James. 1. 2. 3.

are gates and entrance into hell.
So foolish and so ignorant,
are those thou guyd'st not in thy way,
Mong'st whom even I, through wisdoms
have bin misled until this day.
But having found the truth by trial, want,
that earthly joys are transitory:
When they me tempt I make denial,
and only seek the eternal glory.
Now I disclaim all confidence,
in Honor, health, in wealth or feature:
In wit or worldly sapience, Mat. 16. 14

or yet in any earthly creature.
And Lord I here do dedicate,
all thou have given me to thine honor:
My self I wholly consecrate, Mark. 3. 14.

to march and fight under thy banner.
And now I bid these joys adieu,
that only please my flesh and senses:
Because they all are most untrue,
and still do cause so great offenses. 1. John. 2. 15.

Because their glorious bounty fades,
and leave naught but deformities:
Because they are naught else but shades, 1. John. 2. 16.

and bring forth gross innormities.
Because they are most false and fickle,
because they are indeed hells fuel:
Because their rose has many a prickle, James. 4. 4.

because their slavery is most cruel.
Because they are not firm and stable,
because they are profane not holy:
Because they are but as a fable,
because they are but sottish folly.
Because my soul they call and kill, Mat. 26. 27. Mark. 14. 44. 45.

because they give me Judas kiss:
Because my good they spot and spill,
and draw me from mine heavenly wish.
because lik swords, they wou^d my soul
because like serpents, they do sting me:
Because my conscience does control, 1. Cor. 15. 56.

and says to hell gates, they will bring me.
Because they do beset my senses, 1. Sam. 21. 25. 26.

because they dull my spirits quicknes.
Because they cause so great expenses,
because they cause my sad souls sickness
Bcause all virtue hindered is,
by this vild worlds accused pleasure:
Because it will me bereave of bliss,
and of that blessed heavenly treasure.
And therefore earth and world farewell 1. John. 21 16.

adue fond fancies flattering favors,
Your joys are toys, your heaven is hell,
I hate your poisoned taste and savors.
And thou that art, life of my life,
soul of my soul, O Jesus Christ: John. 14. 6.

Point down the period of worlds strife. Psalm. 109. 4

thou art that prophet, Prince, and Priest.
That went up to prepare that place,
above Son, Moon, and planets seven
Oh save me by thy saving grace:
and bring me to that highest heaven.
Where are such joys caelestiall, 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10.

as cannot be expreste by pen:
Bring me from things terrestrial,
to reign with thee for aye
Amen.
A heavenly hymn touching the Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
COme let us sing to God with praise,
our Prophet, Prince, and Priest, always
And to the sacred holy spirit. and etc.
Oh let us laud the Trinity, 1. John. 5. 7. 8.

With heart and voice them magnify.
For Christ who made us life inherit. etc. Luke. 2. 13. 14. 15.

Give thanks to God with joy and mirth
For his sweet son, our Saviors birth,
Of all mankind the comfort true.
He is the guiltles lamb alas, John. 1. 29.

Whose death and passion brought to pass
Faith hope, and bliss, with spirit anew.
Lift up your heart, with joy abound,
With solace sing sweet Musicks sound: Psalm. 33. 3.

In honor of Gods holy name.
Who Christ his Son the lamb did make,
By death man's sins away to take:
All nations sing his worthy fame.
He is the seed was promised,
To bruise and crush the serpents head:
Which caused all men for sin to die.
He is the mediate to appease,
Gods wrath by death to give us ease:
Praise him praise him continually.
Finis.
A prayer in extreme sickness
THou God of might have chastned me,
and me corrected with thy rod:
Wounded my soul with misery,
and humbled me to know my God.
And so made soft my stony breast.
Thy Arrows stick most fast in me:
My heart does pant, my joints oppressed,
my flesh me paineth woefully. Psalm. 38. 23

My bodies members me deceive,
I languish still my strength's decayed, Psalm. 3. 8.

I am so weak of power bereaved,
I cannot stand but must be stayde.
Thy hand O God does press me sore,
my sickness so extremely grows:
That I am even at deaths door,
thou do it Lord. my heart it knows.
That I am vexed thus with pain,
it is for sin and mine offense.
For my misdeeds and trespass plain,
the cause of wrathful recompense.
Ease me O God, and sucker me,
send comfort lay no more on me:
Then I can bear, O suffer me,
to draw my breath, and look on me.
O Lord consider my weakness,
bear with my great infirmity-
Help me oh Lord cure my sickness, 2. Chro. 32 2022.

that I may give all praise to thee.
Incline thine ears unto my mones,
hark to the voice of my complaint:
Let both my crying and my groans,
come to thy throane oh I am faint.
I make my plaint to thee alone,
for thee alone I have displeased:
To thee alone I make my moan,
may't please thee that I may be eased
I know not how for to appease,
thy high displeasure that is gain'st me:
I am afraid to ask for ease,
or look on thee that pain'st me.
I am near drowned with deep despair
when I in mind do well perpend:
How I did sin (sans) fear or care,
without regard of my last end.
Lord I have sind, and thou have said,
that at what time I do repent, Eze. 18. 21. 22.

My debts sor sins shall all be paid,
thy gracious pardon shall be sent.
On this thy promise Lord I build,
upon thy goodness I rely:
Mine heart does to repentance yield,
grant pardon Lord, or else I die.
Though I have often heinously,
offended, and thy patience proved:
By sinning often grievously,
yet thou with pity have been moved
Art slow to strike, yet strong to suffer, Psalm. 103. 10.

thine hands are iron, thy feet of lead:
Thou art more ready grace to offer,
then we to ask our daily bread.
O now for pity ease my pain,
for Jesus sake, my Lord thy Son:
Restore to me my health again,
if not, Lord let thy will be done.
But grant me strength to bear thy yoke,
and patience Lord unto me lend: Mat. 11. 23 30.

That I may bide thine heavy stroke,
and then send Lord whatthou wilt send.
Thy punishments are pursiuants,
that thou of faithful love do send:
To all thy true and just servants,
to warn them of their latter end.
Thy rod and staff does comfort me, Psalm. 23. 24.

and me uphold t'wixt hope and fear:
Thou gain'st presumption chastnest me,
and the other keep me from despair.
To thee O Lord I do commit,
my self I never will repine:
For thou know best what is most fit,
in life and death let me be thine.
FINIS.
Precepts of duties.
HIgh mighty God of righteousness,
in wrath, a dread consuming fire: Exo. 20. Genesis 1 2. 27. 28.

Thou did in perfect happiness,
make man, that dard gain'st thee conspire
And break thy laws with all dispight
when thou had made him pure and holy
Placed him in garden of delight, Genesis 3.

(so great and wicked was his folly.
That having leave, to take or leave,
to choose, refuse or use, at pleasure:
He did himself by sin deceive,
of that Divine surpassing treasure.
And by his mutabilitie,
(regardles of thy sacred sawes) Genesis 18. 14 25.

He brought in instabillitie,
lost his free will, made breach of laws.
Thou God of justice must do right,
man wanting grace, with want of grace:
By grace substraction did requite,
and bannishe him, that blessed place.
By means of which we are inclined,
from thy behests to run astray:
Our tongue, our heart, our soul, our mind
by sin is carried clean away.
Thine honor first is sted fast faith, Mic. 6. 6. 7. 8.

in Christ, and in thine holy book:
And in thy truth that thy spirit says,
which in mine heart for faith does look
The next obedience to thy will,
as thou co^manded'st by thy sweet word Exo. 19. 20. Exo. 20.

From Syna and from Sions hill,
to teach us do thine hests O Lord.
Us for thy children have elected, Romans 9.

and us adopted to inherit:
Thy bliss (if thy bliss be respected)
and sealed us with thine holy spirit.
Thou made us free, by thy sons blood
to the end thou may be glorified 1. John. 1.

In souls and bodies for our good,
his passion has us purified.
thou freed'st us to that end we might
serve thee in holy righteousness: Luke. 1. 74

Thou gave thy son, and he us bought
from thraldom of our sinfullnes.
Thou would he should for all men die 1. John. 4. 14.

to make him live in thine elect:
And they in him, to fructify,
and with his graces have them decked.
By grace and holy inspiration, Exo. 18. Exo. 19.

rebellious nature seek'st to tame:
With precepts for instruction,
and leau'st us laws in thine own name.
The ready way of serving thee,
and profit to our neighbors bring:
And loving thee most zealously,
who art our father, Lord and King.
Though by thy Gospel we be free,
from laws of sin, and Punishment: Romans 8.

Yet rules of life and piety.
thou have prescribed, and to us lent.
Thereby to manage all our deeds,
and guide us, least we stepp awry:
And rightly use our natures seeds,
both well to live, and well to die.
These laws did write in tables two
with the pure finger of thine hand:
Delivered them Moses unto,
that we thy will might understand.
The first contains precepts four,
of duties due unto thy fear^:
The second six commandments more,
of love we should to neighbors bear
The sum and substance of them all
and that fulfilleth every part, Romans 13. 10.

Is thee to love, on thee to call,
with all our soul, might, mind, and heart
To other men (especially,
thine household that are firm in faith)
As to our selves to give supply,
with all our help as scripture says.
But we are weak, our case thus stands
in this frail mortal life of ours, Romans 8. 3. 4

No man can keep these thy commands
but breaks them at all times and hours.
Yet thou thy children often do will,
them selves to comfort hopeingly:
There Is left for them some measure still, 1. John. 2. 1

t'approach to thee acceptablie.
Namely when they bend their whole strength,
(daily prevented by thy spirit)
And stand in hope t'attaine at length,
what now they want, by Christ his merit
Walking and daily going on,
by stepps thereof to Paradise:
Praising and lauding thee alone,
sighs yet for their infirmities. Psalm. 51. 17.

The faithful know all and believe,
with thee our father mercy is: Esa. 56. 1.

For with thy son do all things give,
how can we then of mercy miss.
Therefore my God now give to me,
all that thou give to thine elect: Psalm. 51. 11.

Of thine eternal clemency,
let not thy spirit my soul reject.
Illuminate my knowledge dark,
Possess my heart the Lord to love: Psalm. 18. 18.

What Is don amiss, Lord do not mark,
but let thy spirit, my spirit still move.
That I most constantly may walk,
the steps and path's of thy just laws: Psalm. 119.

And of thy goodness daily talk,
with fear and love and all applause.
To whom I wholly owe my self,
(for thou have Lord created me: Genesis 1. 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19.

And bought me not with worldly pelf,
but by thy son have made me free)
Whence I do also learn to love, 2. Eor. 15. 1 4.

all men in thee and for thy sake:
Who bear thy image from above,
and my vocation surer make.
O let me thus thy favor find,
and peace of consience understand: Romans 5. 2. John. 16. 33.

Thy blessings and thy mercies kind,
to God the work's of mine ill hand.
That filled with days, I leave my life, Genesis 35. 29

rest to enjoy with all contents:
And live eternally from strife,
and keep thy ten Commandments.
Finis.
An invocation to God, humbly praying for remission of sin.
WEll spring of bounty, God of fear, Reu. 1. 8.

beginning that, make all begin:
With what oblation to appear,
appease thy wrath that is due for sin.
I know not blood of Bulls and beast,
or sweetest incense that does rise:
From earth of old, they were the least,
and are not now of any prise.
O how should I be reconciled,
again, unto thy loving favor: Psalm. 51.

How long Lord shall I be exiled,
from my sweet Lord and only Savior.
How long, O have I called to thee,
to thee, in name of thy dear Son: Psalm. 4. 1.

Yet what I asked thou gave not me.
and what I would is left undone.
I long have knocked at thy door,
of mercy but none entrance find: Psalm. 167. Psalm. 18. 5. 6

Sorrows and troubles more and more,
increase and vex my soul and mind.
I daily wait most woeful mortal,
before thy seat of clement grace:
But may not peep within thy portall,
nor see thy glorious beauteous face.
I sigh and mourn my tears are seas,
I sincke under the burdnous load: Psalm. 7. 7. Psalm. 39, 13. Psalm. 42. 4.

Of sin and shame, and find none ease,
provoke me forward with thy word.
Of castigation I desire,
to quench thy wrath with floods of tears:
Yet still increase thy fearful fire,
and so increase my frostie fears.
By prayers thee to press who dares,
except by thy sons mediation:
To seek thy glory's, all our cares,
and the end of earthly men's creation.
what course should I poor wretch the^ take,
to do or ask that is good and just: Psalm. 57. 2. 118. 8.

But unto thee, my prayers make,
and only in thy son put trust.
If that my sins shall thee offend,
then all thy creatures rage and storm: 1 King. 13. John 1.

And all conspire by thy command,
to beat on me poor silly worm.
Where shall I be, or whether fly,
from sight of thine all seeing ey ne: Psalm. 139. 7. Genesis 8.

As Noah's dove, on earth am I,
and cannot look against thy shine.
But if thou show thy loving face,
all creatures on my service tend: 1. King. 17. 4. 5. 6. John. 10. 12 13.

Men beasts and Angels, do me grace,
to help me all their powers do bend.
What should I then, say, give or do,
what pain can gain my favor lost:
Rivers of Oil or ought thereto, Mic. 6. 6,

they are thine own, and of thy cost.
Accept yet Lord the sacrifice,
of Heart and Calves, of lips unfeigned: Mic. 7.

This is that Offering did devise,
to have thy grace to be obtained.
The free will offringe of my Zeal,
in sense of sighing still assending: Psalm. 51.

They to thy mercies seat appeal,
and would make peace for mine offending faulter,
Although mine heart and tongue do Psalm. 40.

yet in Christ Jesus meditation:
Receive this offering on thine Alter,
with all my best imagination.
Hear me in him, in him relieve me, Mat. 11. 29 30.

for without him, noe help can be:
None can my souls, or hearts ease give me
nor can I inward comforts see.
Till I know that thy wraths appeased Genesis 15. 1.

and have thy charter of thy pardon:
Then shall I find mine heart so eased,
that I desire noe further guerdon.
And now I most unhappy man, Psalm. 18. 2.

that did offend my God so kind:
By grace of him in all I can,
i will seek with heart, with soul, and mind
To honor, serve, obey and please,
him that is mine al-seeing maker: Psalm. 119.

Whom I beseech to grant me peace,
and make me of his joys partaker.
Finis.
A Godly meditation, wherein the distressed shows, he is unfeignedly grieved,
hat he has offended God, who is so powerful and so dread a judge: who also
(as the repentant thinks) has armed man and all creatures against him for
his sins. But (aggravating the greatness of his miseries and afflictions) at
the last, heresolueth to go unto God in Christ his name, with whom he is well
pleased, and in whom he will accept the prayers of the offendant.
ALas that I offended ever,
this God of Gods, this Lord of powers
That can in pieces all men shiuer,
and ouerturne the stateliest towers. Gal. 3. 10.

Ah woe is me that I offended,
and justly God stirred up to ire:
Who by his law, has sin condemned, The example of Jonas swallowed with a
whal for his disobedience, shew'th this Jonas 1.

unto the pit of endless fire.
I daily see Gods creatures all,
justly for sin displeased with me:
Men's hearts are hardened and with gall,
feed me that have offended thee.
My God thy blessings all one earth,
thou do witholde, and from me keep:
Alas my soul sustaines a dearth,
of grace, unto thy grace I creep.
But what to do or what to say,
I know not Lord, but I know this:
My grieses increase more day by day,
my mirth is moan, bane is my bliss.
One evil does another call,
like waves on waves in raging seas: John, 2. 3 Psalm. 6.

My weary burden makes me fall,
I find no comfort help nor ease.
I hope of help, but that hope quails,
in crosses are my comforts ended:
I fly to faith, but then faith fails,
when I need most to be defended.
As if I were the only man, So David complains that he was a mark to shoot
at. Psalm. 11. 2.

prepos'd by thine intendement:
Whom heaven and earth must curse and ban
as subject of all punishment.
Thy justice dams me, I appeal,
to mercy, then appeald I fear:
To be rejected, thus cold zeal,
and secret sins with grief I bear.
Shall I think it a fruitles taste,
unto my God for to repair Mat. 7. 7.

That Sinners calls and bids them ask,
and they shall have all things by prayer.
Can it be bootles down to fall,
be^o^e his throne of majesty:
And with repentant tongue to call,
for pardon for my iniquity.
May not unfeigned cries at last, The importunate widow prevails with the
unjust judge. Mat. 18. 7.

prevail with him that is pitiful:
To pardon my offenses past,
and move my spr'its which now are dull
I Will frame my heart to meditate,
my tongue to utter what may please:
Him whom best knows mine estate,
and seek his wrath for to appease.
To him i will go in Christ his name, The prodigal child returned to his Father.
Luke 15. 11.

in whom I know he is well pleased:
And will confess my sin with shame,
and so mine heart, shall sure be eased.
The second part of the meditation.
FOr Christ's sake, look on me again, Gen, 17. 1.

he is God all sufficient:
He does behold and see my pain,
my inward faithful hearts intent.
He knows what I go about, Psalm. 39. 16.

all I think, speak, or do amiss:
He writes or noates, without all doubt,
in his remembrance book it is.
I know he will in worth accept,
what justly I intend to do:
And cannot it perform, except
He put his helping hand thereto.
He knows that I am but flesh,
and what is flesh but frail and ill: 1. Pet. 1. 24. Psalm. 40. 6. Iam. 1. 10.

And what is man a lump of trash,
whom vain desires do fully fill.
And will this God Jehovah high,
so strong and powerful set his might: Psalm. 22. 7.

Against a worm so weak as I,
a silly man a shade of night.
What conquest can there be in God,
to work revenge on me poor soul
Who still corrects me with his rod,
whose justice does my sins control.
shall I dispute with thee, nay rather,
poor wetch I should fall prostrate down, Romans 9. 10.

And humbly kneel unto my father,
and pray with tears when he does frown
If he afflict, more be it so,
if further plague me let be so:
If he will kill with pains and woe,
do what he list, let it be so.
For I am his, do what he will, Mat. 6. 10.

with me and all that mine can be:
It is his own and must be still,
there is no disputing God with thee.
There is noe Art, or Eloquence, psalm. 49. 16.

can quench thy coals of burning ire:
It is not words can make defense,
nor friends can save me from they fire
Nor take me from the powerful hands
so full of might force strength and power:
Or break a sunder thy strong bands,
nor ease one minute of an hour.
I Will yield me therefore to his will, Mat. 16. 10.

Lord do what thy good pleasure is:
Turn me as may, thy mind fulfill,
i will wait the time of happy bliss.
I Will wait thy pleasure, time will come,
wherein I may the issue see:
Of my afflictions all and some,
and what thy purpose is with me.
The meanetime I will with thy word 1. Sam. 2. 1. 1. Sam. 5. 19.

consult and use my exercise:
And comfort take though hope O Lord
refresh dull spr'ites and clear dimmed eyes.
With dew of thy sweet promises,
laying aside all fleshly aid:
I only rest on thy mercies,
in holy word as thou have said.
And in true faith will I remain,
and seek thee (being the true way:
Wherein who walks, at length shall gain
true bliss and happiness foraye. John. 14. 6.

Who this embraces shall not err,
wherein who lives, shall never die.
But wear a crown past reason far,
to live with God etetnally.
FINIS.
A prayer wherein the distressed, humbly confesses his sins, and the
vanities of his former times lewdely misspent, desiring others to take example
by him, and to return to God by reptntance before it be to late. And at the
last preparing to die, commends his soul to God: with whom after death, he
hops to live forever.
AN heart, that is broken and contrite, Psalm. 51.

to God, is a sweet sacrifice:
Repentant sinners him delight,
far more then just men in their eyes.
what I have bin my God has known
what I now am the Lord does see:
What I shall be to him is shown,
from him no secret kept can be.
How I consume so many years,
misspent so many months and days:
Both hours and minutes all appears,
to God who marks my life and ways.
Time is the mean that all things tries,
time works what men's wits devise: Eccl. 3. 1.

Time with his swiftnes, ever flies,
and time in time, will make men wise.
Fly from me, follies of my youth,
pack hence my sins that burdned me:
Welcome to me is age and truth,
now I by faith in Christ will be.
whose sins do make their hearts to bleed
let them examples take by me: Psalm. 25.

Whose wickedness all men's exceed,
come, come, and my repentance see.
Lord now let me depart in peace,
I feel thy rod, I find thy love: Mat. 5. 16.

My pains do grow, my joys increase,
this mercy comes from thee above.
My sickness is a present mean,
to heal and cure my wounds of sin: Luke 2. 29.

Lord purge all my corruptions clean,
and let my death, my life begin.
FINIS
The repentant complains of his horrid and grievous sins, and in the end
gives thanks unto Jehovah on high, who is distinguised into one God and three
persons.
HIdden O Lord are my most horred sins,
unto ye world, though open plain to thee Psalm. 17. 5.

He never betters that no time begins,
corruption kills all good thoughts in me.
What sin does dwell in this vild flesh of ours,
but does increase like monsters huge in me:
Committing them both minutes, days and hours,
as swift as Time, so fast grow they in me.
Rent thine own flesh, and tear thy wretched hairs,
scrape clean corruptions marrow from thy bones Mark. 9. 47

Put out thine eyes, cut of thy tongue, stop ears
lame all thy senses, to kill sin at once.
I feign would walk yt know not how to creep
I am oppressed with such most heinous crimes:
When I should wake, sin drowneth me with sleep
for one good thought I sin a thousand times.
Sigh O my soul, weep, sorrow and lament,
and seek for help, if any hope be left:
Pray unto Christ, for grace thou mai'st repent,
before his merits from thee be bereft.
Though by his rod, afflictions humble thee,
and for thy sins, thou suffer grievous pain Psalm. 23. 4.

Yet with his staff, he still vpholdeth thee,
from deep despair, in bliss with him to reign
All glory be to God on high, Luke 2. 4.

and to his son our savior wise and just:
To whom with joy still pray and sing will I,
and to my comforter the holy Ghost.
Whose being was from all eternity,
one deity distinct in persons three:
According to the blessed Trinity, 1. John. 5. 7. 8.

distinguished three, yet one in unity.
Finis.
The repentant wholly flies unto the mercies of God in Christ, and describes
the loath somnes and vglines of his sins, aggravating the greatness thereof,
above all other men's.
O Lord behold my miseries,
my pain and deadly grief: Psalm. 51. 1.

No help, no hope, but thy mercies,
to yield my soul relief.
I hate my self, and loath my sin,
my heart is rent with fear:
To think what state I have lived in,
my wits with torments tear.
If sins seem ugly unto me,
who did the same commit:
How loath some Lord, show they to thee,
that do in judgment sit.
When others sins, my mind have vexed,
and make me search mine own:
My heart with horror is perplex't,
for my sins seeds so sown.
By measure just and true I find,
no man that ever lived:
Has sinned so much in heart and mind,
as I that am thus grieved.
If all men's faults were put in one,
(and known were my offenses)
T'weare no compaire to mine alone,
so vil'd in all pretenses.
O cease to sing, sigh and lament,
turn tunes to weeping tears: Psalm. 51.

And learn of David to repent,
by faith to cure thy cares.
True faith in Christ, Lord grant to me,
that now live in despair:
From Satan's bondage set me free,
let Christ's blood cleanse me clear. 1. John. 1. 7

Blot out of mind my cursed crimes,
and my misdoings all:
That daily sin so many times,
and hourly sinck and fall,
Thou bid'st the^ come that laden are,
with burden of their sin: Mat. 11. 28

And let thy spirit, my spirit prepare,
that I may now begin.
At first to creep and then to go,
and so come to thy gate:
And then be cured of my woe,
O Lord it is not to late.
Whilst I live let me live to love thee, Col. 3. 1.

for now mine heart above:
There Is naught on earth, to love can move me
my life is with my love.
Where thou do sit on cherubins,
and Angels sing thy praise:
With holy, holy, Seraphines.
Lord let me live always.
FINIS
The poor Suppliant being visited with a grievous sickness, shows how he
languisheth in all the corporal parts and members of his body, but especially
with the torture of his conscience for sin, and at the last prays that God
would take from him this heavy yoke of miseries.
O Lord give ear to my complaint, Psalm. 5. 2. Psalm. 39. 13.

attend my tears and hear my cry
My sinnewes shrinck, my limes do faint,
I languish in my malady.
My bones are broke, my flesh gone quit
my strength in every part does fail: Psalm. 6.

My thighs grow thin, dimmed is my sight
my legs and feet, with weakness quail.
My tongue does faulter in my head,
my spr'its faint, my hands do shake: Psalm. 22.

With pain and ach, I toss in bed,
my veins are stiff, mine heart does ache.
My body is with grief oppressed,
noe place, noe part, is free from anguish Psalm. 102.

I grieve and groan and, take no rest,
I faint, I swoune, I fall, I languish.
I live, but dying every hour,
my glass of time is almost run: Iam. 1. 10. Isay. 40. 6.

I sade away as does a flower,
that withers with the heat of sun.
I live and die yet not with death,
I lingering live, yet dead with sin:
Condemned to die yet draw my breath,
in such confusion live I in.
As if all tortures due for sin,
were every minute laid on me:
Horrors without, and hell with-in,
and all thiese things thine eye does see
I charge not Heaven, I blame not earth
but of this one thing am assured:
That flesh and world, the devil my birth
and faults not fates, have this procured
Lord for thy building thou do square me,
with many a strong and sturdy stroke
When thy will is, O Lord do spare me, 1. Pet. 2. 5.

and take from me this heavy yoke.
FINIS.
A fervent prayer unto God, that the repentant may find favor in Christ, whose
merits and satisfaction he offers unto thee O Lord, as a pleasing ransom for
his sins.
ATtend unto my tears O Lord,
regard my woeful moan: Psalm. 39. 13.

And seek to save me by thy word,
or I am overthrown.
For sin does so oppress my mind,
that I am damned to hell: Isa. 53. 5.

Unless by Christ I favor find,
whose wounds must make me well:
Cure thou my soul so sick with sin
by merrits of thy son:
Mark not the state that I live in,
but mark what he has done.
Most perfect he (though I be vild) Psalm 110. ^^

to please when I offend:
He sits with thee (though I exild)
in glory to the end.
My nature is inclined to evil,
though his with good accord: Psalm. 51. 7.

My senses seek to serve the devil,
his will to please the Lord.
Wherefore O God which art most just,
in him my debts to pay:
In his desert my soul does trust,
thy wrath for to alay.
Finis.
The first Lamentation in distress co^teineth a confession of sins, and a
petition to be released of the punishments due for the same.
The first part.
The first part shows that a man must not only repair unto God in prayers,
in silent sighs, and in inward desires and groans: But we must also worship
God, with our tongue, words, and voice, and in royal speech praise his holy
name.

O Father full of knowledge deep, Romans 8. 27. Ier. 11. 20.

thou searchest secrets of each heart,
Behold'st desires, we private keep,
with hidden silence in the dark.
But yet thou do thus much require,
thy children should know and confess:
Thee for to be their lightsome fire, Romans 10. 9.

that iudg'st their works in righteousness.
As thou have framed in man a heart,
wherewith his maker to believe:
A tongue and lips, and every part,
wherewith he glory may thee give.
And thou do challenge at his hands,
free sacrifice of prayers praise: Psalm. 51. Luke. 2. 51.

And honors due throughout all lands,
that all men can de^ect and raise.
Thy children must not in their mind,
be dumb, nor in their tongues be mute Luke. 11. 9.

when they should seek thine help to find:
and by petition show their suite.
Thy son does bid me ask and have,
and find to seek, to knock and enter,
What they do want, that they may crave
by faith in him they may adventure.
Thou still art ready to be found,
and help thine own in their distress: Psalm. 37. 39

That in their faith are constant sound,
and patient in their heaviness.
Therefore dear father, I beset,
with many miseries distressed: Luke. 15. 18

Come unto thee thine aid to get,
and after trouble to find rest.
And have thy grace without with-in,
but I that am of sinners chief:
Because thou hat'st in me my sin,
many doubt thou will not give relief.
Alas poor wretch what shall I do?
to ask I am so far unfit, Luke. 15. 19.

Unapt my God to seek unto,
unworthy to have benefit.
Of what I crave or do desire,
and yet to cry I will not lin:
Till thou do send refining fire,
and purify me, from my sin.
The second part.
The distressed prays to be sanctified, and to enjoy the renewed graces of
regenerations: and though his infirmity causes him to think that the Lord
does not hear his prayers, but deferreth him too long, yet he concludes that
Gods faithful promises still nourish and feed him with never dying hope of
comfortable issue.

O Let thy spr'it me sanctify,
untie my tongue, open my lips: Psalm. 51.

I cannot silence keep, for why,
my conscience every hour me whips.
My miseries grow more and more, Psalm. 41.

within my bones, I find no rest:
Thy grace anew to me restore,
and let me speak, what likes thee best.
That thine ears ever be inclined,
to my extreme and doleful cries: Psalm. 102. 1.

Let me thy mercies ready find,
to take my tears from weeping eyes.
Thou evermore do hear the cries, Psalm. 86. 7.

of all that fear thy holy name:
And comforts them with thy mercies,
that trust in thee and beg the same
Their souls thou do from death defend, Psalm. 116. 8.

and cheares their hearts in time of need:
To me therefore thy comforts send,
and give thy help with loving speed,
Thy servants cannot hold their tongue,
though often they muse and cannot see: Psalm. 39. 1. 2 3. 4. 5.

Why their afflictions last so long,
and they for mercy cry to thee.
Till at the length the fire of zeal,
does kindle, then it out must break: Psalm. 16. 10.

Tongue cannot hold but must reveal,
their groans and grieves and neds must speak
To show their hope which like to fire
none can suppress when they believe:
It Will pierce the clouds to thee aspire,
yet thou do seem no help to give.
At last thy goodness does appear,
and thou imbracest him with joy: Psalm. 37. 40

Time of deliverance draws near,
and thou Lord feed'st him from anoy.
Good God, how comes this to pass,
that I so long have sought to thee:
And thou still seem to hide thy face, Psalm. 44. 24.

and keep'st thy graces still from me.
How long have I unto thee prayed,
and thou seem not to give me ear:
This makes mine heart and thoughts afraid
ready to faint with deep despair.
I ready was for to surcease,
the suite which I so long had sought:
Made unto thee for to appease, Psalm. 80. 5.

thy wrath by Christ that has me bought.
O Lord my God thy promises,
and loving kindness only feed'st: Psalm. 23.

And comfort'st me in heaviness,
with never dying hope in need.
I know expected time will come,
when thou forgetting all my sin:
Will It see my sorrows all and some,
and free the bondage I am in.
The third part.
The repentant shows his faith and confidence in Gods fatherly goodness and
wisdom who knows best, what and when to give his children, and therefere he
conditioneth not with God by appointing him a time: but only desires that the
Lord would not defer his graces too long: but mercifully hear him as he did
always hear the righteous and holy fathers who also were subject to the same
impuritie of sin as well as the suppliant.

THou art my god thy helps at hand
thou art a father, thou know when Psalm. 32. 3.

To give the state, do understand,
of richest kings and poorest men.
The things most fit thou do bestow,
and helpest, when all help is missing: Psalm. 113. Act. 3. 2. 3.

Those could not creep thou make to go
and pourest down on them thy blessing.
Therefore God all sufficient,
repleate with mercy full of love:
I do not press to know the intent,
but pray thee do what mercy move.
To say come now or then do this,
for the time, when, where, what, and how: Mat. 6. 10.

What thou do aim, my mark may miss,
me to thy providence I bow.
Yet be not over long away,
for thou do know my feeblenes:
Thou see my troubles day by day,
bowed down to extreme wretchedness.
Without hope of recovery, Psalm. 25. Psalm. 57.

I fall (alas) what shall I do:
There is no trust but trust in thee,
for help and aid and succor too.
I know by proof that thou art bent,
to hear poor sinful wretched men:
When they are truly penitent,
and when they pray, deliuer'st then.
From troubles strife and all debate, Psalm. 34. 18. 19. 20.

from sickness death and deadly pain:
From envy malice sin and hate,
the righteous thou will not disdain.
But who is righteous in thy sight,
or in thy judgments clean are seen,
Angels before thee are bright,
much less we wretches righteous been.
But all are sinners, all transgress,
our elder fathers were impure: Romans 4. 18

All have offended more or less,
yet was thy promise firm and sure.
And did obtain mercy and grace, Psalm. 4. 7. Psalm. 16. 11.

relief, hope, strength, salvation:
They saw the brightness of thy face,
thou gave them consolation.
The fourth part.
The repentant shows that the Fathers were iuflified only by grace in Jesus
Christ: And therefore desires that his sins may also be covered in Christ
his righteousness: and then (complaining that his prayers are not heard)
commends himself to God, whose good pleasure he still attends in steadfast
faith and hope.

Our fathers Lord were comforted,
steength'ned relieved and blessed: Romans 4. 5. Romans 3. 24. Romans 5. 1.

Only by grace and justified,
as righteous men in Jesus Christ.
Impute not sin unto my charge,
not for my merit and desert: Psalm. 32. 2.

Thou Lord art love, in love inlardge, Merita vnamiseratio Domini Ber. Psalm. 1.

all those that be of contrite heart.
Thou Lord full of compassion,
and in thy mercies infinite:
Bear with my imperfection,
and let me in thy laws delight.
Cover my sins, as right'ous take me
and right'ous shall I ever be: Psalm. 32. 1.

That right'ous am not, right'ous make me
in Christ O Lord consider me.
O Lord what can it profit thee,
me to forsake or leave in thrall:
As though thou did disualew me,
my daily cries and offerings all.
My troubles yet continue still, Mat. 6. 10.

I seek thee, and am yet denied:
Of earthly blessings, do thy will,
thy name be always glorified.
Wretch that I am, what end shall be,
I still complain, I sigh, and cry: Job. 13. 15.

I cry and call, yet heerest not me,
I still will seek thee till I die.
Thou mai'st be found, be as thou will,
Into thy hands I me commend: Luke. 23. 46.

Thou full of mercy, I of guilt,
in faith and hope do still attend.
Finis.
The second Lamentation contains Godly and devout prayers for constancy in
afflictions, and to bear malicious slanders patiently.
The first part of the second lamentation
The repentant shows that his miseries and troubles increase daily: and
therefore his adversary that judge with a carnal cie, say that God has for
saken him, but he replieth to them that God always chastises them whom he
loves, and does but correct his children as a loving father does, for the
amendment and bettering of their life.

O Lord how do my woes increase, Psalm. 64. 1. 2

how many are my miseries:
My troubles rise and never cease,
men judge thou will not hear my cries:
They say thou will me quite forsake, Psalm. 4. 3.

that there is no help for me in thee:
But Lord they are but such that make,
their sensure with a carnal eye.
And do not spiritually discern,
thy secret purpose and intents: Heb. 12. 6. 7. 8.

Correcting the^ who^ thou would learn
to know thy law and commandments.
Chastizing them whom thou do love
and scourging them often with thy rod:
that thou their hearts and minds may move Pro. 3. 19.

to fear and serve thee mighty God.
The wicked outward means prefer,
and worldly helps at need they muster:
And not to God themselves refer,
nor comfort take from heavenly luster.
Who works by means his sacred will,
and without means, brings to effect: John. 2.

And against means, can save or kill,
for those him serve his, true elect.
Therefore let not their malice move,
nor yet their taunts dismay my mind: Psalm 119.

I will hold fast by God above,
whose promise just and true I find.
I strive thy statutes Lord to keep,
what thou co^maund'st I will perform: Psalm. 119.

Direct me right to thee I creep,
O Lord do thou my life reform.
Defend me Lord from their dispight,
that watch to catch me in their snare: Psalm. 69. 18 19.

And to entrap me day and night,
with nets and ginnes er'e I be ware,
And scoff me basely with reproach,
with shameful scandalls and disgrace:
With thy protection Lord approach,
and let thy mercy me embrace.
Let not me come within the reach,
of their inventions and device: Pro. 17. 13.

whose facts are foul, they fair in speech,
and by base flattery me entice.
Nor such as lie in wait for me,
obtain, their wish who do desire: Psalm. 9. 29. Pro. 10. 3.

Fit time and opportunity,
to work the evil as they conspire.
FINIS.
The second part of the second lamentation.
The repentant prays that God would direct him in the right path, that so he
may grow from grace to grace, and from virtue to virtue, he also confesses
that his sins deserve very sharp punishments and yet desires that the Lord
would spare him in his mercy.

O Let me tread in the right path,
and walk from faith to faith in love: Psalm. 5. 9. Psalm. 27. 11

Observe thy laws and shun thy wrath,
and forward to all virtue move.
And let my conscience witness bear,
of my says and integrity:
Let all men see the crystal clear, Psalm. 51.

and pure heart of conformity.
Though I good father cannot live, Mat. 18. 7. 8.

free from all sin and all offense:
And some take cause, though I none give
yet keep thou clear my conscience.
Shall I deserve still as I do,
men's just reprouffes, though in discretion
And that against my meaning too,
and suffer carnal men's oppression.
That break forth into bitterness,
against me that am weak and lame:
And vomit out their filthiness,
that thou have don, they count my shame
And take it as an argument, Act. 28. 34. 5.

that I am in deiection:
And think it is thy full intent,
to keep me from protection.
Indeed O Lord I must confess,
my sins deserve sharp punishment Luke. 13. 40. 41.

Worthy of more and not of less,
then all the plagues on me have sent.
I more should taste then I can bear,
or able them for to endure: Psalm. 51. 7.

Thy mercies yet they do me spare,
and make me clean that am impure.
But in my weakness of mine hauiour,
I this have done which caused me fall: Romans 5. 9. 1. John. 7.

And therefore trust in Christ my savior,
his precious blood has paid for all.
Depending on thy mighty power,
to save, keep, and deliver me: Psalm. 17. 4. 5

Least miseries do me devour,
and enemies my sorrows see.
And take occasion to pursue,
pretending to my soul no good:
Inuettred hatred they renew,
to eat my flesh and drink my blood. Psalm. 27. 2.

The third part of the second lamentation.
The poor suppliant complains that God does refuse to assist and help him,
and hides his face from him to his seemming. Nevertheless he continues
importunate and will not be denied as pleading the merits and mediation of
Christ, in whom God the father is well pleased.

O Lord consider my great moanes,
prevent ye dangers coming nigh me Romans 8. 3.

My heart is rent with grieves and groans,
I fly to thee O Lord stand by me.
Why stand thou a loofe a less,
seem not my troubles to regard: Psalm. 13.

Why turnst thou Lord away thy face,
mine heart does hope for some reward.
Why hidest thou thy self me fro.
when troubles are so much abounding Psalm. 30. 8.

As though thou lord did me not know
thy darts are always mine heart wounding
There is no help for me in thee,
they say thou nothing do respect me: John. 16. 23.

I ne'rethelesse will come to thee,
in Christ his name wilt not reject me?
The rather therefore me relieve,
that righteous men may well perceive: 2. John. 16. 24.

Thou ready art thine aid to give,
and their desires wilt not deceive.
And not to faint when they are tried, 2. Cor. 6. 4.

with like affections any ways:
But shall with patient mind abide,
thy will, and give thy name the praise. Psalm. 18. 6.

The dullest hearts thou do prepare,
to call on thee and thou again:
Do hear their cries and them do spare
and easest them of grief and pain.
The fourth part of the second lamentation.
The repentant in humility reasons with God that since that the Lord
threatens sorrows to those that seek to other Gods, that he would be pleased
to mittigate his afflictions, and to romoue his heavy hand, because he poor
man only flies to the Lord as his chief rock and fortress whereon he may
safely build.

HOw long O Lord, how long will thou
forget me and how long shall I: Psalm. 13. 1. 2

Seek to be hard and know not how,
to make thee listen to my cry.
How long shall I thy council seek,
yet ignorant what course to take:
I pray to thee, O Lord most meek, Psalm. 13. 3.

with sighs and groans which never slake
My heart with grief and heaviness,
powers forth complaints continually: Psalm. 42. 9.

Before thee in my great distress,
yet inward light obtain not I.
That lighten should my pensive soul
and comfort mine afflicted heart:
Thy wrath with rigor does control,
my forward hopes and causes smart
Thou threatnest sorrows to increase
to such as seek to other Gods: Heb. 12. 3.

Why should not then my torments cease
that child-like fear, thy awful rods.
Since I in thee my faith repone, James. 1. 5.

why should I then true wisdom want
It being sought from thee alone,
why do thou then refuse to grant.
Thou did create all men at first, Mat. 5. 45.

and do preserve, and all maintain:
Thy sun does shine on best and worst,
the same to all thou do remain.
But since to thee alone I kneel, Psalm. 51. 1. 2.

and only, unto thee do call:
O let me Lord thy mercies feel,
and let thy dropps of mercy fall.
With thee there is redemption, 1. John. 1. 9.

and thou deliuerest all that trust:
In Christ for their salvation,
by whom the sinful are made just.
Thou keep'st the^ safe under thy wings
of favor, from the merciless: Psalm. 17. 8.

Thy favor gives all good things,
to thine elect in their distress.
O therefore be my rock whereon,
I may both safely build and rest: Psalm. 18. 12.

Castle of refuge, Arc alone,
in which I am in safety blessed.
For thou have promi'st in thy love, Psalm. 123. 1.

that they that put their trust in thee:
Like Syons mount which does not move
shall safely stand eternally.
Break thou the chains which have me ty'de,
remove the sorrows from my heart:
Wherewith Lord all my veins are dried
and I am parcht in every part.
That I walking at liberty. Psalm. 51.

with a free spr'ite may salve my sore:
My hope may live, and crosses die,
and I sing praise to thee therefore.
And let my foes no more prevail,
that Lyon-like do me destroy: Psalm. 22. 12. John. 11. 14

And like to Wolves they me assail.
that spoil the sheep, the shepherds joy
O carry me, Lord in thine arms,
throughout thiese miseries clean away
And safely keep me from all harms,
that now stick fast in mire and clay.
Let no untimely sudden fate,
cut off my days er'e fully spent:
Or raging floudes sincke mine estate,
nor swallow me incontinent.
But rather Lord return them back,
these swelling waves that roar and rage Psalm. 69. 15.

On every side to work me wrack,
their gusts and tempests, Lord assuage
Let me pass on my mortal course,
and finish thiese my days of life:
Of thy mere love and kind rem orse,
in peace and love, from hate and strife.
FINIS
A thanksgiving to God, with magnifing of his holy name upon all instruments.
Yield unto God the Lord on high,
praise in the clouds and firmament Psalm. 140.

With heavens and earth's sweet harmony,
and tunes which are from motions sent.
His laud be with the stately sound,
of trumpets blast unto the sky:
Let harp and Organes forth be found,
with flute and timbrell magnify.
Praise him with Simballs, loud Simballs
with instruments were used by Jews:
With Syrons crowdes and Virginalls,
to sing his praise do not refuse.
Praise him upon the claricoales,
the Lute and Simfonie:
With dulsemers and the regalls,
sweet Sittrons melody.
with Drumes and Fife and Shrillest shalmes
with Gittron and bandore:
With the Theorba sing you psalms,
and Cornets evermore.
With Vialls and Recorders sing,
the praises of the Lord:
With Crouncorns music laud the king
of Kings with one accord.
With Shackbuts noate that pierce the skies,
with Pipe and Taberret:
What tunes by reeds or Canes arise,
do not his praise forget.
Let every thing that yields sound,
by land or eke by sea:
The birds in air, or beasts on ground,
sing yea, his praise always.
All instruments devised by art,
all living things, by nature:
Praise ye the Lord with joyful heart,
of all the world creator.
The third Lamentation in distress.
Wherein is contained the hope, faith, and confidence of the distressed:
whereby he relieth wholly upon God, not trusting in the help of man, nor
fearing any euili that mortal man can do unto him.

I Cannot Lord excuse my sin,
most infinite, before mine eyes: Psalm. 51.

And many more are me within,
I have forgot: which secret lies.
which slightly I have over past,
as if they were no sins at all: Psalm. 6.

Thy wrath for them makes me aghast,
to mercy I appeal for all.
There Is no man living at this hour,
can satisfaction give for me:
It is so far beyond his power,
of the least sin to set me free.
Who can rehearse or call to mind,
what he has don amiss before:
Who in his reckoning book can find,
his sins, that thou put'st on thy score
If by my self I nothing knew,
yet thou that see and iudgest all: 1. Cor. 4. 4.

Can find enough, both old and new,
yea there is enough in Adams fall.
I have no mean for to be freede,
neither from wrath or miseries: 1. John. 1. 9

But by the wounds of Christ that bleed
and wash me from iniquities.
Condemn me not, oh father dear,
but in him have compassion: Heb. 12. 3.

Though with thy rod thou beatest me here,
yet grant to me salvation.
And then in death I shall be safe,
by thy grace preservation: Psalm. 23. 4.

Thou will it vphould me by thy staff,
from hell and condemnation.
Thou seem as if thou had me left,
why art thou Lord so far me fro:
That am of comforts all bereft,
deprived of hope and wrapped in woe.
Why turnest thou away thy face?
I offering sacrifice to thee: Psalm. 14. 2.

In prayers, praise unto thy grace,
and thou no whit regardest me.
I only put my trust in thee, Psalm. 25. 6.

oh come Lord, come, now at the last
Perform thy promises to me,
remember not my sins be past,
Vain is the hope in mortal man,
weak is his arm, his heart not right: Psalm. 56. 12.

No justice, judgment show he can,
but thou artiust O Lord of might:
Therefore I only trust in thee,
to thee I only am inclined:
Let me not disappointed be,
but let me now thy mercies find.
O Lord look on my miseries,
behold my troubles pain and grief:
Who living in extremities
of life, am weakened in belief.
Our fathers prayed with trust in thee, Psalm. 22. 4.

in dangers, out of troubles all:
Being delivered, and set free,
and were raised up when they did fall.
thou heardst the^, when they thee sought
and did them lend, thy ayding hands: Ex. 20.

when they almost, to death were brought
and them delivered out of bands.
Great was thy favor Lord to all,
them that took hold of thee by faith Psalm. 22. 7.

But what am I that am so small,
a worm, no man as David says.
Yet I believe, help unbelief,
Lord I am covered over with shame: Mar. 9. 24.

Be thou my glory, ease my grief,
that I may magnify thy name.
The wicked worldlings me contempne
because thou hid'st thy face from me: Psalm. 14. 1.

Deriding grace and me condemn,
because of imbicillity.
My neighbors that should me assist,
disdain me, my familiars all:
That should me comfort, do desist,
their help to raise me from my fall.
They say of me my hopes are vain,
my kinsfolks who should yield me aid
In my necessities refrain,
to come to me they are afraid.
And tauntingly they scoff and say,
deservedly, he thus does suffer:
Is just, he wrought his own decay,
none other kindenes they me offer.
I know it is thou that sitt'st on high,
do send and suffer maladies:
And therefore I on thee rely,
to remedy my miseries.
My woes O Lord by such increase,
as should in friendly wise relieve me:
They that should seek to make my peace,
they are the men that most do grieve me
But I that taste the cup will say,
it is thou have don't, and I will bear it Mat. 6. 10.

When it is thy will, who can say nay,
it is out of love, why should I fear it.
Releive my soul with timely dew, Psalm. 30. 42.

and comfort me restore:
Restore my soul unto those joys.
the which I felt too sore.
Now after storms Lord send a calm,
and grant me peace yet now at last:
And I will praise thee with a psalm, Psalm. 33. 3.

with thanks for all thy favor past.
I Will magnify thy name for aye,
that bring'st such wondrous things to pass
That worldlings neither think nor say,
nor know why it is, or how it was.
The just shall hear, and saints be glad,
when wicked men shall faint and quail:
To see what favor I have had,
and all their hope does quench and quail.
who^ they so long have scornd and deemed
even through afflictions cast away:
For thy name sake Lord me esteemed,
their night is past, they have their day.
Respect my meditation,
help me in time convenient:
Lord grant my supplication,
thou know and tri'st my hearts intent.
Let not the righteous be dismaide,
nor wicked triumph in my fall:
Nor yet let sinners be afraid,
in time of need, to thee to call.
And let me put my confidence,
direct my faith, erect mine hope:
Unto thy gracious providence,
this of my prayers is the scoape.
FINIS.
The fourth Lamentation in distress.
Wherein the distressed prays for faith, for zeal, and strength in
undergoing Gods corrections, and to be delivered from dangers prepared against
him.

O Lord I lift my heart to thee,
my soul in thee does ever trust: Psalm. 25. 1. Psalm. 31. 18

O let me not confounded be,
but make me righteous with the just.
Let men not have their wills gain'st me,
but power on me thy comfort sweet
Thy saving health Lord let me see,
who prostrate beg it at thy feet.
Let thy right hand and providence,
be stretched out to hold me up:
And give me grace and patience,
in lowlines to taste thy cup.
So shall I sit on surest rock,
and strength and power to me get:
And ablely bear mine enemies stroke,
though round about they me beset.
For why my comfort is in thee,
and on thy providence I depend:
O keep me safe in liberty,
till all my troubles come to end.
From perils six have me delivered,
I know therefore thou will from seven Job. 5. 19.

From earthly thoughts let me be seuer'd,
and conversation have in heaven.
I know that love, a multitude, Romans 4. 7. Iam. 5. 20. 1. Pet. 4. 8.

of shameful sins does closely cover:
Within the gates, I me include,
thou art my souls true spouse and lover.
The faithful thereby may take hold,
of hope to have a prosperous end:
Of their desires, this makes me bold,
for aid and comfort to attend.
And with all patience to persevere,
I know thy word it is most sure:
Poor penitent by faith, i will ever,
stand firm and to the end endure.
Alas dear God I nothing crave, 1. John. 14. 13. John. 14. 7.

to have of thee by mine own right:
But in Christ's name I Will ask and have,
for he is most gracious in thy sight.
Yea for his merrits thou do love me.
in him I know thou art well pleased:
And hear sinners when they move thee
forgiu'st their sin, and they are eased.
Among'st whom Lord I am the chief
and of good things am Ignorant:
Yet on the cross did save the thief, 1. Tim. 1. 15.

for Christ his sake me mercy grant.
In this worlds vanities most vilde,
I live and have no taste of truth:
I knew not I was in exile,
but did in folly spend my youth.
Of thee alone I knowledge have,
(for of my self I am but weak)
Thou art my God that strength me gave
to work, to rest, to live, to speak.
For of my self is misery,
and of my self is all that is ill:
But from thee Lord comes all mercy,
and perfect power to work thy will.
With in, to consolation,
of my sad soul and wounded heart:
With out to preservation,
o^ my weak body in each part.
Therefore teach me ye truth oh Lord,
thy sacred truth show me thy ways: Psalm. 25.

That I should walk, led by thy word,
and to thy glory spend my days.
Lord keep from wicked thoughts mine heart
mine hands that they commit noe ill:
Mine eyes, my tongue, and every part,
Lord grant they may perform thy will
My feet from falling still preserve,
as of my self regard me not. Psalm. 51.

Deal not with me as I deserve,
as are my sins reward me not.
Behold not my deformities
but look on me in Christ by love:
My sins and all enormities,
as mists and clouds from me remove
Thou righteous art and gracious,
reformest sinners, sins forgiu'st:
O be to me propitious,
to live in thee that ever live.
Keep thou my soul, let me not perish,
nor utterly to be confounded:
That trust in thee, but my soul cherrish,
and joy mine heart which thou have wounded.
Thou art my strength and sure defense,
in time of dangers imminent:
Though all help fail, experience,
has taught me thou art permanent.
I go unto thine Oracle,
and from thy word I council take:
And find a wondrous miracle,
thou never do thine own forsake.
Thy servants that in thee do trust,
thy tabernacle shall them shield:
In secret thou do hide the just,
that are not with foul sin defilde.
Harken O Lord harken and hear,
unto my voice that call and cry:
O let thy love to'wards me appear,
with streams and floods of thy mercy
Thou say O Lord, seek ye my face Psalm. 103. 3. 4.

what is it? but in my distress:
To cry for help and crave thy grace,
and aid in time of heaviness:
My soul by the pure privilege,
of thy free spirit which teaches truth
My heart prepared with knowledge,
and faith and hope unto thee sueth.
My tongue does speak mine heart does mutter,
and every member in his place:
Does strive to speak and these words utter
help me oppressed hide not thy face.
Though, father that did me begett,
my mother that from womb me bare: Psalm. 27. 10

And all my frindes forsake me yet,
thou Lord of me take charge and care.
O Lord thou will me not forsake,
for so have promised in thy word:
In all distress noe fear i will take,
but fourthwith fly to thee O Lord.
Thou give not like our earthly Sires,
nor wants suppli'st like carnal friends:
That would, but cannot our desires,
perform in deeds as heart pretends:
Hopeles, I should down faint and fall,
did I not in thee surely trust:
That holds noe respect at all,
but unto those whom Christ makes just.
And thou accept'st not vain glory,
as worldings do, nor things eternal,
Thou look not to things transitory,
but to the things that are internal.
A lowly and obedient heart,
a troubled spirit thou do elect:
Of poor oppressed, thou take the part,
and proud men down thou do deiect
frame thou therefore my inward zeal
that outward business, me deceive not:
Of comforts which thou do reveal,
to thine, and me of joys bereave not.
When at thy mercy gate I knock,
do not as rich men use the poor: Mat. 7. 7.

That gain'st them fast the gates do lock,
but quickly Lord set open the door.
Let not my miseries deprive,
my spirits of joy or souls comfort:
Let noe vain things ill men devise,
draw me to be of their consort.
make strong my faith, and hope lord give me,
and i will take hold of thy protection:
Be my defense and panoplie,
and guide me safe to thy election.
Thou have O Lord my troubles seen
Have known my soul in bitterness:
Thou have mine help and succor been,
O help me now in my distress.
In mercies thou have mightily,
saved me from perils infinite:
My life consumes, mine heart does die,
my years do waste, my day is night.
the day tells day, the night ye morrow
the base reproach of my disaster:
Yea friends and foes, add grief to sorrow
and each base mate does me or'e-maister.
I am now at the point to pine,
O let it be thy blessed pleasure:
To ease my grief for I am thine,
my pains assuage lord in some measure
For thou my pains have measured,
and all that is good for those that fear:
Lord thou in store have treasured,
to me Lord let the same appear.
In sight of those that are my foes,
that think there is noe period:
Of all my tortures pain and woes,
grant this for Christ his sake, O God,
The fifth Lamentation in distress.
Wherein the distressed prays God to keep him from despair, howsoever men
go about to make him afraid.

IN thee O Lord I put my trust,
and yet there are which daily say
There is no help for me unjust,
but Lord thy word cannot decay.
Thou art my God how can they then,
prove that thou will none help me send
I am brought low in sight of men,
there is none will help or comfort lend.
My basket and my store is spent, Deuteronomy. 28. 16. Job. 1.

they say, it was by thee accursed:
Thou did it take, that had it sent,
but they take all things at the worst.
At me they gape, at me they wonder, Psalm. 7. 7.

as at a monster seldom seen:
On all their works and words I ponder,
What I now am, what have I been.
I faint at naught thou know my smart
thou art my Father and do me foster:
what words or works, can daunt my heart
I am in thee become a boaster.
Thiese men thy might and power disable
or else thy love to man diminish:
Or else they think thou art unstable,
or do begin and wilt not finish.
Or that the poor wilt not support,
nor help thee needy in distress:
But as thou know what they report,
so make them feel their wickedness.
But I do know thou failest never,
them that in thee their trust repose: Psalm. 125. 1.

If they be constant and persevere,
all things are for the best to those.
Thou art in deed a jealous God, Exo. 20. Heb. 12. 6.

and first thy children thou do monish
Thou bear with love, and beat'st with rod
if they mend not, wilt further pu^nish.
Yet cal'st thy chosen children back,
by gentle strokes, from running riot:
And sufferst them to suffer lack,
and do prescribe to them their diet.
We may condignely then deride,
the judgments of such foolish men:
That unto thee Lord wilt prescribe,
the measure what, and the time when.
Such fleshly men by wealth and woe,
censure thy love or thy displeasure:
As natures friend or graces foe,
by human reason all things measure
They think thou love whom thou feed'st fatt,
with plenty pleasures worldly riches:
And that all others thou do hate,
thiese world and flesh, and devils bewiches
And great is this temptation,
unless our natures thou assist:
Infeebled with affliction,
whose help does rest in Jesus Christ,
When thou therefore do me correct
with one hand, hold me with ye other:
Let faith in thee make thee accept,
me for thy son by Christ my brother.
Lay not upon me greater load,
then I poor wretch can well endure:
If I do sincke, stay my abode,
and if I fall then keep me sure.
thou know lord whereof I am made
I am a silly simple man: Psalm. 22. 7.

A worm, a flea, a puff a shade,
that no good do, nor no good can.
Try by the cross, true to the crown
that we may prove by wants and losses
But to despair pull me not down,
but unto comforts turn my crosses.
I am not able bear thy yoke,
least Christ thy son does with me draw
I am not able fend thy stroke,
less he O Lord does bear the blow.
Lord with thy mercies compass me,
protection draw out of despair:
O let me thy salvation see,
and all things fit obtain by prayer.
Thou showest mercy to thee meek,
that trust in thee in all men's sight: Mat. 5. 4.

Thy children shall find that they seek,
thou shall to sunshine turn their night.
a place whence worldlings are excluded
and all that hellish rabble rout:
though here on earth they have intruded
to root Gods faithful children out.
And such as have with hate pursu'de,
and trusted in the arm of flesh:
And would their hands in blood imbrued,
shall say in judgment they were rash.
god's on my sid, who ca^ or'ethrow me,
Christ pleades my cause, ca^ god refuse me Romans 8. 31.

As just in Christ, ye Lord does know me,
he does acquit, who can accuse me.
We thought that this man's life was madness,
then shall the wicked worldlings say:
But see his words are turned to gladness,
whom we have deemed a cast away.
his hand has wrought yt he would have
yea I my self shall say I er'd:
That thought poor wretch would not me save
because my joys were then deferred.
I thought my cries thou would not hear,
when I thee sought thy self did hide
When I complaind thou came not near
I would no time, and place thee tide.
But now I knowledge and confess,
thy wisdom great in humbling me: Mat. 5. 10.

Thy love sustained me in distress,
thy providence relieuing me.
This past all judgment and conceit,
of learned, grauest, wisest men:
Therefore dear father I will wait,
take thine own time, how, where and when
I will not with thy will indent,
nor thee direct the manner how:
Thou should me help it is mine intent
unto thy will to bend and bow.
Heareafter I will hold my peace,
though men shall say yet still of me:
(and though their tongues will never cease
there is no help for me from thee.
The sixth Lamentation in distress.
Wherein the distressed detesteth the world and worldly things, and desires
heaven, and heavenly things.

MY soul does long and shall depend,
for ever on God everliving:
God shall begin and make an end,
that has given all, yet ever giving,
I sigh and groan for to appear,
before his gracious mercy seat:
As thirst'h, the heart for water clear.
so long I for thy mercy great.
I am quite tired with my groans,
I faint under mine heavy load: Psalm. 6. 2.

Of miseries breaking all my bones,
laid on me justly by my God.
O God the rock of my whole strength
Lord of mercy behold mine anguish Psalm. 18. 1. 2

O grant me help and ease at length,
I faint, I fall, I sigh, I languish.
Why do I daily weep and mourn,
and have no comfort help nor ease: Psalm. 6. 6.

Why do not hear, but from me turn,
why do my woes and foes increase.
Since I do seek thee unfeignedly,
defend me, oh defend me in:
This dangerous time of misery,
laid justly on me for my sin.
Preserve me from men merciless,
hard hearted, bloody minded cruel:
Bless me with thnie hid blessedness,
give me thy favor my souls jewel.
The man of earth lays load on load,
as on an Anuill stroke on stroke:
Within without, at home abroad.
mine head to heel, bows with ye yoke
They nip, they strip, they watch, they catch,
they crave and rave, by hook and crook:
Flesh blood and bones, they tear and cratch
on that they neither think nor look.
They wake they rake, they poll and pill,
they face they brag, they boast dissemble
Each stone they turn to have their will,
and make mine heart to quake and tremble.
I am reproach to neighbors all, Psalm. 71. 7.

I am ashamde men should me see:
They scorn and laugh to see my fall,
but this mine hope does comfort me.
That thou from them wilt set me free
and thee triumphant shall behold: Reu. 7. 15. 16.

In shining throane of Majesty,
where is neither hunger thirst nor cold.
No want nor sin, nor ignomie,
nor sickness, death, nor deadly pain: Reu. 7. 17. 17

But fullnes, mirth, joy, victory,
with thee in glory I shall reign.
And if it be thy will O Lord,
now after all this sturdy storm:
To my most troubled soul afford,
thy peace and pity me poor worm
Free me from death (that is Mors Gehenis'
give peace, joy, rest that is transitory: Reu. 21. 8.

I take it as an earnest penny,
of perfect bliss and endless glory.
And i will here praise the men among,
that they may see, mark and consider:
It Is thou can only right our wrong,
and from all troubles us deliver.
Thou can'stand wilt us save and keep,
though much we suffer in this life:
Thou art our Shepherd, we thy sheep,
save me from hate, envy and strife.
So shall I also give thee praise,
my mouth continually thee laud:
My soul and inward parts always,
thy wondrous works shall still applaud
I will be glad and joy in thee,
rejoice yea, and again rejoice:
Abject though I, yet comfort me,
i will praise thee with mind, heart, and voice.
Awake therefore in time awake,
preserve me that I perrish not: Psalm. 88. 4. 5 6.

I am if thou do me forsake,
but as a dead man clean forgot.
And censured a cast away,
among such as see me deprived:
Of present help, for thiese men say,
my soul can never be revived.
One sorrow does increase another,
all hope on earth turns to distrust.
Of aid from neighbor, friend or brother
hide not thy face my God most just.
Forget not mine extremities,
Lord free me from infernal hells:
Of torments and of miseries,
which comes from thee and from none else.
my soul is beaten to pitts brim,
my heart does faint, my hands grow weak Psalm. 6.

My knees do fail mine eyes grow dim,
my tongue is dumb and cannot speak.
And each part of my body vexed, Psalm. 6.

I daily moan my miseries:
Look on me Lord, I am perplexed,
O ease my grief and hear my cries.
Though thou by Justice made ye wou^d
and by correction grieved mine heart:
If thou will cure, salve soon is found,
with spiritual comfort ease my smart.
Do not with hold such things are good
which for thy children are ordained: 1. John. 1. 7

Turn thou thy face with Christ's blood,
cleanse all the spots my sins has stained.
Rise up O Lord, rise up I say,
with thee does love and bounty reign
I am thrown down I thee obey,
therefore rise up, raise me again.
Although my sins like swords do cut,
me from thy favor and thy grace:
Let righteousness of Christ be put,
to hide my sins before thy face.
Unite me unto thee again, John. 17. 11

in such sort Lord, make me so fast:
That I with thee may still remain,
and joy in joys, that aine shall last.
FINIS.
The seventh Lamentation in distress.
Wherein the distressed shows his desire to hold more fast the promises of
God.

O Lord thou art my hope and strength Psalm. 18. 1.

thou help'st in trouble, do not hide
Thy self for ever; but at length,
for men distressed, do thou provide.
For I by thee, will hold most fast,
i will trust in thee while I do live:
And till those storms be over past,
i will neither fear, nor faint, nor grieve.
Tremble thou earth, rage Sea and land,
wind, tempest, storms and all about: Psalm. 69. 3.

I see thee Lord hold out thy hand,
for my defense I Will never doubt.
What though hills quake and staggering stumble
and fall into the midst of seas:
Though waters roar, rage and tumble,
thou can this change, and all appease.
Should I the^ faint at troubles small,
which like small darts thou throw'st at me James. 1. 1.

In love, but not to kill at all,
but make leave my vanity.
Forsake my follies every deal,
reclayming errors to the truth:
This thou did hurt, and thou can heal,
thou have preserved me from mine youth.
I must confess I merited
the death of death, with pains of hell, Romans 6. 23.

And to be disinherited,
of heavens high, where just do dwell.
But Lord do mittigate thine anger,
and turn thy heavy wrath to love:
Deliver me from all this danger,
let thy compassion mercy move.
And with true co^forts Crystal fountain,
my dry and thirsty soul refresh: John. 4. 14

And pour on me from holy mountain,
sweet dewes to glad my soul and flesh.
Thy darts in me stick fast O Lord,
O pull them out, cast them away:
and cure my wounds, to help make have,
bind up my sores, souls sorrows stay.
Cleanse the corrupt affections,
of my defiled wicked heart:
Prosper and bless mine actions,
lighten my knowledge gross and dark.
O wash me from impiety, Psalm. 51.

exhilarate my sick souls sadness:
In darkness let me light epsy,
in midst of sorrow grant me gladness.
On fruitful ground Lord do me plant,
and build me up on surest rock:
Annoyes to joys, to wealth turn want,
from future ills me keep and lock.
As trees that grow by waters side,
whose leaves and blossoms freshly flourish Psalm. 1.

For ever let my state abide,
thy love revive, thy grace me nourish.
Let thy spirit daily spring and bud,
with faiths pure branches from my heart.
Let dewes and drops of Christ's deer blood
feed veins of hope from sinners dart.
My store's decayed, thou can renew it
my basket's empty thou can fill it:
Refresh my heart again revive it,
revive it Lord, for thou did kill it.
Thou help'st ye simple poor and needy,
thou see my state thou can all mend,
I know thou know when to be speedy,
and know thy time when to defend.
Help help O Lord else down I fall,
hold me fast, by thy strong hand:
And lift me up against them all,
that by opposing me withstand.
Thy promise Lord thou do perform,
thy words are deeds, thou sai'st and do:
A happy end thou do return,
and grant, to those that on thee trust.
My safety Lord thou have ordained,
by faith my hope does mount and fly: 2. Cor. 8. 12.

And by that hope I am sustained,
if that were lost my soul would dye.
My faith has fixed an object right,
my will does far my power exceed:
But Lord I know that in thy sight,
the will is taken for the deeede.
Then Lord for deed my will do take,
and I secured shall be then:
Oh grant me this, for Christ his sake,
to whom be praise for aye
Amen.
FINIS.
The eight Lamentation in distress.
In which the distressed craves pardon for his sins, the cause of his
misseries.

O Had I wings like to a Dove, Psalm. 55. 6. 7

then should I from these troubles fly,
To wilderness I would remove,
to spend my life, and there to dye.
Mong'st bushes thick, and branches tall
of mighty Cedars hughe and high:
With sauadges and wild beasts all,
for to avoid my misery.
But why thus wish I, Lord alas,
that am vain man of flesh and blood:
Thou God that bring'st all things to pas,
do know, this sorts not for my good.
For were I in vast wilderness,
in furthest part of earth or air: Psalm. 139. 7. 8. 9.

I could no whit my case redress,
as being in thy power there.
Were I in bowels of the earth,
were I in Sea, in Clouds or Sky:
With sorrow, grief, with joy or mirth,
there Lord thou art with powerful eye.
There can thou also find me out, Psalm. 139. 10.

and visit there my foul offense:
Thou art my paths and bed about,
it is vain to hide or seek defense.
The second part of the eight Lamentation.
The penitent by faith preuailes against frailty in the fiery trial.

THen let me at thy footestoole fall,
and there acknowledge mine amiss
For pardon beg, and mercy call,
and pray for grace and heavenly bliss.
And that thou bridle my desires,
cleanse mine affections with thy spirit:
Inflame me with thine holy fire,
in naught but thee let me delight.
Lord tame the fiercenes of mine heart,
reform my words my mouth and speech
Thou fountain of all wisdom art,
therefore right wisdom do me teach.
In understanding truth instruct me,
vouchsafe me perfect patience:
So to that freedom wilt conduct me,
where is no loss nor pain of sense.
And from thiese dangers best me free,
which most I fear, and soon'st possess:
The comforts most desired by me,
and so enjoy true happiness.
O make not Lord thy absence long,
but hasten my deliverance:
Against my foes Lord make me strong,
which do themselus against me advance.
That ready are with on set new,
for to assault my silly soul:
Wearied with storms that do accrue,
and plungd with waves which over me roll.
The third part of the eight Lamentation.
WHerefore have thou left unto us, 1. Pet. 5. 7. Heb. 135.

by thy word, a commandment:
To cast our cares on thee which thus,
with weighty burdens us torment.
With promise to us help and ease,
thou see and know Lord our desire:
Our secret hearts and all our ways,
all is plain to thee as light as fire.
If therefore I should justify,
my self I should condemned be:
Thou find'st me out and do me try,
my righteousness is naught to thee.
disclay ming mine integrity,
I cast me down Lord at thy feet:
And pray for pure sincerity,
that I do all, in all that is meet.
Wherefore thou art most bountiful,
when wants and weakness we confess:
Yea then thy gifts are plentiful,
us to releive in our distress.
On thee my burden Lord i will lay,
for well I know thou car'st for all:
That thee belicue, love, fear obey, 1. Pet. 5. 7.

and for thy grace and mercy call.
My faith and hope is all in thee,
I am of imperfections full:
I Ask why thou do visit me?
should I that blockish am and dull.
Defiled within and eke without,
plead duties don or else be mute: Iobes example shows the evidence of this.

It is in vain to go about,
with thee O Lord for to dispute.
Who evil am in my best way,
in purest thoughts yea most impure:
Pardon my weakness Lord I pray,
and give me zeal and strength t'indure.
With humblenes and perfect love,
which Lord thou do of me require:
Instruct me God with wisdom move,
me guide and lead to thy desire.
Show me the way that tends to bliss,
after this my long straying here: Mark. 18. 12.

And bring me home where all peace is,
let thy free favor Lord appear.
Wherein is life and liberty,
comfort joy and society,
With rest, peace, and tranquillity,
for them that live in piety.
The fourth part of the eight Lamentation.
OH happy he who^ thou protec'st,
most hapy he who^ thou do love
He Is strong and wise in all respect'st,
he is fed and clad from thee above.
In all good things, he is rich in deed,
when he does call, thou do him hear:
What he does ask, thou give at need,
he seeks, and finds them every where.
When he is sick, thou do him cure,
when poor, thou do his wants reply:
When he is sad he shall be sure,
thy saving health and help is nigh.
When he is troubled do defend him
in danger do securenes give him:
when men him hate thy love wilt send him
when dead to long, life does revive him.
And give him the^ such joys for ever, 1. Cor. 2. 9.

as no man's wit can comprehend:
Me favor grant, Lord bring me thither
to thiese thy blessings without end.
This favor Lord unto me show,
and bless my contemplation:
Only in heaven and thee I know,
is perfect contentation.
My sorrows shall be turned to joy,
my wants unto sufficiency: Psalm. 126. 5.

My tears to gladness from annoy,
mourning to mirth and melody.
My soul keep safe from death and hell,
my feet from sliding, and from falling:
Let me uprightly walk and dwell:
and on thee still O Lord be calling.
Who do perform thy promises,
and let'st none empty part away:
That with their hearts seek thy mercies,
or do for help and comfort pray.
The fifth part of the eight Lamentation.
SEnd help therefore, O Lord and save me,
from the^ yt would me quite devour
And daily grieve me and deprave me, Psalm. 22. 22

my soul's, with Lions every hour.
I wade as through the rageing sea,
I dwell amongst men set on fire:
whose teeth are spears, whose tongs bear sway
like two edged sword with wrath and ire.
Thy mercy therefore and thy truth,
let be my bucklar and strong shield. Psalm. 18.

Have bin mine hope even from my youth,
let troubles cease, new joys me yield:
Set me upon thy rock forever,
of perfect love and true relief:
Let rest and refuge fail me never,
and thy protection save from grief.
Bring thou to pass what is fit for me,
what thou do know expedient:
That righteous men my end may see,
and how mine hope obtained content.
That they may of thy glory talk,
and speak of thy eternal praise:
All men shall say that see me walk,
doubtless God will the righteous raise,
There is a God that is gracious good,
to them that be of perfect heart:
When he has all their foes withstood,
heauen's joys to them he will impart.
Finis
The first part of the ninth Lamentation in distress.
The penitent acknowledges man's vildenes and Gods mercies by faith and example
of Gods providence, relieth on his goodness.

O Lord thy name's most excellent,
in all the world, thy glorie's spread: Psalm. 8.

Through heavens and the firmament,
and by all creatures uttered.
In universal harmony,
extold in heaven and in earth:
Exprese'st in Song and melody,
with all alacrity and mirth.
What thou bestow'st, what man can number,
upon us slaves, and sons of men:
Who by our sins are far put under,
all Creatures we can name by pen.
Forgetful and so capeable,
of sin, as powder is of fire:
In all our words and works unstable,
and know not what we should desire:
Above all Creatures we fotget,
thy grace, are prone to disobey:
And if thy mercy did not let,
all Adams broude thou should destroy
And I for my part, me confess,
guilty of all sins, and all euilles: Psalm. 51.

And that I have deserved no less,
then to be damned among'st the devils.
The world for disobedience,
did punnish, and thou mought'st subvert:
But chiefly me for negligence,
mai'st plague with all plauges, it is desert
I am not worthy breath in the air,
nor have the use of any creature:
Much less to the e to make my prayer,
cause against my God I am a traitor.
Thou worthily, me do afflict,
at me thou take just offense:
All punnishments thou do inflict,
because thy wrath I did incense.
My trespasses do more offend,
then I can please with my best zeal:
The worthiness I best intend,
I least perform my soul Lord heal:
The second part of the ninth Lamentation.
I Shame at mine unworthiness,
yet feign would be at one with thee:
Thou art a joy in beauines,
a succor in necessity.
To them that do their lives reform,
and rightly frame their penitence:
Sincearely follow and perform,
thy will without all negligence.
All this to do I do desire,
and what thou say I do believe:
Thy pardon grant me I require,
release and pardon Lord me give.
O be with them that do thee seek,
and yield them help that hold by thee
Instructing, humble men and meek,
that wisdom seek by thy mercy.
Since I so long have to thee cride,
so long thee sought yet hope I will:
Though my sad soul in silent bide,
in constant patience i will wait still.
thou rightly hear'st my inward groans
my sorrows sighs wants and desire:
And do respect the outward mones,
of men distressed that fear the fire.
Though in their lips they mute do seem,
and do speak nothing with their tongues:
what they would have, thou do deem
and present art to right their wrongs.
But lo the time is not expired,
of mine ordained punishment:
Nor of that freedom I desired,
i will wait by hope in languishment.
My help my comfort and my life,
salvation mine depends on thee:
Within my conscience stint the strife,
and give me grace and liberty.
The third part of the ninth Lamentation.
MY life, my comfort, help and all, John. 11. 25.

salvation, on Christ depends:
It Is he does raise me when I fall,
he all begins and he all ends.
I will not murmr neither grudg,
nor fear nor faint; but always wait:
He is my Savior, and my Judge,
his grace decreed who can retrait.
Is there not an appointed time,
for all things that by God be wrought? Job. 42.

Job was brought low, at last did clime,
to wealth and honor he was brought.
And Joseph was afflicted long,
by brethren and by false accuse:
He was shut up in prison strong,
did all his cause and wrongs peruse.
At length brought him to honor great,
and David was at first cast down:
And then enthroned in princely seat,
and long enjoyed the royal Crown.
Poor widow of Sarepta she,
and hirs were ready for to pine: 1. King. 17, 9.

Her barrel, and her cruise by thee,
were blessed, and by that Prophet thine.
Her meal, and oil, did never fail.
thou send'st that Saint, even to that end:
That they in dearth should never quail,
so did from famine her defend.
Wherefore a little while i will wait,
I know the appointed time will come:
I shall be freed from sins deceit,
wilt mercy send in miseries room.
The fourth part of the ninth Lamentation.
THou art my portion and my strength
my defense and salvation: Psalm. 28. 1.

Thou see my troubles, and at length
will it give me consolation.
Thou send'st them notas ignorant,
of the^, thou know thou did me make
Therefore what is needful God me grant
good Lord do never me forsake.
I am brought to the very pit,
of all confusion men suppose: 1. Sam. 2. 5.

Thou have decreed the time most fit,
of my delivery from my foes.
To me unknown that being seen,
I may attribute to thee then:
The praise who praised ere have been,
without the aid of mortal men.
Which I have sought so long in vain,
yea while I called thee upon:
Let me acknowledge help again,
to come from thee or else from none.
And all that the world can afford,
be but the effects of thy dear love:
Thy power thy providence and word,
do send me comfort from above.
O blessed man whom thou do choose,
and call'st by crosses unto thee,
Whom thou by death seem to refuse,
by secret sweetenes lives by thee.
With inward consolation,
fed with the Manna of thy love:
Who dwells in thy protection,
with lively hope can never move.
He faints not at mightiest frown, Psalm. 119. 57.

so I O Lord assured rest:
Thou art my portion and my crown,
to dignifie those love thee best.
Thou tendrest me as a dear son,
though thou me visit with thy rod: Psalm. 99. 33

Yet suffer not me for to run,
with sinners and to fall from God.
Although I seem of hope deprived,
and that my wonted comforts past:
Yet I O Lord shall be revived,
by thee and by thy grace at last.
For all my long and instant cries,
I will not shrink though knowing this:
Thy wondrous power and great mercies,
most infinite thy mercy is.
If made the Rock a water spring,
thy thirsty people to refresh:
From mine hard hearted foes can wring,
some comfort for my withered flesh.
If thou raind'st Manna from above,
meat by a Raven thy saints to feed:
Thousands of men did feed with love,
when their was little show of bread.
If to thy people thou sendest Quails,
in desert where all food was scant:
And since thy goodness never fails,
should I suppose that I should want.
The fifth part of the ninth Lamentation.
Confirm my faith for evermore,
that I most constantly believe:
Thou can and wilt increase my store,
and all good things thou will me give.
All power belongs unto thee,
who can imagine or will say:
Thou can not in my need help me,
or that thy love is taken away.
Since thou have don such mighty things
so freely for men in distress:
Should not I fly with swiftest wings,
to thee in time of heaviness.
But lo O Lord all things are thine,
the heavens are thine the earth also:
The Cattle, Fowls, the shrubs and vine,
all things in heaven and earth below.
All things above, all things beneath,
is thine, who truly then can say?
Thou can not give, or them bequeath
to whom thou will, who can say nay?
Thou make ye corn to spring and grow
and waterst the earth with thy sweet showers
Thou causest beasts with thanks to low,
with dewes, thou water'st fragra^t flowers.
Since then thou art the Lord of all,
since thou co^maund'st, and do forbid:
The rich and poor, make proud men fall,
that down can throvv and raise at need.
Since that thou tryest and vvilt revvard,
since thou do what shall please thy will
And in what manner vvilt regard,
and whom thou vvilt, can save or spill.
No living man commands thee,
not all the world can thee control:
O Lord I still will pray to thee,
for health of body and of soul.
Let it be thus, O father dear,
for Christ his sake thy dearest son,
That dyed and rose my soul to clear,
in all things Lord, thy will be done.
All glory to the Trinity,
to Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
Combind in holy unity,
of power in might and glory most.
FINIS.
To God the Father*
Wellspring of deity God Godhead giver,
who give away, yet kepest what was given
A fountain vndiminisht by thy river,
River and fountain both in fullnes ever.
Father by everlasting generation,
Without precedence in paternity:
Whether it be of substance or relation.
For all things are together in eternity:
Disclose the depth, take from my muse obscurity,
Thine hidden depth, which makes my verse an oracle
So shall I both attain unto thy purity.
And all yt read my lines conceive this miracle.
How God in getting of another, yet,
Another not an other God did get.
FINIS.
To God the Son.
GReat son of God, but borne the son [of man,
One subject of a double substance framed:
wherein nor manhood lost, nor godhead wan
But of the^ both at once one Christ was named
Before all times begot, in time created,
The Lord of Lords, a servant from retaining,
And yet no former form thereby abated:
In servants form, the form of God remaining
Great son of God, the^ who^ there is no greater
No not the father in his great divinity,
As God creator and as aman a creature:
[For more and less, agree not in infinity.]
Teach me to know how man by God assumed
Is both, and yet not man by God consumed.
To God the holy Ghost*
O Spirit Divine, the common knot whereby,
The father and the son do love together:
For son and father universally.
Are love, though love be proper unto neither,
Thou that from both Proceedest and from none:
Unequally but with the like authority,
As from one principal, though from that one,
Principally yet without priority:
One all the first from two the last of three,
Sweet breath that ioyest every pensive heart,
Breathed from God, O God breath into me,
Skill above skill, and teach me how thou art
The last of three, and yet of three so cast,
As in them all is neither first nor last.
FINIS.
Diverse consolations that the life and time of affliction is short.
THe comfort yt does make us bold,
is our afflictions transitory:
Cause we of Christ do take sure hold,
the troubles short, endless the glory.
Eye has not seen, ear has not hard,
the joys that God for his elect
In heaven already has prepared,
though many troubles to effect.
Light are our troubles temporary,
because Christ and his spirit divine,
This weight and burden help to carry,
and does in yoke with us conioyne.
We look not on, things, seen and vain,
but on things unseen, cast our eye:
The blessed saints for Christ were slain,
Christ answered, when they did cry.
How long, how long, Lord will thou stay?
a little time though God does lowre: Reu. 6.

Stay till, his wrath be past away,
it is but a minute of an hour.
Christ calls the time of troubles little,
but Paul does say the glori's great:
And in respect, it is but a tittle,
if it be compared to heavens seat.
A while says God, I thee forsook,
that is short time in misery:
But thee t'ernall mercy took,
that is to heauen's felicity.
I Will fear no danger, pain nor loss,
it is but the twinkling of an eye:
I see the crown i will bear the cross,
for I shall live eternally.
Good gracious God, me patience send,
and then do send, what send thou will:
Grant me those joys that never shall end
for to that end Christ's blood was spilt.
FINIS.
Of Death.
What Is death? a separation
of mortal body from our breath:
What Is that? but a Cessation,
from cares, and from a living death.
What Is that Cessation: it it is a sleep,
by which we wholly are refreshed:
Yea but in sleep, who shall us keep?
he that blessed all, and is most blessed.
But who made death? t'vvas made by sin,
and what is sin? the laws transgression:
Of that how should I vauntage win?
all sin is weakened by confession.
But by death's dynt, it is overcome:
and whence came sin? from hell beneath?
When wa'st first bred? in mothers womb:
when will it end? not till our death.
This seems strange, but this is true,
by nature sin is hatched in us,
Old Adams rules, till God renew.
why then I see, the case stands thus:
As sin goes in, so life goes out,
as sin goes out, so life comes in:
So by the Lord, it is brought about,
sin conquers life, Life conquers sin.
Though life by sin be still anoyde,
and sin of death by strength and sting:
Yet Viprous sin, by death's destroyed,
life kills death, when death kill'th sin.
The death of body, or of nature,
is that, where to all subject be:
Cause sin has tainted every creature,
according unto Gods decree.
When bodies life does fade away,
and we give up our dying ghost:
And this our Corpse is clad in clay,
and unto God our souls does poast:
It is ordained and decreed,
that all men by necessity:
Through that first Adams sinful deed,
are subject made, the death to die.
To dye for sin, it is due for sin,
to dye in sin, a heavy case:
To dye to sin is to begin,
to leave to sin, and live to grace.
The death in sin, without repenting,
in affect, effect, and aspecting:
In thinking, doing, and frequenting,
and offered grace of God rejecting.
I wretched woeful execrable,
have plague of God, by sin for sin:
Of miseries, most miserable,
to them that live and die therein.
But he that dies, before he dies,
when he is dead, he is not dead:
But oldeage dies, and he shall rise,
with glory from the grave his bed.
And he that is touched with conscience prick,
whose sense of sin is sharp and quick:
That man is sick, ere he is sick,
and when he is sick, he is not sick.
I look poor wretch on mine estate,
and others monish, by mine harms:
That was near death but now of late,
by sin inchaunted by her charms.
Had I not dyed, sure I had di'de,
(oh happy Phoenix living death)
Still let my flesh be mortified,
let my sp'rit, breath, by thy spirits breath
Sweet Jesus thou did die for me,
and in thy death, with thee I di'de,
Oh live in me, and J in thee,
shall live, and evermore abide.
And worms meat thou, dirt clay and slime,
thy body kill, thy soul to save:
Quail vild affections, whilst have time,
yt life by death, through grace mai'st have
Shake hands with sins and all offenses
and learn to dye before thou dye:
When bid'st adue unto thy senses,
then shall thou live eternally.
The Cause of death.
THe cause of death is wicked sin,
for out of sin our death did flow:
From thence our plagues did all begin,
cut of this tree, our ills did grow.
Hunger, fire, death, and all,
created were for punishment:
And laid on man for Adams fall,
and was the cause of our torment.
God said to Adam, Scripture says;
what hour soever thou shall eat:
Thou shall be sure to die the death,
god made not death, but death did threat
Through envy, malice of the devil,
into the world came this estate:
Sins entered with all actions evil,
by Adams fault: not by our fate.
Two sorts of death, from death by sin,
proceed, as effects from their cause:
The death of Nature does begin,
and death of grace next by Gods laws.
Death of two sorts.
BY which we are made slaves for ever,
in darkness, called death eternal:
From worm of conscience freed never,
deprived of all the joys supernall.
As by example, evident,
two sorts of death approved well:
The* Glutton rich, being dead was sent,
his body buried quick in hell.
And Lazarus poor, beggar dead,
to Abraham's bosom carried is:
With Angels wings, with glory spread,
where is true joy and comforts bliss.
The one has heaven, the other hell,
the one has bliss, the other bale:
The one in heaven still must d well,
and the other, Devils pull and hale.
He died with his conscience evil,
in death he saw his wickedness:
And his dampnations with the devil,
as holy Scriptures do express.
To the elect and faithful.
THis is the consolation great,
of the that in their deathbeds lie:
Their minds fly up to th mercy seat,
and there for mercy loudly cry.
By Christ which death abollished,
and sin that is cleansed by his blood:
Whose merits, pardon purchased,
for all our sins, and death withstood.
To us his goodness is imputed,
to him the sins that we committed:
And we for righteous are reputed,
and all our sins, they are remitted.
For he alone by death has bought us,
from power and pain of devil and hell:
and merly he through love has brought us
with him in heaven to reign and d well.
That no afflictions give us grief,
that Satan should us not destroy:
And giu'th to us eternal life,
and filth our hearts with heavenly joy.
He made us freemen, heirs to God,
which captive bondslaues were to hell:
Beat Satan down with iron Rod,
to place where dampened devils dwell.
Eternal death could not prevail,
gain'st him, nor over him have power:
christ stre^gthned those who^ sin did quail
his might, the mighty did devour.
Over death over sin and hidious hell,
he gave us life and victory:
T'all those that keep his precepts well,
and them installes in endless glory.
For as by Adam all men died,
for sin and by iniquity:
In Christ shall all men be revived,
to live with him eternally.
FINI Si
Although the body die yet they shall live.
THe Godly and just people have,
most comfort though with pain and grief:
They suffer death and lie in grave,
and seem for saken sanz relief.
They are as sheep which men ordain,
to death and slaughter to be put:
As silly guiltles Lambs are slain,
when Butchers knife their throats do cut.
For we which live shall given be,
to death for Jesus Christ his sake:
If they do not despair in thee,
noe fear of death can cause the^ quake.
But rest assured they shall pass,
through death to life eternally:
Who ask for mercy and for grace,
and unto God for faith do cry.
They suffer both his hand and Rod,
and when he strikes, are patient:
They put their hope and trust in God,
who comforts the^ with hearts content.
Their death is good, and of great price,
they also know through Christ his passion
Death's over come, in wondrous wise,
and so, receive they consolation.
If any touched in latest pains,
of dierfull death, this faith hold fast:
In midst of death, his life attaines,
and shall have lasting life at last.
The Christians surely do believe,
that when they seem to be most dead:
That then, they most of all do live,
and so with joy lift up their head.
FINIS.
The death of the Godly is a sleep.
CHrist calls the death of godly men,
a sleep, his own a death, and why?
The Soldiers spear was made a Pen,
his blood the Ink to write thereby.
Quietus est, for Christians all,
and then the same to us was sealed:
A sleep, he justly may it call,
cause by his stripes our wounds were healed.
His was a death, cause death was due,
in him died all, he di'd for all:
Gods Justice us to death does sue,
he paid it and repaired the fall.
that we moight sleep, he suffered pains,
that we might laugh, he often did weep
His was the loss, ours was the gains,
thus did he change, Death to a sleep.
FINIS.
To whom they that die ought to commit their Spirit.
TO Christ did Stephen yeald up his spirit,
for he is the way the truth and life:
He purchased life by death and merit,
the husbands he, the Church his wife.
He is that Noah, his Church ye dove,
that houldes his hand for to receive us:
He bids us come to embrace his love,
we fly to him when all deceive us.
The heavens and earth the Lord commaundes,
to him all Creatures run but we:
None can us take out of his hands,
in life and death to him we flee.
FINIS.
The body is buried but shall be raised up again at the last day.
PIllor of faith, Basis of bliss,
of true religion sure supporter:
The point of Resurrection is,
in death it is the chief comforter.
If this do fall, all faith may fail,
what article does us refresh:
When life and health, and strength does quail:
the Resurrection of the flesh.
Our bones shall blossom as the grass,
we shall be raised out of dust: Dan. 12. Job. 19. Romans 8.

The body that before time was,
by power of Christ's spirit rise it must.
The first fruit's Christ, ye head is raised,
the members shall the same likewise:
The Lord God for the same be praised,
we know that we shall also rise.
If head, above the water be,
how can the body then be drowned:
We shall arise, and Jesus see,
and with him shall be kingly crowned.
FINIS.
In the pangs of death and in all tribulations, the remedies be to be learned
in the sufferings of Christ.
OF life and death the true director,
who in his life and his dying:
Of our misdoing is corrector,
and into all our actions prying.
Christ is afflicted for our sake,
left us, example that we should:
Follow his stepps and his way take,
thy Cross to bear with courage bold
Our Savior Jesus teaches thee,
how can that be (say thou) behold:
Example, if thou punished be,
with sickness, hunger, thirst, and cold.
With thy self reccon and account,
how it cannot compared be:
with his thorns, yea his nails surmount,
the greatest pain that paineth thee.
Art thou restrained of thy desire,
and lusts yt draw thou know not whether
Think on Christ's cross, Gods wrath and ire,
and put his tortures all together.
If pride puff up thy mind with motions,
look on Christ, nailed on the Cross:
And think as bound by due devotions,
of our great gain, by his great loss.
If thou in filthy lust do burn,
or any other ill desire:
Think but how Christ his flesh was torn,
to save thy soul from flames of fire.
With stripes thrust through, and all to broken
his drink was Ezell mixed with Gaul:
With his last gasp, ye earth was shoken,
who suffered for the sins of all.
If envy, hate, revenge, thee grieve,
think with thy self how Christ did pray
(O Father, do them all forgive)
for them that took his life away.
FINIS.
An exhortation to forgive one an other, before we depart out of this, world.
GOd us commanded to forgive,
and says then we shall be forgiven:
Without offense noe man can live,
and God his balance hangs even.
He that does not forgive his brother,
will then the Lord his faults remit,
Noe, as he deals with another,
another shall repair it is fit.
And when you kneel to God and pray,
forgive if you have any thing:
Against any living man that day,
that Christ may your remission bring.
And when thy gift thou do present,
and on the Altar sacrifice:
First with thy brother make consent,
and him forgive in any wise.
When thou to Christ wast enemy,
and strengthened, in great extremes:
Yet then did he give remedy,
and over thee spread his mercy beams.
He gave to thee his holy spirit,
to guide and lead thy soul aright:
And gave thee heaven there to inherit,
all joys and bliss, lay in his sight.
When thou from him wa'st gone astray,
he sought thee out and did thee find:
And finding thee, brought thee away,
unto his fould, he thee resignde.
Thank God therefore and render praise
exalt and laud his holy name:
Unto the heavens sing always,
all men on earth do ye the same.
Hence forth my soul, walk in his path
and err not from him any more:
Less thou provoke his heavy wrath,
and then art worse then were before.
Let not Gods spirit be given thee,
to work thy condempnation:
But let thy eye remembered be,
for thy souls preservation.
Shun thou all wicked company,
with dooers ill associate not:
Least thou from faith should fall and fly,
and soul and body soil and spot.
But bless his name who called thee,
unto the state of righteousness:
And thy sins vengance taken has he,
to give thee heavens happiness.
Bless thou his blessed holiness,
his praise let mind and heart record:
And let thy tongue and voice confess,
the gratiousnes of God the Lord.
Prostrate thy self down at his feet,
offer thy service with free heart:
O yield God all, for it is most meet,
since he made, saved, and blessed each part.
Who spared not his only Son,
but let him die thy soul to save:
To pay and ransom thy faults done,
and to redeem thee from the grave.
So in the prayer of our Lord,
we do forgive that is done against us:
As God forgiveness shall afford,
our Savior Christ does teach us thus.
That is, that we forgive them must,
who did us harm in any thing:
In thought, in word, in deed unjust,
or ought to thine indamaging.
FINIS.
Diverse consolations that the life and time of affliction is short.
THe comfort that does make us bold,
is our afflictions transitory:
Cause we of Christ do take sure hold,
the troubles short, endless the glory.
Eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
the joys that God for his elect:
In heaven already has prepared,
through many troubles to effect.
Light are our troubles temporary,
because Christ and his spirit divine:
This weight and burden help to carry,
and strongly us to them combine.
We look not on things seen and vain,
but on things unseen cast our eye:
The souls of Saints for Christ was slain,
Christ answered, when they did cry.
How long a time that they must stay,
a little while though he does lower:
His stay till wrath be over past,
it is but a minute of an hour.
Christ calls the time of troubles little,
but Paul does say, the glories great:
As in respect of the earth a little,
so griefs compared, to Heavens seat.
A while says God, I thee forsook.
that is short time in misery:
But there the eternal mercy took,
that is to heaven felicity.
FINIS.
A consolation for them which suffer for their offenses.
IF men you buffit for ill deeds,
what praise among me^, get you thereby:
Corrections from your faults proceeds, 1. Pet. 2. 20

and therefore take it patiently.
See none do suffer as an Actor.
of ill, as busy bodies, thieves,
Nor as a wicked male factor,
for that bars pity from your grieves.
But if please God we suffer must,
for wicked deeds were done by us:
Deserving punishment most just,
may holy be by suffering thus. 1. Pet. 3. 14

And unto God it is no less pleasing,
then suffering of the Innocents:
God can and will, help our diseasing,
we are but as his patients.
If evil men their faults confess,
and noe good course of life omit:
Believe in Christ, and faith express,
then surely he will their faults remit.
And their deserved punishment,
and crosses all he will lenifie:
And give a crown magnificent,
to pureness them he will sanctify.
The thief who died for heineous crime,
hang on the Cross by Jesus side:
Confessing sins at his last time,
was in his suffering sanctifide.
To comfort him our Lord did say,
this day thy soul to heaven sealed up:
On Jacobs ladder, heavens high way,
because thou tastes with me my cup.
Then sinners all that him believe,
repent their sins and mend their life:
As mercy them shall sure relieve,
and so cut off their mortal strife.
The suffering Martiers testify,
Christ and his Gospel he us sent:
The law does sinners scourge and try,
faith frees their pains if they repent.
When thou suffer for right or wrong
let steadfast faith in Christ remain:
Such sufferings shall ere it be long,
the crown of endless glory gain.
No man therefore ought to despair,
Christ dyed for our redemption:
Him advocate did God prepaire,
from sin to cause exemption.
And the^ he wil'd his word be preached
to every creature instantly:
And by his Gospel his grace reached,
cause he would have no sinners die.
The health of all he does desire,
calls all to him that burdned be:
And to forgive does us require,
and all to pray that troubled be.
FINIS.
A disputation between the Devil and us.
Man. IF Satan heap up all thy sins,
address thy self to God on hie
Fall thus to pray (when he begins)
Lord turn thy face, and hear my cry:
The Devil with strong invasion,
suggesteth his temptation.

Guarde me from Satan, death, and hell,
the Feind on me his wrath does wreake
All ill temptations Lord repel,
defend my soul for it is weak:
Look on the face of Christ thy Son,
consider Lord what he has done.
For Christ is mine, and I am his,
mine is his justice, mine the gains:
Lord turn thy face from mine amiss,
Christ bear my sins, and bore ye pains:
Thou did me ask, and I shall have,
in faith therefore thy grace I crave.
Devil. God hears no sinners, why do pray?
thy sins the sands in number pass:

M. Christ blood has washed my sins away
and made me righteous as he was.
Christ's merits shall me cloth abont,
God will not find my vildenesse out.

D. Shall thou the sincke of sinfullnes,
go on with Peter and with Paul:
To everlasting blessedness,
noe, noe, to Hell, down must thou fall:
I but in thought did him offend,
and he me dampened without end.

M. I with ye thief reach out my hand,
of faith, to Christ his hand of grace:
He holds me that fearful stand,
and draws me up to heavenly place:
Thou never can be saved, and why?
for men, not Angels, Christ did die.

D. How have thou this assured trust,
Which have done nothing that is good?

M. Because though god, be god most just,
My debts are paid with Christ his blood:
My sins are all to Christ imputed,
And righteous, I in him reputed.

D. Thou shall be haled down to hell.

M. my head's in heaven, there is no hell fire

D. with us in chains, and pains shall dwell

M. Thou art a murderer and a liar:
When head's above, who can be drowned,
Christ is the head, mine head is crowned.

Thou art a damned fiend no judge,
It Is thou set'st God and man at wars:
Thou art that envious slave do grudge,
That man should shine as do the stars:
and heaven enjoy whence thou were thrown
Thy malice old, false fiend is known.
D. Legions of Devils watch sinners souls.

M. but Angels pitch their tents about me
God me protects, and thee controles,
Devils are in chains, I need not doubt thee
If thy power stretch not to a Swine,
How can thou hurt this soul of mine.

D. God is not just, if for thy evils,
He gives thee everlasting life:
Thy balefull portion is with devils,
Where thou shall have torture and strife:
Endless, mercles, remediles;
Due for thy monstrous wickedness.

M. God's just and does his promise keep,
From justice to his mercy seat:
In Christ's name I appeal and creep,
And so obtain his mercy great:
And by his grace in largest scope,
By Christ I do erect mine hope.

D. Thou feed'st thy self with hope in vain.

M. Christ is the truth, he cannot lie:
He says his saints with him shall reign,
And such a one by Christ am I
Presumptious slave, my hope's not vain,
Cause Christ is heaven and cheifest gain.

D. Thou see what thou shall leave behind,
What thou shall have, thou see not:

M. Satan auaunt thy faith is blind,
From the heavens bliss is far remote:
That may be seen with natures eyes,
My soul does scorn and I despise.

D. y^ part'st hence loade^ with misdeed,
And of good works thou art naked bare:

M. Christ's works and merrits stand in steed
Of mine by faith are mine I dare.
By faith in him and true repentance,
Still hope for bliss and escape Gods vengance.

D. But thy repentance comes to late,
Again thy God's the God of truth:
I must needs say, he must thee hate,
Cause against me all thy flower of youth:
Think now that he will take the bran,
No it is to late thou wicked man.

M. To late it was not for the thief.

D. yea but the thief, his faith was true,
Thine is a wavering weak belief,
Have no more faith then has a Jew:
Now what remains, but deep despair
For God of thee, will take no care,

M. I Will fly to God, i will him beseech,
To blow this little spark of fire:
And he that is in mercy rich,
I know will grant me my desire:
Faith pleases God by quallitie,
He cares not for the quantity.

D. Do not thou see God has in store
In earth, in hell and every where:
Ten thousand thousand, plagues and more,
Which makes us Devils quake and fear:
Yet art so sensles. foolish dull,
To say thy God is merciful.

M. He like a good Surgeon,
Does hurt to heal, they are his lances:
That let out our corruption,
And so saues us from worse mischances:
Our plagues on earth save us from hell,
devils well may fear, for there they dwell.

D. It is a wretched thing to dye.

M. To die in Chri'st, a blessed thing:

D. A sinners death's a misery,

M. By death is lost my sin deaths sting:

D. and god has made thy death most biter

M. the joys of heaven will be ye sweeter.

D. Thou leau'st this world, go know not whither,

M. I leave this Hellish place on earth:
Mine home is heaven, and i will go thither,
My soul does claim it by her birth:
Heaven is my country, there was bred,
My soul, and there is Christ mine head.

D. Thou leau'st commodities behind,
And many great and pleasing things:
Thou many more ill things may find,
yt men to care and sorrow brings:

M. There Is naught on earth that is worth ye buying
For that is in heaven, is worth my dying.

D. Thou leaust thy riches and thy store,

M. Thay'r other men's, that I do leave:
I bear mine with me and no more.

D. Therein thou do thy self deceive:
Thy wife and Children do forsake.

M. They are y^ Lords he will them take.

D. It Is hard to be quite plucked away,
From those thou love so dearly well:

M. Within short space they shall not stay
But come to me where I shall dwell:

D. thou do fio^ thy sweet friends depart

M. I go to sweet friends true of heart.
Whom Satan cannot make despair,
Them he will tempt, in themselves to trust:
Against that give thy self to prayer,
And know, none in themselves are just:
So from thy self to Christ do fly,
And he will relieve thee by and by.
He Is over strong with us to wrestle,
Against this danger when help we need:
Against his force Christ is our Castle,
And his assaults defends with speed,
Answer the subtle devils dispute,
With thiese replies shall make him mute.
It is a sure and strong defense,
Against all desperation:
When Satan seeks with diligence,
To work thy souls damnation:
The more the devil would thee depresse
The more do trust in Gods goodness.
Against presumption and pride,
Thy feeble weakness well do weigh:
And let humility thee guide,
Remember thou art but dust and clay:
Unto thy Savior Christ do fly,
What thou do want, he will supply.
If thou thus answearst devils temptation,
And all his vain suggestion:
Shall not fall into desperation,
Nor blown up by presumption:
And being strong in faith and humble,
The devil shall not thee down tumble.

FINIS.
The poor and distressed soul being laden with the burden of his sins,
fervently prays to God for his remission thereof.
O Lord come pity my distress,
see how I sigh and groan:
With tears and floods of heaviness,
my heart is overthrown.
Noe hope I find, noe help I feel,
noe cure nor salve I see:
None can my sins corruptions heal,
sweet Jesus comfort me.
My wounding sorrows never cease,
my greefes grow more and more:
What I should kill, does still increase,
Lord save my soul therefore.
I living dye, yet dying live,
in life, yet daily dye:
I figh and groan yet cannot grieve,
sin makes this mystery.
Lord let me live yet howrely die,
in love yet daily hate:
Let me embrace yet still defy,
let peace breed all debate.
O let me live, yet never live,
a live yet ever dead:
O let me grieve, yet never grieve,
fed with thy living bread.
Let passions pass, let groans be gone,
let moanes be turned to mirth:
I live and die to Christ alone,
let sorrows sincke to earth.
FINIS.
Seven Psalms of David's repentance commonly called Penitential Psalms.
Psalms. 6.
I Am thy child, O God most dear,
then fatherly do chasten me: Romans Heb. 12. 6. Exo. 20.

In irefull wrath as judge severe,
correct not mine impiety.
For Lord to thee still turns my hope,
(because thy mercies have no end)
Even as the lowly heleetrope,
unto the lofty sun does bend.
Forgive me Lord for I am weak,
angry rebuke, I may not dure:
My vexed boanes through pains do break
with mercies mirth do them recure.
Dire anguish sticks in troubled soul,
with Oil of grace do it alay:
My conscience sting does me control,
thy comforts do not long delay.
In debth no man remembers thee,
nor offreth thanks unto thy name:
In dark some grave how is he free?
to celebrate thy glorious fame.
I am a weary of my groans,
all night I wash my couch with tears:
Wearing my self away with moanes,
my heart is quite consumed with fears.
My beauties gone with very grief,
and worn with anguish of my foes:
But thou at last wilt send relief,
to me my God in spite of those.
Away from me you wicked train,
and workers of iniquity:
My weeping has not bin in vain,
for thou at length have heard my cry.
My prayers Lord thou will embrace,
and all mine enemies confound:
With sudden shame thou will deface,
and make them level with the ground.
FINIS.
Psalm. 32.
Blessed is he, whose unrighteousness,
the Lord has pardoned and bin:
So careful of, in his distress,
to hide and cover all his sin.
O blessed is that man again,
to whom the Lord imputes no fault:
And in whose spr'it no guile does reign,
his soul with error to assault.
Whilst I in silence yet forbore,
my flesh with languor began to faint:
And all my bones to nothing wore,
by reason of my daily plaint.
Thy heavy hand does make me quail,
and tremble too, both night and day:
My heart and soul with drynes fail,
my moisture is consumed away.
My fault's to thee, I will unfold,
to God my sins I have exposed:
As unto him the truth I told,
so he with mercy me enclosed.
Therefore to thee, the pure shall pray,
in season due, with zealous ground:
For in the floods there is no stay,
in waters deep thou art not found.
Thou art my stock and stay secure,
with songs of joy I am consigned:
Thou art my rock and countermure,
from all annoy I am enshrined.
I will instruct thee in thy way,
my eye shall ever be thy guide:
That thou may never err nor stray,
nor yet thy footsteps once to slide.
Be not like to the Mule disturbed,
that reason does not. understand:
Nor to the horse which must be curbed,
before thou can his force command.
Sorrow and woe remain for those,
that wicked are and love discord:
But mercy still shall him enclose,
which puts his trust in God the Lord.
Be joyful O ye righteous then,
lift up your souls with cheerful voice:
All ye that are pure hearted men,
in grear Jehovah, still rejoice.
FINIS.
Psalm. 38.
PVt me not to rebuke and shame,
nor in thine anger chasten me:
O righteous God, for thy great name,
pardon my sins and set me free.
In me thine arrows fast do stick,
thy heavy hand does press me down:
My flesh, my bones, and heart are sick,
when thou in wrath on me do frown.
I have no rest in any joint,
by reason of my deadly sin:
With balm of mercy me annoint,
and bring me to thy heavenly Inn.
My dismal deeds do plunge me soar,
like rageing billows of the maine:
O wast me to thy blissful shore,
and be mine Anchor-hould again.
My festred wounds breed mine annoy,
by reason of my foolish guyze:
Chasing my heart and soul from joy,
all day I mourn with woeful cries.
Full of diseases are my loins,
and limbs decay in every part:
Longuor unto my flesh adioynes,
and anguishment consumes my heart.
Thou know all my hearts desires,
my groanings are not hid from thee:
Extinguish these outrageous fires,
O Lord and cure mine agony.
My heart does pant, my strength does fail,
my neighbors did their love exchang:
And darkness did my sight assail,
my very kindred waxed strange.
Mine enemies that sought my life,
laid snares for me in every place:
Plodding all day to work my strise,
and bring my name into disgrace.
But as one deaf that could not hear,
their taunting scoffs I did neglect:
And like the dumb did speech forbear,
for thou their slanders wilt correct.
For in thee ever do I trust,
to right my wrongs and plead for me:
A against my foes O God most just,
for all revenge belongs to thee.
Of the most humbly I did crave,
that they in triumph should not rise:
If I by chance a foil might have,
they would exalt with joyful cries.
With deadly plagues I am beset,
and heavy thoughts in me do stay:
My horrid sins I Will nere forget,
but mourn for them both night and day.
My cruel foes are great in strength,
and they in number do exceed:
Therefore O Lord aid me at length,
and succor me in time of need.
Psalm. 51.
LOrd of thy mercies multitude,
and goodness great I do implore:
My heinous sins from me exclude,
and sanctify me evermore.
Wash me clean from my wickedness,
and purge me from my sinful crimes:
That I may never more transgress,
but glorify thy name all times.
For I acknowledge all my faults,
my sins are ever in mine eyne:
Defend me still in all assaults,
thou know O Lord my soul is thine.
Against thee alone was mine offense,
my sins lay open to thy view:
Therefore the Lord's Omnipotence,
(if I were cast) is just and true.
Behold I first was formed in sin,
and from my mother so was borne:
And so (poor soul) continue in,
yet let me never be forlorn.
But lo the truth thou do require,
from the interior parts of mine:
And then my soul thou shall inspire,
with prudence, secret and Divine.
Purge me with Hisop, then I know,
although my sins are wondrous black:
I shall be whiter then the Snow,
no brightness then, my soul can lack.
O Lord into my wounded heart,
send down thy spirits joyful voice:
That my brus'd bones in every part,
which thou have broken may rejoice.
From mine offenses turn thy face,
and Purge me from mine evil deeds:
Increase in me thy spirit of grace,
from whence new birth of heart proceeds,
Let me not from thy presens part,
take not thy holy spirit from me:
But be a comfort to my heart,
still with me, let thy spirit be.
And then the man that does transgress,
I shall reclaim from wicked ways:
O free me from blood guiltienesse,
that I may sing thy rightful praise.
O Lord do thou my lips unfold,
that opened mouth may offer praise:
Which is the sacrifice of old,
grateful to thee in all my days.
A contrite heart thou do require,
for a sweet smelling sacrifice:
A broken spirit is thy desire,
which at no time thou will despise.
Be gracious Lord to Sions hill,
and Salems wales build and repair:
Then Ca^ues and Lambs we will offer still,
upon thine Alter fat and fair.
FINIS.
Psalms. 102.
O Hear my prayers Lord and let,
my mournful moanes to thee assend
Hide not thy face nor me forget,
in time of trouble me defend.
Incline thine ears unto my call,
hear me O God and that right soon:
Support me ever least I fall,
both Morning, Evening, Night, and Noone.
My days like smoke consume away,
my bones are burnt, my heart is dead:
And withered like grass or hay,
that I forget to eat my bread.
My flesh will scarce cleave to my boanes,
I am become so weak a man:
And worn away with grievous groans,
like to some Owl or Pelican.
In watching I have spent the night,
and like a sparrow all alone:
That on some houses top does light,
disconsolate I made my moan,
All the day long I am reuil'd,
by those which are against me sworn:
And lead a life like one exiled,
and of his country quite forlorn.
For I [like bread] did ashes eat,
and powered tears into my cup.
Cause in thy wrath and anger great,
thou threw'st me down and took'st me up.
My days do like a shadow pass,
but thou for ever Lord art sure:
And I am withered up like grass,
but thy remembrance still shall dure.
O Lord arise and pity take,
with Sion let thy mercy stand:
Good God even for thy meries sake,
for now the time is full at hand.
For why thy servants Meditate,
upon her stoanes with greeuance just:
To see her lie so ruinate,
deuoid of comfort in the dust.
The heathens, then thy name shall fear,
and earthly Kings thy majesty:
When thou O Lord shall Sion rear,
unto her glorious dignity.
And then all Nations of the earth,
which vex the poor with furious hate:
Shall quake and tremble at thy breath,
when thou shall help the desolate.
This shall be written on Record,
for unborn babes which shall ensue:
That they may lawd the living Lord,
and magnify his judgments true.
The Lord looked from his mighty throane,
and glorious seat of majesty:
That he might hear the playning moan,
of Captives then adiudg'd to die.
That they in Salem might declare,
the glorious name of God the Lord:
How he of Sion took such care,
as with his mercy did accord.
My strength in progress down he brought
and suddenly cut of my days:
To spare me yet I him besought,
till riper age, when life decays.
Thy years O Lord endure for aye,
there is no limmit to thy times:
For thou did the foundations lay,
of heavenly Spheres, and earthly Climes.
Thy handy works shall wear away,
but thou for ever wilt endure:
They like a garment shall decay,
thy years, eternal are most sure.
Thy Servants, Children shall remain,
and their posterities abide:
And they in heaven with thee shall reign,
in earth stand fast and never slide.
Psalm. 130.
OVt of the deep to thee I cried,
therefore O Lord hear thou my voice,
Oh let thine ears to me be tied,
that I in thee may still rejoice.
If thou O Lord wilt be severe,
to note in me what is amiss:
Thy judgments I might justly fear,
dispairing of thy heavenly bliss.
But thou art merciful O God,
and still thy grace does most abound:
To them that reverence thy rod,
thy favor ever will be found.
On thee O Lord I did attend,
and in thy word reposed my trust:
Till thou thy light to me did send,
and raise me up even from the dust.
Trust in the Lord, O Israel,
his mercies rich as sands on shore:
Redemption great with him does dwell,
in bounteous plenty: plenteous store.
Then he from sin will thee redeem,
and ransom home, from soul offense:
Houlding thee in as great esteem,
as Adam in his innocence.
Psalm. 144.
TO my Petitions bow thine ear,
good Lord consider my desire:
O comfort me in dreadful fear,
for thy truths sake I thee require.
With us in judgment enter not,
no man is righteous in thy sight:
O let thine anger be forgot,
and thine Anointed us acquit.
The enemy has vex't my soul,
and cast my life down to the ground:
My boanes in darkness he does roll,
that like a dead man I am found.
Therefore my spirit, is oppressed,
my heart within me grieved sore:
That I can find no quiet rest,
but desolation euer-more.
Yet former times to mind I call,
musing upon thy works begun:
And exercise my self in all,
the wondrous acts which thou have done.
To thee, do I stretch out my hand,
and unto thee my soul does groan:
Even as the dry and thirsty land,
that for her moisture makes moan.
Hear me O Lord, and that with speed.
because my spirit waxes spare:
Hide not thy face in time of need,
least that I fall into the snare.
O let thy comfortable love,
betimes into my soul distill:
And let thy spirit like a Dove,
dwell in my heart and keep me still.
Upon thee only I depend,
direct me in the perfect way:
And guide me to my iourneyes end,
for thou art my support and stay.
Good Lord defend me from my foes,
for unto thee I fly for aid:
Under thy wings hide me from those,
that for my soul, their snares have laid.
Teach me to do the thing a-right,
that may be pleasing to thy mind:
And amiable in thy sight,
that I, thy favor still may find,
Thou art my God and only guide,
which do protect me with thy hand:
O let thy spirit with me a-bide,
and lead me to the holy land.
For thy names sake, Lord quicken me.
and for thy righteousness I crave:
O set my soul from troubles free,
and let it never see the grave.
And for thy goodness sake destroy,
mine enemies that me pursue:
And to my soul would work annoy,
O Lord confound that damned crew.
I am thy servant O my God,
Dear Father guide me with thy rod.
FINIS.
A Mystery to be noted and followed of those that are parting out of this life.
IN the departure of the Lord,
of mortal bodies vital breath: Luke. 22. 41. Mat. 26. 36 Mar. 14. 31

Their lives a mystery worth record,
which he did show, us here on earth.
Who does prepare to die each hour,
must follow Christ, our Savior.
For he the night before he died,
did single out himself alone:
Disciples all he set aside,
and to his Father makes his moan:
His mother dear he leaves with John,
to comfort her when he is gone.
So Christians all when they go hence,
must cast of care of worlds respect: 2 Chro. 32. Isay. 38. 1.

Settling their house with providence,
and then all earthly care neglect:
Leaving all thoughts of common wealth,
which too much men's affections steal.
Commending wife and children all,
to Gods protecting will Divine:
Himself to God Celestial,
betakes from world to Gods design:
Forsaking friends and kinsfolks here,
exempts his heart, from care and fear.
He must then secret be alone,
who will with high Jehovah walk:
Distilling tears with prayers moan,
and seruent sighs with God to take:
His soul and spirit let him commend,
to heavenly joys deuoid of end.
At time of death Christ watch't and prayed,
with earnest zeal and seruencie:
In Olive Mount all Night he stayed,
a place for heavenly secrecy:
He there thrice his disciples warnes,
to watch and pray, against tempters harms,
Even so all they must watch and pray.
with sighs and groans for former sins:
(That from this life depart away,
against temptations, Satan's gins:
Exhorting all, to live to die,
to Faith, sure Hope, and Charity.
Christ bowed his knees it was not enough,
he fell down flat upon his face:
His cries, the heavens pierced through,
to God for aid and heavenly grace:
He twice retired to fervent prayer,
with ardent Zeal in open air.
He bends his knees with humblenes,
who himself, commits to Gods dispose:
He falls flat with lowlines, 2 Chro. 32. Isay. 38. 1.

that takes the love for his repose:
And wholly does himself deny,
fixing his faith in God on high.
As Adam first in paradise,
had seemly corpse without array:
So Christ from Earth on Cross does rise, Genesis 1.

his naked self does them display:
As Brazen Serpent was erect.
so he is lift up for his elect.
Even so that soul that Heaven aspir's, John. 3. 14.

from earths affections must ascend:
Mounting with heart and his desires,
to heavenly life that has no end:
Himself to the world, must crucify,
nayl'd with faith, hope and charity.
This Champion there must combat make,
with Dragon fierce man's enemy:
Till he turn back the victory,
leaving the Lamb tue victory: Reu. 12.

Then victour shall enjoy the nest,
of highest heavens and be possessed.
FINIS
Short Meditations or Iaculatorie prayers, to be had in memory upon several
occasions.
When any sudden fear assayleth thee, pray.
BE unto me O Lord a Tower,
of strength against my mortal foe: Psalm. 60.

O guard and ward me with thy power,
which way soever I shall go:
Then shall my heart and soul rejoice,
in God my Lord with cheerful voice.
If an ill Suspicion overtake thee.
CReate O Lord my heart anewe,
regenerate my spirit within: Psalm. 50.

Suspicious thoughts, which me pursue,
expel, and purge me from my sin:
Still let thine Angels me conduct,
and with thy spirit my soul instruct.
If vndesent sadness perplex thee.
LEt thy salvation be my joy,
confirm me with thy spirit of grace: Psalm. 50.

Let sadness not my soul annoy,
for pensive thoughts too much take place:
Oh let my comforts still reside
in Christ, who for my sins has died.
If vainglory seduce thee.
NOt unto us, but to thy name
all honor (Lord) we attribute: Psalm. 115.

For thou alone deseru'st the same,
what can we to our selves impute?
Oh Lord, thou know we are but dust,
yet we presume in thee to trust.
If despair molest thee.
THou art my hope even from my youth, Psalm. 70.

and from my Mothers womb my guide:
Why should I then despair in truth,
but in thy mercies ever bide:
For thou O Lord wilt still protect,
with consolation thine elect.
If thou be afflicted in mind.
Help me and I shall then be safe, Psalm. 118.

and I will meditate always:
Uphold me with thy strongest Staff,
that I may ever sing thee praise:
Thy wonted love Lord let me find,
to comfort mine afflicted mind.
If Sloth assail thee.
LOrd, with thy power my soul excite, Psalm. 79.

come and confirm me in thy way:
That in thy laws I may delight,
and from thy statuts never stray:
Rouse and revive my drowsy spirit,
that joys with thee I may inherit.
If wrath disturb thee.
OH give me patience Lord, and peace, Luke. 12.

least y^ my soul should lose her crown:
O let thy love to me increase,
and power thy grace and mercy down:
For thou have said in thy behest,
in patience be your souls possessed.
If desire of honor or promotion tempt thee.
LOrd unto thee my heart incline, Psalm. 118.

from greedy gain my thoughts withdraw:
From vanity direct mine eyne,
and rectify me in thy law:
For in thee does all honor rest,
it comes not from the East nor West.
If Gluttony solicit thee.
THy Kingdom is not drink nor meat,
but joy and peace in heaven above:
It Is not the flesh which we do eat,
can profit us without thy love:
Then with thy grace my spirit cherish,
for that is the food which cannot perish.
If any blessing of God happen to thee.
What shall I render to my Lord,
for all his blessings powered on me:
My heart and soul with one accord,
shall laud and praise thy majesty:
All Blessings do from thee descend,
blessed be thy name world without end.
In any grievous persecutions.
IVdge them oh Lord which me pursue,
and ouer-throw my foes in fight:
And with thy sword confound that crewe,
which prosecut me with despite:
Oh be thou still my guard and guide,
defending me on every side.
When thou see thou art forsaken of God.
LOrd, why do thou depart away?
and turn'st thy face out of my sight:
Oh let thy comfort with me stay,
for now O Lord it waxes night:
O let my soul not be dismaide,
to the O Lord I cry for aid.
Against Detractours.
Save me, O Lord, for righteous men,
and truth begin to fail:
There is no truth in tongue nor pen,
detractions now so much prevail:
Confound the tongue and lips of those,
who to deceit themselves dispose.
For our enemies.
LAy not their sin unto their charge,
alas they know not what they do:
But of thy mercies them enlarge,
free them from sin, and Satan too:
Open their eyes that they may see,
and so repent their injury.
If Corrupt flesh provoke thee.
LOrd pearce my flesh with thy true fear,
subdue my wicked vilde desire: Psalm. 118.

I know thy judgments are severe,
in me Lord quench lusts burning fire:
Which sin, God grant all may abhore,
which is the cause of many more.
If labor tire thee.
BEhold Lord my humillity,
and eke my labor do respect:
Forgive my faults continually,
wherein my duty I neglect:
Let neither time nor labor tire,
my thoughts to serve thee with desire.
FINIS
The penitent prays for the Testimony of a good Conscience.
Look down (O Lord) on me poor man,
In thee I live, I move, and am,
O clear my soul and conscience,
That I in thee my peace, may find
Rest to my heart, joy to my mind,
freed my sin and mine offense.
Let me not stretch my conscience,
But trust unto thy providence,
nor by deceit or guile get gain:
Ill gotten goods let me restore,
And of mine own give to the poor,
as thou my portion shall maintain.
From conscience that shall err amiss,
Out of the way of heaueuly bliss,
and has not warrant from thy word:
From all the paths Heretical,
From all the ways Scismaticall,
Restrain, refrain my feet O Lord.
From conscience strict, and full of niceness,
And over curious much precizenesse,
repress mine heart, my soul and mind:
And with traditions new invented,
That are not with thy word indented,
let not my actions be inclinde.
A wounded conscience who can bear,
It Is full of horror dread and fear:
it is an endless perturbation.
A witness torture Judge and Gaile,
It makes our faith and hope to fail:
and lead'th to desperation.
A conscience wicked and perverse,
That none but great sins can it pearse:
and mighty mountains mole-hills makes,
It hinders our Salvation,
It furthereth Obduration:
and sense of sin it from us takes.
Of each good gift Lord thou art giver,
From all ill conscience me deliver,
and ever, and evermore preserve me:
Then I in quietness and rest,
As one of thine whom thou have blessed,
for ever, evermore will serve thee.
FINIS
A heavenly Himme of the joys Celestial.
O Lord that art my propugnacle,
I look unto thy Tabernacle,
where does thy wondrous glory dwell:
By the eye of faith I do behold,
Such joys as noe tongue can unfold:
scarce holy Angels can it tell.
I see the downfall of my foes,
The glory of thy Saints and those,
sweet quiers of Angels shning bright:
Me thinks I see thy Majesty,
Thine honor and high dignity,
allclad in Radient beams of light.
O how I long for to embrace,
The benign kindness of thy grace.
that real rich possession.
Which thou by Charter of thy word,
Do give to them that fear the Lord,
and thereof make prosession.
I mean that high Jerusalem,
The City dwelling for all them,
that shall in endless glory reign:
The City of that holy one,
Has Walls vprear'd of precious stone,
of Pearl the gates, there is nothing vain.
The Temple thou, the Lamb the light,
Noe Sun by day, nor Moon by night,
need there to shine, there is no jar:
But all is peace, all well there do,
Yet subject vassalls there unto,
all Monarks, Kings, and Princes are.
Possessions none impeachment have,
Lordshipps noe care, noe worldly slave,
can take away my right from me:
Love without jealousy is there,
There Is noe distraction, there is noe fear,
there is noe corrupted state can be.
Good shall we be, not persecuted,
Noble, and not as proud reputed,
rich and not robbed nor flattered:
For to enjoy we shall be sured,
For to retaiue we are secured,
Heavens walls cannot be battered.
Take thou ye troubles Lord from mine heart
To me these joys of joys impart,
and me unto this City bring:
That I with all hearts enargies,
In heavens most blessed hierarchies,
may Alleluia to thee sing.
FINIS.
A prayer for a good Conscience.
TO him I Will sing my songs and himmes,
That rides on the Cherubimes,
and heavens does like a Courtaine spread:
My Madrigalls and roundelayes,
Shall be my makers name to praise,
whose mercy does uphold my head.
I lust not drink of Hellicon,
To Poets that I leave alone:
they climb yt high Parnasous mountain:
I will assend to Sions hill,
I long have longd to drink my fill,
of blessed Israells sacred fountain.
Faith, hope, and love, shall be my proppes,
In steed of Aganipes drops,
on me God power down showers of graces
His holy word and spirit Divine,
In stead of all the Muses nine,
my heart my soul and mind embraces.
I seek not grace from graces three,
But beg grace of the Trinity,
early at Morn, at Noone and Night:
I scorn a Sycophants applaudings,
I hate a flatterers base collaudings,
I way not black mouthed Momus spite.
Great God that know each secret part,
To thee I offer hand and heart,
and wait to do thy gracious will:
And thee beseech for Christ his sake,
My meaning well for deed to take,
my heart for Art and cunning skill.
How wise and good is God by this,
Each man may see, that every miss,
in us, and every thought and word:
Both good and bad by conscience,
And power of his spirit influence,
is Regestered and of Record,
Iut all our actions, hit does pry,
Accust'h or excust'h, by and by,
and as a thousand witnesses:
Will speak before the judge the truth,
Of all things done in age and youth,
of justice and all wickedness.
If conscience to Hell does run,
The same to us shall sure be done,
we shall go to, for company:
What thousands say, we need not care,
Do what they will, do what they dare,
if conscience do not test fie.
A conscience good does make us blessed,
It Is cheerful, a continewall feast,
a Paradise of passing pleasure:
The Temple of the holy Ghost,
This makes the blessed Martyrs boast,
and is the Christian treasure.
A conscience good, let us strive to keep,
For though sometimes it seems to sleep,
at judgment it will awake:
And in a book all shall lie open,
Before the judge what is done or spoken,
when we account must make.
FINIS.
The penitent proves that sin is not of God, but of the devil and our
selves.
CVrious discourse, religious rod,
Sins not in God, then not from God,
what is not from him, is not his deed:
Gods works have none enormitie,
We are the works deformity,
all is good that does from God proceed.
He tempt'h to try, not overthrow us,
Yet needs not try, for he does know us.
but it is, that we our selves should know:
From him all is good, from us all is ill,
He makes all good, we all do spill,
our selves, our selves, do overthrow.
In punishments that t'vs are ill,
What he does do, he does it still,
(he is one, the same* and that same one:)
Not doing ought, but by not doing,
In him it is good, to good ensewing,
he will see if we can stand alone.
Gods grace is not difficient,
Sin has not cause ifficient,
and thee to sin God does not make:
Suggestions by the devil are sent,
And there unto man gives consent,
why should not God that man forsake?
Our conscience is sent as a spiall,
Our punishments sent as a trial,
and often times plagues sent as a curse:
God never was to us a debtor,
If all be saved he is never better,
if all be damned, he is nere the worse.
God made all good, that all good can,
Then look into thy bosom man,
an Ambuscado there there does lie:
Of hideous sins by good omitting,
And monstrous sins, by ill committing,
it is there placed by, man's enemy.
A comfor able Himne for the Children of God.
Salvation does to God belong,
He blesses all both old and young,
that are his chosen and elect:
He does defend his Children all,
That are in danger, grief and thrall,
by his good means and kind respect.
He has means all sufficient,
And power all perils to prevent,
to those with thanks do ever pray.
What comfort help or good soever,
We find from him let us parseuer,
and magnify him night and day.
Let us with humble hearts confess,
His mercies, love and great kindness,
with heavenly himnes to God above:
With mirth and joy sing every one,
God heard our souls petition,
and sent his son to show his love:
The Lord receaues and hears our prayer,
He hears and helps us in despair,
be glad my soul, in him rejoice:
Oh spread abroad his holy fame,
With songs Melodious lawd his name,
with heart, with mind, with tongue and voice.
O thou most high God, art not praised
Unless from heart, that praise be raised,
who only know our thoughts and mind:
The glory all must be thine own,
By prayers thy powers are ever shown,
to those by faith thou just do find.
O hallowed be Gods holy name,
Who Heavens made and world did frame,
and man like to his Image pure:
He all his other Creatures blessed,
Fish, Cattle, Foul, and all the rest,
to comfort man while times endure.
FINIS
A prayer against temptations especially fit for a man that finds in himself
a continual Inclination to any particular sin.
OH gracious and most loving God,
who in beginning did Create:
Man to thy shape and image good,
and likeness in most pure estate.
And did him place in holy place,
the garden sweet with all delight:
With mercies and abonnding grace,
dect heavenly with earthly sightes.
And did thy Creatures all ordain,
in heaven and earth man for to serve:
Oh what was man that he should gain,
Gods great respect, him to preserve.
Yet Lord how soon he fell away,
from thee and from original grace:
How gresly did he disobay,
thy secret will before thy face.
Which thou to him did then reveal,
by whose fall, all corruption grew*
And sin shut out true godly zeal,
and earthes corruptions did ensue.
And all things in the earth began,
to disobay him instantly:
By God made good, to comfort man,
who hated him, forsaking thee
By his transgression these proceeds,
of his pollutions Lyneall:
Have all defild their ways and deeds,
and all men tainted by his fall.
Which first offense bred infinite,
sins in corruptions of man's nature:
As I my self both day and night,
do feel and know* most wretched Creature.
Which I confess, oh Father dear,
to whom this chief offense was done:
How Satan's works, in me appear,
who hourly into evils run.
Which are most vilde, most mean and base,
do judge my self of all the worst:
When I behold my wicked case,
considering how I am accursed.
I that confess, I cannot hide,
how most to sin I am inclined:
Known unto thee my God and guide,
who see the secrets of my mind.
Much more the deeds which I commit,
of darkness seen to thee above:
To whose bright eyes both dark and light,
at seasons all, do seem as one.
And therefore find'st out all my sin,
in thought, in action, or intent:
Though by each sin death did begin,
yet thou do promise those repent.
That they shall be forgiven all,
within which number, Lord make me:
Who see my sins for mercy call,
that reigns in me continually.
And as hit were, command me go,
drawn there unto by violence:
By Satan vilde our deadly foe,
that never cease ill pretense.
Who works in me corruptions,
corruptions more pollutions breeds:
Which draws mine affections,
which mind inclines to wicked deeds.
And chiefly to that odious sin,
which makes me weak for to fulfill:
Thy laws and precepts just wherein,
thou us commaund'st to do thy will.
Yet strong and apt for to effect,
those things forbidden by thy laws:
Therefore to kill, Lord sins conflict,
remove from me the wicked cause.
Especially this hedious crime,
that hanges and sticks so fast on me:
That hit do reign no longer time,
which feel it loathsome unto me.
A heavy burden to my soul,
which I cannot shake off at all:
By mine own power or strength control,
but by Gods works parpetuall.
Who works all repentance true,
therefore Lord make me penitent:
With contrite heart my spirit renew,
let loathsome sins thy grace prevent.
For thou Lord see I do commit,
sins as hit were against my will:
Give me therefore power, strength, and wit.
corrupt affections all to kill.
The thoughts whereof we vex and grieve,
and heaps of fear my soul possess:
Despair Attemptes hopes to deprive,
me to devour in all distress.
FINIS.
An exhortation to praise God, and to acknowledge our thanksgiving to him
without ceasing.
WE praise thee God, we knowledge thee,
Our only Lord and Christ to be,
the earth and world do worship thee
Eternal father, Heavenly King,
To whom aloud bright Angels sing,
the thrones and powers thee magnify.
The Cherubins and Seraphin,
To cry to thee do never linne
holy holy, most holy Lord
Of Saboth, God of Majesty,
Heavens full and earth of thy glory,
all Nations laud thy name and word.
The glorious postles company,
The goodly prophets Unity,
the holy Marters noble army:
The holy Church, the world through out,
Does spread the Gospel all about,
the Father of true piety.
Thy sacred true and only son,
The Holy Ghost us comfort won,
thou art of glory King oh Christ:
Thou art the euelasting son,
Of God whose blessed will was done,
in the all people to deliver.
Thou did not then the Virgins womb,
Abhor nor loath that sacred Tomb,
till thou wast borne who^ God sent hither:
When thou the serpents head had broken,
The heavens, Kingdoms gate set'st open,
for true belieuers to come thither.
Thou sit'st on Gods right holy hand,
Thy fathers will do understand,
whence thou shall come our judge to be:
We therefore thy poor servants pray,
Thy sucker* aid, and help that day,
whose precious Blood redeemed us free.
Let them with saints be numbered,
In endless glory comforted,
thy people Lord keep, save and stay:
Bless save thine own inheritage,
Lift up their hearts from age to age,
we magnify thee day by day.
We worship thee, world without end,
This day from sin Lord us defend,
have mercy, mercy on us Lord:
Lord let thy mercy on us light,
Our trust is on thee day and night,
we trust in thee with one accord.
O Lord I put my trust in thee,
Let never me confounded be,
all glory to the Trinity:
To God the Father and the son,
And Holy Ghost all praise be done,
for ever and ever eternally.
FINIS.
Adams fall.
Injurious Adam in thy self accursed,
cease to complain of God and natures thrall:
Since he that made man good, left him at first,
a power to stand, and yet a will to fall.
fetch not thy fault, from heavens determination
but blame thy mind to weak and insufficient:
Sin is no being but a mere privation,
and has no cause efficient, but deficient.
For such is his respect yt all things moves,
yt all things hold there motion and condition:
Error he neither likes nor approves,
but suffers only by a just permission:
So have thou Adam in thy wish rebelling,
Thy faults not fates, nor ought there else compelling.
FINIS.
The Table.
1 A Prayer unto Almighty God to prevent, prepare, and dispose our hearts
rightly unto prayer. fol. 1. 2. 2 A general confession of sins. fol. 3. 3 A
Morning Meditation. fol. 4. 5. 6 7. 8. 4 An Evening Meditation. fol. 9. 10. 11.
12. 5 A Nosegay gathered in the holy Paradise. fol. 13. 14. 15. 16. 6 A
particular confession of a sorrowful sinner. fol 17. 18. 19. 20. 7 An heavenly
Hymn, touching ye nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. fol. 21. 22
8 A prayer in sickness. fol. 22. 23. 24. 25. 9 Precepts of duties. fol. 26. 27.
28. 29. 30. 31. 10 An invocation to God, humbly praying for remission of sin.
fol. 31. 32. 33. 34. 11 A Godly Meditation, wherein the distressed shows that
he is unfeignedly grieved that he has offended God. fol. 35. 36, 37. 12 The
second part of the same Meditation. fol. 38. 39. 40. 13 A prayer wherein the
distressed, humbly confesses his sins, etc. -- fol. 41. 42. 14 The repentant
complains of his horred and grievous sins, etc. fol. 43 44. 15 The
repentant flies unto the mercies of God in Christ, etc. fol. 44. 45. 46. 16
The poor Suppliant visited with great sickness etc. fol. 47. 48. 17 A fervent
prayer unto God, that the repentant may find favor in Christ, etc. fol. 49 50
18 The 1. 2. 3. and 4. parts of the first Lamentation in distres. fol. 50. 51.
52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 19 The 1. 2. 3. and 4. parts of the second
Lamentation in distress. fol. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. 20 A
thanksgiving to God with magnifiing of his holy name, etc. fol. 70 21 The 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7. Lamentation in distress. fol. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76.
77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88. 89 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. 96.
97. 98. 99. 22 The 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. parts of the 8. Lamentation in distress.
fol. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 23 The 1. 2. 3, 4. and 5. parts of
the 9. Lamentation in distress. fol. 108. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115.
116. 117. 24 A Petition to God the Father. fol. 118. 25 Another to God the
Son. fol. 119. 26 Another to God ye holy Ghost. fol. 119. 120 27 Diverse
consolations, showing that the life and time of affliction is short. fol. 120.
121. 28. Of death. fol. 122. 123. 124. 125. 29 The cause of death. fol. 125.
126. 30 Death of 2. sorts. fol. 126. 127.. 128. 31 Although the body dye, yet
they shall live. fol. 129. 130. 32 The death of the Godly is but a sleep. fol.
131. 33 To whom those that die ought to commit their spirit. fol. 132. 34 How
the body is buried, but shall be raised up again at the last day. fol. 133. 35
Remedies to be learned in the sufferings of Christ, etc. fol. 134. 135. 36 An
exhortation to forgive one another, etc. fol. 136. 137. 138. 37 Diverse
consolations, showing that the life and time of affliction is short. fol. 139.
140 38 A consolation for them that suffer for their offenses. fol. 141. 142. 39
A disputation between the Devil and us fol. 143. 144. 145. 146. 147. 148.
149. 150. 40 How the poor and distressed soul being laden with the burden
of sin fervently prays, etc. fol. 151. 152. 41 Seven Psalms of
repentance, commonly called Penitenciall Psalms. fol. 153. 154. 155. 156. 157.
158. 159. 160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 42 A Mystery to be noted of all those
that are parting out of this life. fol. 166. 167 168 43 Certain short
Meditations, or Iaculatorie prayers, etc. fol. 169. 170. 171. 172. 173. 174.
175. 176. 177. 178. 179. 180. 44 A prayer for a good conscience, and a prayer
against temptations. fol. 181 182. 183. 184. 185. 186. 45 An exhortation to
praise God. fol. 187. 188 46 Adams fall. fol. 189.
FINIS.

