THE ART OF RHETORIC CONCISELY AND COMPLETELY HANDLED, Exemplified out of holy
Writ, and with a compendious and perspicuous Comment, fitted to the capacities
of such as have had a smatch of learning, or are otherwise ingenious.

By I. B. Master of the free school of Kinfare in Staffordshire.

ECCLES. 12. 10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words. Printed for
Nicolas Alsop, and are to be sold at the Angel in Popes-head-alley. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN LORD POULET Baron of Hinton Saint George, All
sanctified prosperity.
Much honored Lord,
THose reckonings that are daily added to the score, and run long on without
computation, swell insensibly to an height incredible: of such nature are my
obligations toward your noble self, standing bound not only for the
principal, but the interest, the times and conditions of my lot being such,
that until now my utmost studies and endeavors could never purchase an
opportunity, in person to render the grateful acknowledgements of your
Lordships bounty toward my self, and to present the due homage of mine own
observance: yea, I am by experience sensible of much difficulty to pick out
the times and means of dutiful demonstrations, unless vicinitie of place, and
other conducing circumstances befriend us. Wherefore (my Lord) having with the
long travel of grateful thoughts to your Honor, and desire of public good,
brought forth these two-languag'd twins; I have ventured to deliver them into
your Lordships hands (if they may be welcome) and through them into the hands
of others (if they may be worthy) aiming by them to acquaint the world with my
personal obligations, and thankful cogitations toward your Honor: and if
they (by reason of their subject) shall discover any thing that may redound to
the benefit of many or few, that that also may be reckoned to your Lordship, as
the means of my abilities: unfeignedly withal desiring, that this your bounty,
and all your virtuous actions may be summed up to the glory of God, the author
of every good and perfect gift, both in us, and to us. To whose gracious
tuition my constant prayer shall earnestly recommend your worthy person and
noble family.

Your Lordships in the manifold obligations of dutiful observance, JOHN BARTON.

To the Reader.
THe sacred Scripture (howbeit altogether eschewing, 1. Tim. 6.4. and 2. Tim 2.
14.
and utterly condemning the impertinent use of frothie criticismes, yet) in
beautiful variety, majesticall style, and graceful order, infinitely and
incomparably transcends the most pithie and pleasing strains of humane
Eloquence. From this authority therefore I have made the art of Rhetoric
exemplary; whereunto for the satisfying of the reader, I have premised these
several instructions, partly as apologies to the skillful, for those
additions, contractions, alterations herein made; partly as directions to the
studious.

First, Rhetorica est ars orationis confirmandae, and habendae, etc. Keck. Rhet.

Aristot. Cicero, and alii^ quinque parts Rhetor. constituerunt;Inventionem,
Dispositionem, Memoriam, and Pronunciationem^ sed male. Di^tericus Rhet.
Grammatica pure, Rhetorica ornare, Logica cum ratione, etc. Molina(...).


I say not (according to the received definition) that Rhetoric is the art of
pleading well, howbeit I was about to define it the art of Oratory, which is
equivalent with the former: but I consider, that to an Orator (besides
Rhetoric) Logic and Grammar essentially belong. For together with the
cooking, that is, the dressing and serving up of an oration, wherein Rhetoric
consists, an Orator must have matter and method from Logic; purity of
construction, and words accustomed from Grammar; or he cannot be perfect.
Indeed it is very rare to find a man skillful in Rhetoric, who is not so in
Logic and Grammar; yet I have read some sermon-books stuffed with Tropes and
Figures, which doubtless with a good deliverie would please, yet were very
barren of solid matter. Now because these arts commonly met in a professed
Orator, those that formerly wrote Rhetoricks, Common places to help invention.

Qui figuras grammaticas Rhetorica tradunt, distincta ^rtium praecepta
confundunt. Dict.


put in the Topics of Logic and Figures of Grammar, as essential parts of
Rhetoric. Therefore must the learner, in any pleasing passages of words,
diligently consider to which of these several arts every virtue in them is to
be ascribed. For whose help herein, if this work take, I will annex in future
editions an Appendix of all grammatical figures.

Again, I say not, the parts of Rhetoric are Elocution and Pronunciation; for
both these are but utterance, and neither implie the gesture: as for that their
common acceptance is equivalent with the terms I give, this were tolerable in
case of necessity, not where more significant may be had.

Secondly, I presume, I need not excuse giving of English names, having put the
known names in the Margent, and used them in my Comment: as for changing those
names, good reason. For Tropes and Figures were distinguished by names that had
no difference, Metaphora and Tropus idem sunt apud Aristot.
as Metonymia and Metaphora are both Translation, which is a name general
enough for all the Tropes: neither can I think it but preposterous, to speak of
affections of Tropes before the Tropes themselves; which perhaps they did, that
the examples wherein affections were, might be more fully apprehended, though I
suppose so much at once would rather puzzle the learner.

Thirdly, I thought it strange, that Rhetoricians should be fain to define
Metonymia and Synechdoche, as Plato did a man, Homo est animal bipes absque
pennis, latis unguibus. Substitution is a proper name unto them both; neither
can any name be given to Substitution, which will not as well serve for
Compreh^nsion.
by couching the particulars: nor yet does their definition of a Metonymie
directly teach Elliptick Substitution, nor of the other comprehend the putting
of one kind for an other; yet indeed I found it very difficult to distinguish
them. The truth is, that these two are but one Trope; and but for avoiding
censure of singularity, I would have made them one, as I have annexed them in
regard of their affinity.

Fourthly, whereas I have made Metonymie twofold, Perfect and Elliptick, I say
boldly, that nothing in all Rhetoric does more puzzle scholars, then not being
made acquainted with this difference of Metonymicall examples, how that in
some, a borrowed word supplying the place of a proper, we do no more but change
again, that is, cast away the borrowed word and assume the proper, and they are
resolved: But now again some examples will not suffer a change of the tropicall
word for another, but must be resolved by an addition of some word, containing
the Cause, Effect, Subject, or Adjunct in a general term. Instance in this
speech, That rock was CHRIST: They say truly, In the word CHRIST is a
Metonymie of the Subject for the Adjunct. Well, then say I, Resolve this Trope,
put out the word CHRIST, and render the Adjunct, for which it is put, That rock
was -- what? If they say, CHRIST is put for the sign, then I should say, That
rock was the sign. But this resolution you see is defective: therefore I must
lay both together, the general term SIGN and CHRIST, and say thus, That rock
was the sign of Christ. Now in this example, The Pope spurns Emperors
KINGDOMS off their heads, I need not fetch in the general term to resolve it
by spurns the SIGN of their KINGDOMS, etc. but change for the adjunct it
self, which is ready and complete, Spurns Emperors CROWNS off their heads.

Fifthly, I aver that I have truly referred Pronominations to Metaphors, for
they all carry the force of comparison. Instance, I call an Arch-traitour, a
JUDAS: Now say Rhetoricians, This is by a Synechdoche: for here is Judas, a
particular word, put for the general, TRAITOR. How unlawful this predication
is, and how insufficient the resolution, any scholar will discern; For Judas by
a Synechdoche cannot signify an Arch-traitour, but simply a Traitor. Now make
it a Metaphor, and I have the full meaning. But I will give a more useful
answer: I say therefore, that if this be a Synechdoche, we need no Metaphor;
for I can, by as fair a semblance as this, reduce every Metaphor to a
Synechdoche or Metonymie. Instance, Luke 23. 43. To day shall thou be with me
in PARADISE Shall I say this is a Synechdoche, (...) says (...) (...), Luke
16. 24. (...) ve^e^^^ti do^^^^^ (...) lib. 1. cap. ^. I think (...) it is a
(...) they build (...) o^ wood.
one place of felicity being put for another? Yet why may not I as well as
Butler, call this speech, They BUILD an horse, a Synechdoche? One kind of
structure (says he) is put for another. Again, Psalm. 34.1. The young LIONS
lack. Shall I say, LIONS for FIERCE and GREEDY men, is a Metonymie? For Lion is
the subject, and fierceness and rapine the qualities of a Lion. Yet why not as
well as Keckerman calls this speech, K^ck. Rhe^^ page 153.
Every day is an HOLY DAY to the idle man, a Metonymie? Because HOLY DAY is
put, says he, for a time of leisure and sport, which are appurtenances to an
holy day. Now undoubtedly all these are Metaphors, though Butlers
(...)catachresticall. But it would save much (...) and prevent a deal of
error, no more but to observe when the words bear the force of comparison; for
all such are Metaphors. All Relation in Substitutions and Comprehensions, which
is not true and real, turns to Metaphors. Examples are, Hosea 7.9. Romans 12.
20. Psalm. 41. 3. 1. Cor. 14. 11. Gal. 4.19. Which some would thus re^olve, Gray
hairs, for sorrow^ sorrow for misery, a metalepticall Metonymie of the Ef^ect;
Barbarian, for any stranger Synech. of the kind; Heap coals of fire^ for
^vercome him; Make his bed, for give him ease, Travail in child, for long
after, Metonymies of the Cause. Unless the Example be Metalepti^all, and the
Lu^er Trope a Metaphor, as thus, Ye are Gods circumcision, which word is a
Metonymie put for CIR^UMCISED, which is a Metaphor.

But the learner will find thi^ intricate, before ^e has compared it with the
Tract.


Rhetorician^ have been deceived by a relation Metaphorical in stead of real.
For instance, They PRICK UP THEIR EARS: Let us BREAK THEIR BONDS ASUNDER. In
these examples, would Rhetoricians say, are Metonymies of the Adjunct. For,
PRICKING UP THE EARS is a sign of HEARKENING; BONDS, an Adjunct to
AUTHORITY: But say I, Pricking up the ears, is a sign of hearkening in
beasts. So God has no CORDS, but comparatively; therefore these are Metaphors.

Sixthly, I say also, that those examples which I have referred to an Ironie in
the latter end of the chapter, are truly referred. And either an Ironie must
be made so large (as it well may) to comprehend them, or we must invent another
Trope. Synechdoches they cannot be (though some make them so) for they have no
relation.

Seventhly, I aver also, that Hyperbole and Tapinosis are as flatly different
as the names I give them, although the M^dern or late Writers. Nonnulli
Rhetores, etc. Keck. lib. 2. page 17^.
Neotericks make them one. But says Keckerman, Some Rhetoricians call
Tapinosis Hyperbole in defect, but it is better to distinguish them. What? when
I call a MERE FOOL a SHALLOW FELLOVV; a WICKEDNESS, an ERROR; when I say that
is WARM, that shrewdly BURNS, etc. do I hyperbolize? do I overreach, and speak
beyond my compass? Moreover, they were too short in not observing that these
Affections were often found without being in other Tropes: and so where they
found speeches that were merely hyperbolicall or tapinosicall, they would
refer them to some Trope, though without reason. For this speech, I made my
bed to SVVIMME, Dietericus takes for a Metaphor: but I pray you where is the
comparison? For put case his bed were born up with waters, it were a plain
speech; which being impossible, what is it else, but a notable Hyperbole?

Eighthly, I dare profess, that whatsoever Rhetorical excellency is or can
be in words, is comprised in the Tropes and Figures which I have set down. I
have deliberatively read the most eloquent books, besides diverse Rhetoricks;
yet all the commendablenesse of words I could pick out, would not yield a new
Figure. As Gemination and Reduplication etc. come into Repetition: so
Concession,^ Permission, etc. fall into Insinuation, and so of others.
How all their examples come within compass of my Figures, will easily
appear. But some examples I have, which they never paralel'd, and some things
their Rhetoricks touch not. It had been easy to have made my book confused and
intricate with prolixitie, to have showed much reading and little wit, and
needlessly to have wearied and perplexed my reader. If it be objected, that
specially in those figures of Repetition, Variation, Allusion, there are
various examples, which might have had several names: I answer, if every
phrase, whereunto I could have given a proper term to express the form
thereof, should have been a Figure, Quintilian makes 13 Tropes which Isidore
reckons in his Grammar, page 847. ^ot in his Rhetoric, wherein ^e blames the
Ancients for prolixitie, ut eam lectori admirari in promptu sit, comprehendere
imp^ssibile. Isid. 858. cap. 2. de ^he^.
I should have run in infinitum. And doubtless the copious variety of words
(especially in the Greek tongue) has begotten that difference among authors
that sought to open the arts, which being read by the unskilful, they took
them for so many several Figures, as they found names, and the species of them
for distinct Figures: the confusednesse whereof was by the diligence of the
studious amended by degrees.

And why should not we contract and refine late writers, as they did the
former? I have given general terms whereto all kind of pleasing speech may be
reduced, so that I know no reader, wheresoever he meets with whole heaps of
Figures together, shall find any thing but the spice or composition of what I
have mentioned.

Ninthly, whereas Rhetoricians give diverse rules about delivery, for the
turning of the eye, carriage of the hand, setting of the countenance, framing
of the voice, etc. I dare say, they are needless, insufficient, absurd: for
this varies according to a multitude of circumstances, person, subject, place;
and these particulars are also various. Only I have mentioned the Emphasis;
and truly, if mine observation fail me not, look what faculty a man has in
giving a graceful Emphasis, in like degree he has the gift of the whole
delivery.

Lastly, I expose my Treatise to the view and censure of the learned, as I have
been bold in some things to censure other men's. Whosoever will, may examine the
matter; and whosoever can, may undertake the patronage: although I have imputed
faultiness to theirs, I do not warrant there can be none in mine own. I have
spared to mention the worst I found, and think it might be judged pride and
envy in me to reckon up the contradictions, curiosities, coincidencies,
impertinencies, which are among them. I arrogate nothing to my self in
detecting or amending them. I hold it a duty of this age and nation, As Mr.
Harris taught in that eloquent sermon of H^zek^^^s recovery.
to leave arts more refined to posterity, having so abundant helps. For what I
have altered, I think I could pick my apology out of several authors, whom I
found to be hammering upon those very matters, though (not finding a way out)
they were fain to come again into the common rode. Indeed I had, besides the
advice of my learned friends, the joint assistance of my brother; and that
candle, which we have lighted, we set up to others. Sure I am (Reader) that
this facil art has been found by good wits so imperfectly discovered, that
some things were very intricate, some things very frivolous. How difficultly
and defectively young scholars have apprehended the notions of this art, all
schools have complain^^^ That from the ignorance of Rhetoric (besides many
other inconveniences) gross misco^structions of Scripture have sprung,
experience, ^^stifies. I was opposed with that place in Dani^l, Dan. 4. 27.
Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine INIQUITIES by showing m^rcy
unto the poor. I answered, that in the word INIQUITIES was a Synechdoche^ the
general word Iniquity being put for Oppression, one kind of iniquity,
whereby I clear^^ the place from seeming to confirm the Popish doctrine of
making satisfaction for our sins by our works, for which purpose that place
was alledged^ and showed, that it did import no more then that speech of
Isaiah, Cease to do evil, learn to do well. I will not multiply examples.
Reader, thi^ Tract having been proved and approved, as a sufficient mean to
instruct any indifferent wit, that will bestow pains in serious meditation and
conference with a scholar in the knowledge of the art, I am bold to commend to
thy use, if tho^ shall need it; and commit unto thy love, if tho^ shall esteem
it. Farewell. If thou say I have made my gates too big, know I did it that
my book might have the better passage. But now I shut them up, resting thine in
the hope and endeavor of better services,

JOHN BARTON.
THE Art of RHETORIC.
CHAP. I.
Sect. I.
RHETORIC is the a skill of using dainty words, and comely deliverie, whereby
to work upon men's affections.

It has two parts, Adornation and Action.

Adornation consists in the sweetness of the phrase, and is seen in Tropes
and Figures.

A b Trope is an affecting kind of speech, altering the native signification
of a c word.

In a Trope are to be considered, 1. The Kinds, 2. The Affections.

There be four kinds of Tropes: 1. Substitution, 2. Comprehension, 3.
Comparation, 4. Simulation.


The Comment.
a) That is to say, It is the Art of trimming, decking, garnishing the Oration,
with fine, witty, pithie, moving, pleasing words, cla^ses, and sentences in
the passages and style of speech.

b) This word Trope, is as much as to say, a borrowed speech, so that when any
word leaves his native, that is, his proper signification, ^^d assumes a
borrowed, we say it is Tropicall: Although some speeches are grown so common,
that they are taken to be proper; as, Correct me, O Lord, for Chastise me, O
Lord, the Effect for the Cause: but so usual, that few perhaps would note it.
c) See Note 6.

Sect. 2.
Metonymi^.
SUbstitution is a borrowed speech, by an accidental a relation.

It is either Perfect or Elliptick.

b Perfect Substitution is, when the word wherein the Trope lies, is cast away
in the c Resolution. And it is fourefold.

1. First, of the Cause. 2. Of the Effect. 3. Of the Subject. 4. Of the Adjunct
or Accident.

Substitution of the Cause, is two ways: 1. First, when the d Efficient cause
is put for the effect. Genesis 4.7. 2. Cor. 9.5. Micah 7.9.
a Sin lies at the door. Ezra 4. 7. The writing was in the Syrian a tongue.
1. Tim. 6. 6. Godliness is Isa. 60.17.
a gain. So when the Author, e Principal, or Famous in a thing is used for
that which is wrought or brought in by him, or named from him. Act. 21.21. They
are informed tha^ thou teach to forsake a Moses. Psalm. 14.7. Psalm. 6^.^.
a Jacob shall rejoice, and a Israel shall be glad.

2. Secondly, when the Material Cause is used for the Effect. Psalm. 105. 8. He
was laid in^ E^cl^^. 1^.^.
iron.

The Comment.
a) Relation is, when a thing in any respect has reference to another. An
accidental Relation I call that, which continues only while they are Tropes,
or otherwise they are not necessarily considered together; as, Sin is put for
horror and punishment, Tong^^ for language, Gain for gainful, Moses for the
Law, Jacob and Israel for the Israelites, Iron for fetters. Now, there may be
sin, where there is no horror or punishment considered. Gain may be
considered abstractively, that is, by it self, and not in a subject: as there
may be virtue, justice, though there were none just; so there may be a tongue
without language, as in beasts: Jacob might have been, though no Israelites
after him; Moses, though no Law; Iron, though no fetters. But in Synechdoches
there is a true Relation considered, Metonymia ^ consentanels fit, Synechdoche
Logica oritur. (...)
whether they be Tropes or no: the Genus must have his Species, and the whole
his parts, and contrarily. These do subsist one in another. In a word,
Substitution is from things that have but an affinity; Comprehension from
things that have a consanguinitie.

b) Note from this example, Note 1.
that in some Metonymicall Relations, the Cause and Effect, Subject and Adjunct
may perhaps be hard to conceive: for unless to scholars, it is not so ready
to be apprehended, Though this would be more readily resolved elliptically, the
bringer of gain. And so i^ should be Substitution of the Effect. See Sect. 5.
that gain is the cause of gainful, though indeed it is: for what makes
gainful but gain?

c) The resolving of a Trope is the changing of it to a plain speech: for
instance, The writing was in the Syrian language. This now you see is made a
plain speech, by putting away the borrowed word tongue, and resuming language,
which was meant by tongue. This I call a Perfect Resolution, because I come
directly to my word again.

d) The Efficient Cause is, whereby a thing is made or done; and the Material
Cause, whereof.

Note 2.
e) Note that it is one thing when the Principal is considered as the Cause,
another as the Subject, another as a Part. Instance, Israel fought with Amalek.
If here by Amalek and Israel I mean their succeeding race, themselves being
dead, ^^ Imperator consideretur ut causa, etc. est Metonym. Referri au^em
possunt hac exempla ad Synech. Diet. Rhe^. lib. 1.
it is a Metonymie of the Cause: but if I mean by them their armies, themselves
being at home, it is a Metonymie of the Subject. If I mean by them the
Israelites and Amalekites, led by them into the field, themselves being
partners in the battle, it is the Part for the Whole.

Sect. 3.
SUbstitution of the Effect is, when the Effect is used for the Cause. 2. King.
4.10. a Deuteronomy. 28.61. Psalm. 53.5. Ephesians. 5.11.
Death is in the pot. Ioh. 11. 25. I am the g 1. Ioh. 5.4. Ezekiel. 18.30.
resurrection.

Substitution of the b Subject is, when the Subject is used for the Adjunct.
Ephesians. 4. 22. Cast off the old c man. Thus the place, or seat, and container, are
used for the placed, or contained thing. Psalm. 78. 87. Their d heart was not
right. Genesis 6. 11. The e Act. 18.18.
earth was corrupt before God. 1. Cor. 11. 26. As often as you drink this f Prove.
1.14.
cup, ye show the Lords death.

The Comment.
a) Death is put for poison, which is the effect of poison. b) The Subject is
that thing, whereunto something is said to appertain or belong: and the said
appurtenance is called the Adjunct or Accident. c) Man is put for nature. d)
Heart, for the affections there seated. e) for people. f) for wine. g) I think
good here to note, Note 3.
that it will perhaps be difficult sometimes to hit upon a term whereby to
resolve a Trope perfectly: for indeed when I first considered of this example,
I could resolve it with addition thus, I am the cause or causer of the
resurrection; but the term Raiser I could not think on a good while. And at
first view I thought these Elli^tick also, Exodus 21. 21. Ephesians. 5. 16.

Sect. 4.
SUbstitution of the Adjunct is, when the Accident is used for the Subject. 1.
Tim. 4. 16. Neglect not the gift given by the hands of the a Romans 11.7.
presbytery. Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory save in the b cross
of Christ. Thus the Adjunct of time is put for the subject measured by it. Job
32. 7. I said c days should speak, and the c multitude of years should show
wisdom. So the sign or f circumstance is used for the thing betokened. Romans
13.4. He bears not the d sword in vain. So also the quality is put for the
subject. Ecclus. 10.6. g Job 15.34.
Folly is set in great dignity.

The Comment.
Note 4.
a) First let me note, that in some examples it skills not, which you call the
Subject, which the Adjunct: for instance, Let their table be a snare, that is,
Let their meat be a snare. Table may be either the Subject or Adjunct. And let
me note further from the first example set down, Note 5.
that some Tropes may be variously resolved, according to men's several
judgments. As some may think Presbytery, here being put for Presbyters, to be
the Effect for the Cause; for what makes the Presbytery, but the Presbyters?
though I rather take it to be an Adjunct to Presbyters. b) Cross, for
sufferings. c) Days and multitude of years, for the aged. Whence note, Note 6.
that the borrowed speech lies sometimes in more then in one single word. For
there is a single word, which Logicians call Vox incomplexa, as Peter, an
horse, virtue, gentle, etc. And there is a double word called Vox complexa, as
Peter the Apostle, an horse all white, despised virtue, gentle in behavior.
These you see run into one, and do of diverse single ones make up double ones;
so that having said, A Trope is always in one word, I mean not that it must
always be in one single word, but sometimes in a double word, which, upon the
matter is but one word; as here the double word multitude of years, is in
purpose no more then the single word Days. And as the words of the Trope are
sometimes complexive; so also are the words of the Resolution, as in Proverbs,
or otherwise. d) Note hence, Note 7.
that a choice word may best befit a Trope, where in the Resolution the same
word cannot serve: as Sword is put for Authority, being a sign thereof; yet
we cannot say, He bears not the Authority, but he has not the Authority in
vain: so that in Resolutions sometimes there must be alterations in some joint
words of the clause, which yet agree well to the Trope. e) By sign is meant
any token, or resemblance, as the ornament, habit, title, ceremony, etc. f)
See the tenth note. g) That is, the Fool.

Sect. 5.
ELliptick Substitution is, when the Cause and Effect, or Subject and Adjunct
do meet in the Resolution.

This is also, First in the Cause. Heb. 11. 39. They received not the Acts 8.
28.
b promises.

2. In the Effect. Genesis 25.23. c Two Lev. 17. 14.
nations are in thy womb. Thus when an Epithet implies a Cause. Psalm. 100. 1,
Make a Luke 11.14. Isa. 17. 11.
d joyful noise.

3. In the Subject. 1. Cor. 10.4. That rock was Exodus 12.11.
Christ. And so when that is spoken of the Subject, which is intended of the
Adjunct. Deuteronomy. 32. 10. He found him in the e howling wilderness.

Also when the Subject is put for the Subject so qualified. 1. Cor. 16.13. Quit
your selves like Matt. 6. 24.
f men. So when an Epithet implies the sign. 1. Sam. 14.2. Put on 1. Tim. 2.9.
g mourning apparel.

4. In the Adjunct. Deuteronomy. 9.21. And I took your Psalm. 71.5.
h sin, the calf that you had made, and stamped it to powder, etc.

Thus when that is spoken of the Adjunct which is intentionally referred to the
Subject. Mal. 2. 15. She is the i wife of thy Ezekiel. 23. 3.
i covenant, and the wife of thy i youth. Deuteronomy. 33. 2. From his right hand went
a k fiery law.

The Comment.
a) Ellipsis is as much as to say, a leaving out: I call therefore those
Ellipticall Substitutions, wherein some word is left out, and in the Resolution
therefore must be added again. It is true, that the defect of words in the
language is the cause of some Ellipticall Substitutions: as if there were any
word promiseds, the first example would be perfect. It is true also, that a man
may resolve some perfect examples Elliptically, if he please; as, Death is in
the pot; that is, the cause of death is in the pot: but Ellipticall examples
are such, as must of necessity be res^lved with addition, so that in the
Resolution both the Substituting and the Substituted word are mentioned
together, as in the examples following.

b) Promises, for fruits Effect.
of the promises: Cause.
for they did receive the promises; but the fruits or accomplishment of them
was in the time of the Gospel.

c) Two nations, for the fathers. Cause.
of two nations Effect.


d) joyful, for joyful Effect.
- making. Cause.
An Epithet is any Adjective joined to a word to express his signification. So
here joyful signifies making joyful, and so implies the Cause in the word
making: for noise it self cannot be said to be joyful. e) Howling is here
attributed to the wilderness, and meant of the wild beasts, which are an
Adjunct to the wilderness: as if you should say, Wilderness Subject.
of howling beasts. Adjunct.
f) Men, for valiant Ad^^^c^.
men. Subject.
So we say, Will you come to supper with those hands? meaning those foul
Adjunct.
hands. Subj^^^.
g) Mourning, for sign Adjunct.
of mourning. Subject.
h) Sin, for the subject Subject.
of your ^inne. Adjunct.
For it cannot here (though otherwise it might) be resolved perfectly thus, I
took your calf, etc. because of the subsequent clause. i) Here wife is
attributed to covenant and youth, which are but accidents to the person: as if
he should say, the wife of thee Subject.
by thy covenant Adjunct.
in thy youth. Adj^^^^.
k) Fiery is here given to the law, which is intended of the Subjective place
of deliverie; as if he should say, The law Adjunct.
from fiery Sinai. Subject.
So you see that Ellipticall Substitutions are but a kind^ of half
Substitutions, one word being put for more, not one word for another, as in
perfect Substitutions. This ex^^ple was forg^t to b^ ^xpl^ined in (...) place.
l) For sign Adjunct.
of Christ. Subject.


CHAP. II.
Sect. I.
^ynechdoche.
COmprehension is a borrowed speech by a natural relation. It is fourfold.
1. Of the Genus. 2. Of the Species. 3. Of the Whole. 4. Of the Part.

Comprehension of the Genus is, when the a general word comprehends the
particular. Psalm. 72. 8. He shall have dominion from the Ph^^ ^. 13
river to the ends of the earth.

Comprehension of the Species is, when the particular word implies the
general. Matt. 23. 24. They devour b widows houses. Isa. 2. 13. The day of
the Lord shall be upon every ^ cedar of Lebanon, and every b oak of Basan.

The Comment.
a) A General word is that which comprehends singular words under it: The
G^nu^ here is tak^^ sometimes for the logical Species, though Keckerman be
more curi^^s.
as a Beast comprehends an Horse, a Cow, a Lion, etc. A Stone comprehends an
Adamant, a Flint, a Peble, etc. So River here, which comprehends Thames, Trent,
Tyber, etc. is put for Euphrates. b) They did not only devour widows houses,
but any sort of poor people; and not only houses, but any kind of goods. The
Prophet means every Cedar, and every Oak, though he adds a seeming
limitation: Quoties limitatio additur, Tropus tolli^ur. Keck.
and commonly when to a general word a limitation is added, Rhet. But it is
where the limitatio^ is intenti^^all also, not merely verbal.
it makes it particular. If I say, The disciple, for John, it is a Synechdoche
of the Genus; but if I say, The beloved disciple, for John, it is a Particular,
and no Trope. Note, Note 8.
that sometimes in English, though I cannot directly find it so in Latin, one
particular word is put for another: as Matt. 5. 33. Whosoever puts away his
wife, except it be for fornication, etc. where forni^ation, being one manner of
Incontinency, is put for another, viz. Adultery. For the married by
uncleanness are guilty of adultery properly^ not fornication. So also one part
is put sometimes for another. Psalm. 16. 11. Thou will not leave my soul in
hell; where soul is put for body. Note also, Note 9.
that Rhetoricians make such speeches belong to this Trope, as we find 2.
King. 5. 27. He went out of his presence a leper as white as ^now. He might
(say they) have said^ As white as wool, milk, chalk, etc. so that by ^now is
meant any white thing. But I rather think this is no Trope, because he is not
tied to mean any other thing; nor need I seek any such Resolution of the word
to understand his me^^ing.

Sect. 2.
COmprehension of the whole is, when the whole implies the part^ Acts. 2. 2. It
filled the whole a house where they were sitting.

Thus the plural^ number for the singular^ Ma^t. 27. 14. The same things also
the b thieves cast in his teeth.

Comprehension of the part is, when the part implies the whole. And this is
five ways.

1. When a piece or member is put for the whole bulk or body. Ephesians. 4.9. He
descended into the lower parts of the c earth. 2. When a set number is put for
an uncertain. Levit. 26. 8. d Five of you shall chase an d hundred. Rev. 12. 5.
Of the tribe of Judah were sealed d twelve thousand. 3. The singular number for
the plural. Number. 24. 22. The e Kenite shall be wasted. 4. One circumstance for
another or more. Deuteronomy. 28. 30. Thou shall marry a wife, and another man shall
John 12. 32. 1. Sam. 14.26. Deuteronomy. 16. 9.
f lie with her. 1. Sam. 24.3. Saul went in to g cover his feet. 5. One or few
of a company, band, sect, etc. for many, or all. Exodus 17.13. h Iosuah
discomfited Amalek.
The Comment.
a) House is put for chamber. b) Thieves for thief. See Luke 23.39. c) Earth
for world. d) He means, A few of you shall chase many^ and by twelve thousand,
S. John understands a great number. This may also be referred to a Synechdoche
of the Genus; one number being put for another of the like kind. Much ado
there is about the reference of these Synechdoches, whereas indeed it is more
trivial then deserving a controversy, there being little excellency in them,
unless when they are Hyperbolicall. Some of them need not to be reckoned for
Tropes, for like reason that I gave of others in the last note of the last
section: as, Twenty good turns will not win the ungrateful; for I may mean
just twenty. e) Kenite, for Kenites. f) Not only tie with her, but defile
her: for both these circumstances are intended by that one. g) The action of
covering the feet is not intended it self, but expresses another circumstance,
viz. doing the office of Nature. Note, Note 10.
that if that circumstance which is put for another, be a natural, that is, a
necessary circumstance, which always accompanies the action it intends, then
it belongs to this Trope: but if it be but an accidental circumstance, with
which, or without which the action uses to be done; then is that circumstance
an Adjunct, not a Part, and belongs not to a Synecdoche, which is by a
natural Relation, but to a Metonymie, which is by an accidental Relation, as
I have said: Instance, Prove. 17.18. A man void of understanding strikes hands,
and becomes surety. Here by striking of hands is meant, gives his word. This
circumstance is accidental, and therefore an Adjunct unto promising: for
without it a covenant may be made. h) Iosuah is put for himself and his army.
Note, Note 11.
that sometimes those that are but a part by Relation, are put for all; as,
Genesis 20. 7. God healed Abimelech: the plague that was removed was barrenness,
so that the women only could be healed; he was of their number by relation
merely. So the Lawyers speak in the cause of their Client, as if it were their
own, though mere relation make them a part. And if this seem rather an
accidental relation then a natural, you may refer it to a Metonymie of the
Adjunct, as some Rhetoricians do. Note also, Note 12.
that there is an Ellipticall Resolution in many Synechdoches: as, Paul puts
the palace indefinitely for Neroes palace. Note again, Note 13.
that there are Synechdoches in Epithets, when that is attributed to the whole,
which is intended of the part, or contrariwise: as, What naked and curled
gallants are these? that is, What gallants are these with curled hair and naked
breasts? So, I opened your letter with doubtful hands.

CHAP. III.
COmparation is a borrowed speech, Metaphora.
carrying the force of a ^ comparison. Ier. 5.8. Every mana Job 1.10. Heb.
12.29. Deuteronomy. 32.14.
neighed after his neighbors wife. Hereto appertain all b Anthropopathies.
Genesis 6.6. It b Mal. 3.16. Act. 17.3^.
repented the Lord that he had made man, and it b grieved him at theb heart.
All Pronominations either from the Person, Nation, or Place. Matthew. 17. 12. ^
Elias is come already. Ezekiel. 16.3. Thy father was an c Amorite, and thy mother
an c Hittite. Rev. 18. 2. c Babylon is fallen. Parabolicall and Proverbiall
speeches, and all of g like nature. Mark 4.3. The e 2. Sam 12.2.
sower went out to e sow. Ezekiel. 18.2. d The Eccl. 4.12.
fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge.

The Comment.
a) A Metaphor is nothing but a comparison drawn into a word. His comparison is
drawn from horses, which neigh for lust. b) Anthropopathies are speeches
attributing to God according to the manner of men, as properly God has no
heart, neither can be said to repent or grieve; but these things being said of
men, God is expressed to us by them. c) Pronominations are proper names that
are borrowed, as John Baptist has the name of Elias for the likeness^ of their
gifts, being such an one as Elias was. So Israel is said to have the original
from the Amorite and Hittite, from the similitude of their conditions with
these nations. ^ue pertinent omnes Parabolae in Evangelio propositae, Fabulae
AEsopi and Poeti^^^, quae nihil ^liud sunt quam Metaphorae allego^icae. Di^t.
^lib. ^. Rhet.
So Rome takes the name of Babylon, from the paritie of their manners. d) The
fathers have sinned, and the children are punished. e) A preacher went out to
preach, etc. g) By such like speeches, I mean any that have a comparative
exposition; as mystical speeches. S. John calls War the red horse, Famine
the pale horse, Death the black horse. So types, emblemes, riddles, fables,
when we use them comparatively. Note 14.
Note that sometimes a speech is borrowed, though but supposed of the thing
from whence it is taken: as Psalm. 78. 25. Man did eat Angels food. Angels have
no food, but as supposing they had, of the daintiness it was so called.

CHAP. IIII.
SImulation is a Trope, Ironia.
whereby under color of one thing a man insinuates another, or else derides.
1. King. 22.15. a 1.Sam. 25.3^
Go and prosper. 1. King. 28.27. Either he isa 1. Cor. 10.12 Insinuation and
Derision are both in that example Job 12.2.
talkking, or he is a pursuing, etc. Ioh. 9.25. Whether he be a sinner or no, b
Genesis 3.22.
I cannot tell; but this I know, he has opened mine eyes. 1. Cor. 3. 4. c Who
is Paul? who is Apollos?

The Comment.
a) As under color of saying, Go and prosper, the Prophet means the contrary,
Go and perish. And that was but a pretended speech of Eliah: for he meant not
as he spoke, but spoke in mockage. b) The simulation which lies in this speech,
is apparent from the 31 verse: for the blind man contendeth to prove, that
Christ could not be a sinner: and the speech is like unto this, I know not
whether this iron be hot, but I am sure it has burnt my fingers. So there are
Ironies in contradictions, O holy idolatry! O prodigious virtue! He blushes
like a black dog. He quakes like an oven. c) The simulation that lies in this
speech is this, that whereas the Apostle, to avoid exception, names himself
and Apollos, his intent was (as appears chap. 4. verse. 5) under color of
those names to touch those Ministers whom the Corinthians did too much applaud,
and to whom they did ascribe above what was meet: for Paul and Apollos were not
magnified amongst them, but rather despised: under color of these names does
the Apostle tax the preachers they extolled. So that there are Ironies in a
Person, as in a Metaphor, when I call an hypocrite a Nathanael, a coward an
Hector: or by an Inversion, as, How chance you beat your master to day? Or by
Insinuation, as, I am so proud, none of my neighbors may speak to me: or by
insinuative Interrogation, as, Was I e're burnt i'th'hand? or by Negation, as,
I never took money to forswear my self, meaning it still to him or of him we
speak: or by St Phil^^. 19.
Preterition, as, I will not tell you how drunk you were yesterday, how you
swaggered and staggered, and the boys flockt about you, etc. when yet I do
tell him thus. So in these speeches, Perhaps you may find him from the
Alehouse. So, He is the wisest man in the town, when all the rest are out; when
I mean, He is the veriest fool in the town. So, They were alive, They were
rich; when my purpose is not to say what they were, but thereby to insinuate
what they are now. So when I say, If I had said so, I had lied; when I intend
that he lies in saying so.

CHAP. V.
THe Affection of a Trope is the quality, whereby it requires a second
resolution. These Affections are five: 1. Abuse. 2. Duplication. 3.
Continuation. 4. Superlocution. 5. Sublocution.


Abuse is when a Trope is very far fetched. Catachres^s.
Heb. 12. 1. Seeing we are compassed with a a Deuteronomy. 32.24. Luke 12.50. Hos. ^4.
2.
cloud of witnesses. Exodus 13.19. Thou shall not seethe the kid in hisa mothers
milk.

Duplication is, Metalepsis.
when there is a plurality of Tropes in one word. Matthew. 21.10. All the b
Phil. 1. 16^
city was moved. Mal. 4. 2. The Sun of righteousness shall arise with
healing under his c wings.

d Continuation is, when Comparation is continued. Allegori^.
Matt. 3.10, Every d Ma^^^. 3.1^
tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into
the fire.

Hyperbole.
Superlocution is, when a Trope is stretched beyond moderation. By way of
amplification, Psalm. 119. 136. e Number. 23.10^
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, etc. Or by way of extenuation or
restriction. 1. Sam. 24.14. After whom does the king pursue? After a e Psalm.
22.6
dog? After ae flea?

Tapinosts.
Sublocution is, when a word speaks below the intention. Matthew. 25.24. Lord, I
knew thee an f hard man.

Note 15.
Note that these two latter Affections are found without Tropes. 2. Sam. 2. 18.
Azahel was light of foot as a John 21. 25. Heb. 11. 12. ^ud. 20. 16.
g wild roe. Isa. 49.2. I have labored in g Psalm. 105.15. Hyperbole and
Tapinosis being ^found^ without T^opes, are to be judged Tropes themselves,
because they bring in a borrowed sense.
vain, I have spent my time for g naught. Jude 14. Behold, the Lord h comes.
So also in Sublocution, 1. Cor. 10.5. But with many of them God was not i Psalm.
68.8.
well pleased. Hos. 4. 4. This people are i as they that strive with the
priest. This Sublocution either in a Trope, or out of a Trope, is when we mean
a thing by way of eminency. Mal. 2.14. She is thy k ^sther 3.10.
companion.

The Comment.
a) Which you may understand by resolving the several examples following: for
there is found in them not only the borrowing of the word, but that joined
with a further Rhetorical virtue: as a cloud of witnesses is not only to be
considered as a Metaphor, but as an unusual, strange, and streined Metaphor,
not obvious and congruous. The like is to be said of mother, which is very
abusively given to a dumb creature; yet these abusive speeches skilfully
drawn, do adorn much. b) City is first put for Jerusalem, by a Synechdoche of
the Genus: and then Jerusalem for the Ierusolomites, by a Metonymie of the
Subject. c) Wings is put for beams, a Catachresticall Metaphor; and beams for
merits, another Metaphor. d) Rhetoricians teach that Tropes of any one kind
coming together make an Allegory; yet again they give this rule, that the term
of the same comparison may not be changed: as to say, These plants may become
corner-stones one day. Now I say, if it spoil an Allegory, only to change a
piece of it, how can words of no dependence at all make an Allegory? Therefore
an Allegory is, when Metaphors are continued, or else heaped together in the
same comparison; as here tree, that is man; fruit, that is works; hewn down,
that is, condemned; cast into the fire, that is, thrown into hell. All these
are in one comparison. And in the 12. of Eccles. From the second verse unto the
fifth, there are diverse Metaphors, but all upon the same subject, to wit, the
description of old age: yet if any will contend, that the prosecuting of
particular Metonymies, and will not say of Metonymies or Tropes in general (a^
Rhetoricians have affirmed) do also make an Alleg^rie, I will not altogether
gainsay them: for it is indeed comely to continue still Metonymies also of the
same kind: as in this example, it is more pleasing to say, The scepter as well
as the sheep-hook must go to the grave, then to leave out one of the Adjuncts,
and say, The scepter as well as the shepherd must go to the grave. But I leave
it to the judgment of the reader. e) Rivers is a Metaphor; so dog, and flea.
f) And Hyperbole and Tapinosis are directly contrary: for that is when we do
overspeak, and is ever discerned by a limitation, or restraining, whereby to
resolve it in such like words, Nay not so; as, Nay not rivers, though abundance
of tears: Nay not a dog, or a flea, though a mean person. But a Tapinosis is an
underspeaking, when we mince, or forbear to speak to the full; and is discerned
by an assenting, or an enforcing to resolve it by, in such like words, With a
witness, At least, I may well say: thus here by hard he means a rigorous and
austere man, as Luke expresses it, chap. 19. 21. Therefore well might he say
hard. And as there is Amplification, and Extenuation in an Hyperbole; so there
is in Tapinosis: as this, A living of an hundred pounds per annum is worth
thanks, is Extenuation: But this, This Cure is not worth above an hundred
pounds, is Amplification. g) For there is many times this Affection of over or
underspeaking, when otherwise the words are all plain: As swift as a wild Roe;
there is none of the words borrowed, only there is an overreaching in them:
he was very swift, but so swift he could not be. So, not altogether in vain,
though for little good. h) Here also is an overreaching speaking in the
present time. i) Here is only an under-speaking. He might well say, Not well
pleased; for he was highly provoked. So he might well say, They were like those
that contended with the priest; for they were very those. k) The wife is the
companion indeed, for she is the man's chief, principal, and nearest companion.

CHAP. VI.
THus much of the Tropes. Now follow the Figures.

A a Figure is an affecting kind of speech without consideration had of any
borrowed sense. A Figure is twofold: Relative and Independent. The bRelative
figures are six. 1. Repetition. 2. Variation. 3. Gradation. 4. Correction. 5.
Allusion. 6. Composition.

Repetition is the recitation of somewhat in the sentence, sometimes by
Continuation, Judge. 5. 12. ^ Awake, Awake Deborah, ^ Awake, Awake. By
Transition, Hose. 2.^1. I will hear the ^ heavens, and the he^^ens shall hear
the earth, and the earth shall he^re the corn, etc. By Amplification, Psalm.
145. 18. The Lord is nigh to c all that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in truth. By Connection, Isa. 3. 24. c In stead of sweet smell, there shall
be a stink; In stead of a girdle, a rent; In stead of well-set hair, baldness;
In stead of a stomacher, a girdle of sackcloth, and burning in stead of beauty.

Variation is a pleasant fruitfulness of words, added only for varieties
sake. Psalm. 14.7. d Psalm. 7.16.
Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. Isa. 1.4. f A sinful nation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters. And verse 17. ^ Relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead
for the widow.

^^nax.
Gradation is, when the immediate succeeding clauses transcend each other in
signification. 1. John 1. 1. That which we h Exodus 15.9. ^udg. 5. 27. ^ude 12.
have heard, and that which we have seen, and our hands have handled of the
word of life. Judge. 5. 30. To Siserah, ^ a prey of diverse colors of
needle work, of diverse colors of needle work on both sides^

Correction is the reenforcement of the clause last uttered, ^panosthes^
by the subsequent. Gal. 3. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? i if it
be yet in vain.

Allusion is a delightful harping upon words. 1. Tim. 6. 6. k But godliness
is great gain. Matt. 8.22. Let the k dead bury the dead. 2. Tim. 4. 2. (...) k
Romans 12.
(...). 2. Cor. 4.8. k (...). 2. Cor. 6.10. As k poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. 1. Tim. 3.16. God was k
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.

Composition is a smooth linking together of select words and clauses. Psalm. 3.
24. In stead of sweet smell, there shall be a stink; in stead of a girdle, a
rent; in stead of well-set hair, baldness; in stead of a stomacher, a girdle
of sackcloth; and l burning, in stead of beauty.

The Comment.
a) The learner must carefully distinguish between a Trope and a Figure; though
in our common speech we confound the Terms, and the difference between them is
this, that a Trope cannot be without a borrowed sense; but a Figure may be,
whether the words are borrowed or proper. Rhetoricians indeed gave this
difference, that a Trope was in a word, and a Figure in a clause or sentence;
but observe all the examples, and this will be found false. b) These five first
I call Relative figures, because in every one of them there is a reference of
words which makes the elegancie. The other Independent, because no part of the
clause brings in another; but the whole clause is jointly and independently
cons^dered. c) These examples of Repetition, though they be of several sorts,
need no explanation. d) This you see is the very same thing, but spoken in
diverse terms. f) Here he also expresses the same purpose with variety of
words. g) One of these terms Relieve, judge, or plead for, would have served
the several clauses; but to vary terms is far more pleasing, for using the
same words breeds satietie. h) Here is a climbing of the speech; To see is more
then to hear, and to handle is more then to see. A work of diverse colors is
somewhat; of needle, that is more; on both sides, that is yet more. i) Here the
latter clause is so inferred, that it recalls the former, and causes it to take
a deeper impression. But indeed Revocation is more powerful, when there is a
direct Revocation; as thus, ^r Harris in ^ezekiahs ^^^very.
We are now redeemed, justified, sanctified, glorified in him. Redeemed,
justified, sanctified, glorified? What things are these? And Mr. Smiths
personation of Nebuchadnezzar has in it a pretty Revocation: Did I call it
great Babel? I will call it great Babel: Did I say, I built it? I will say, I
built it: Did I add, For the honor of my Majesty? Let it go, For the honor
of my Majesty. Note 16
Note that some speeches have a spice of Gradation and Correction together.
Romans 8.34. It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again. Yea, and in
some speeches, two, three, four, or more Figures may be compact together: the
same speech may carry both an Exclamation, Diversion, Reservation, Allusion in
it, or the like. This thou can not choose but note in the examples
throughout, and wheree're thou read. k) Allusion is a very large and witty
figure. Sometimes we allude to what is forespoken: as in the first example the
Apostle alludes unto the speech verse 5. So we allude in the mentioning of
another words, or of our own that are known words; as if one should begin a
speech thus, If I had not ploughed with your heifer, etc. alluding to Samsons
words: so in the inversion of a clause, as, The poor have ever lived hardly,
but now they hardly live. Sometimes we allude unto the sense, when the word
has a double construction, as in the second example. So in these, ^ish. Hal^^
The Rhei^ists can no more abide that proposition converted, then themselves;
The ash is an emblem of unprofitable prelacie, which bears nothing bu^ Keys.
The Vulgar ^all this desca^ting upon words.
We are all saints by calling, and some of us but by calling. Physicians live
by other men's pains. Sometimes we allude unto the sound, as in the third and
fourth examples: yea if it be but the keeping of the letter, as thus, There is
a difference betwixt the sins of weakness, and the sins of wilfulness.
Labor not to please the ear, but pierce the heart. Sometimes we allude to
sense and sound both; as, Those things we should most set-by, we most set by.
Sometimes we allude in the choice of words, that have a pretty correspondence,
answering and suiting with one another, as in the fifth example; and so thus,
Go and seek thine entertainment, where thou have lost thine honesty. How much
better were it to be with the sheep of Iethro, ^ish. Hall.
then with the wolves of Israel! If he had said, with the tigers or bears of
Israel, it had been all one for his meaning, but had been nothing so neat.
Sometimes we allude to the pace or measure of words, as in the last example;
The clauses are all of alike size, which makes them run very pleasantly.
Sometimes we have allusions both of the sound, sense, and pace together. l)
There are ^ virtues in this Figure; the one intimated in the word smooth, that
is, such a collocation and well-ordered disposition of the word, as does av^id
harshnesse, and pleases the ear with a^ harmonious consonancie of syllables,
as in the example is plain: For if the last clause had keep the form of the
precedent thus, And in stead of beauty, burning, it would have sounded more
unpleasantly, but that transposition of the words gives a grace unto them. The
other virtue intimated in the word select, is a judicious choice of words,
sometimes of a monosyllable, dissyllable, or more syllables, sometimes being
more full or fit in regard of more consonants or vowels for the place and use
intended, although otherwise of equal ^ignification. So that this composure of
words is like some frame of joined ware, the joints and parts whereof are so
truly proportioned and fitted, that the whole coupleth fightly together,
without gaping or unevenness. Note 17
Now true it is, that to teach election of words, when to use long words, when
short, where to choose a word that begins with a vowel, where with a consonant,
which to make the precedent, which the subsequent, I say, though for this end
sundry rules might be given, as also in all other Figures and Tropes, so that
the multitude of rules would have sweld a volume too big: yet because little
but the Theorie of Rhetoric can be learned by Art, and the Practick is the
gift of Nature, I have thought it a fruitless, yea an hopeless attempt (as is
discoursed in Tullie de Oratore) to teach the practice of Rhetoric. For ever
when it is not natural but affected in us, to dra^ and compose Tropes and
Figures, we fall so far short of the goodlinesse of Oratorie, as a forced
action from a natural deliver^ So that herei^ only Discretion, Observation,
and Exercise must be our guides. And the notions of Rhetoric (as has been
proved and approved) are herein fully discovered, that the ingenuous consulting
with any sch^lar, may attain the exact understanding of them.

CHAP. VII.
THe independent Figures are six. 1. Description. 2. Diversion. 3. Reservation.
4. Exclamation. 5. Personation. 6. Insinuation.

^eriphr^si^.
a Description is a a complementall dilatation of speech, which is two ways. 1.
By a Circumstance. 2. By a Circumlocution. Eccles. 10.20. A bird a of the Romans
6.12. Judge. 5. 24. Iam. 1. 23.
air shall carry the voice, and a that which has Deuteronomy. 32.25.
wings shall tell the matter.

^postrophe.
Diversion is, when abruptly breaking off the matter in hand, we speak of
another. Genesis 49.18.b Judge. 5. 21.
I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.

^pos^opesis.
Reservation is an abrupt breaking off, withholding part of our mind. 1. King.
21.7. c Isa. ^. 19.
Do thou now govern the kingdom of Israel^ -- Arise, etc.

Exclamation is a speech expressing some conceived passion or affection of
anger, ^epho^o^^^^
joy, desire, admiration, doubt, scorn, insultation, objurgation, etc. Psalm.
42. 2. d When shall I come and appear before God! Romans 12. 33. O the depth of
the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Personation is, Prosopopoei^^
when we feign a person e speaking or hearing; or a thing, as a person. Psalm.
16. 10. f Thou 1. Cor. 15. 32. Eccles. 7. 16.
wilt not leave my soul in hell, etc. 2. Sam. 1. 25. g O Psalm. 11.1^
Jonathan thou wast slain, etc. Iud. 9. 8. h The trees said unto the Olive, Do
thou reign over us; but the Olive tree said, etc. 1. King. 13. 2. ^ O Altar,
Altar, etc.

Insinuation is a subtle winding into the Affections to beget good liking,
attention, or consent. By k Compellation, k Occupation, k Appeal, k
Anticipation, etc. Romans 12. 1. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God. 1.
Tim. 2. 7. I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not. 1. Cor. 11.13. 2. Cor.
11.^1. Ac^^ 26.8.
Judge in your selves, is it comely, etc. Acts 26. 29. I know that thou
beleevest.

The Comment.
a) Description here I take larger then Periphrasis, for that indeed is but
Circumscription; and by Complementall dilatation, I mean ^ine spreadings and
fillings of speech^ either by Circumstance, which is an addition of words in
the setting forth of a thing, not expedient for the matter, but for ornament;
as in the former of these clauses it had been sufficient, and all one for the
matter, to have said simply, A bird shall carry, etc. that addition of the air
is but a neat Complement, or filling of speech: and these circumstances are
many times comprehended in an Epithet; as if he had said, A flying bird shall,
etc. Flying is but a superfluous circumstance to the mat^er, yet it adorns
much. So in these speeches, Blessed shall Iael be among women in the tent.
David vows to kill all Nabals house, to the dog that lies at his door. Or by
Circumlocution, which is a phrase of speech: a fowl is in this wise described,
that which has wings. So that description of dying, by David, I go the way of
all the earth; and that of Solomon, Man goes to his long home, are very fine
Periphrases. b) Jacob was foretelling what should befall the several tribes:
in the midst of his prophecy, he suddenly breaks off into this ejaculation,
which depends not upon the precedent matter. Note 18.
Note here also that there is an elegant Diversion in the person. Psalm. 34. 12.
What man is he that desires life? Keep thy tongue from evil: he should have
said, Let him keep his tongue from evil: but he turns to the second person;
for the more personal any application is, the more forcible it is. c) Betwixt
Israel and Arise, to make the sense perfect, there wants some such words as
these, And can not get a vineyard? and those words are much more forcible by
the reservation of these. For it is not every Eclipsis that makes a
Reservation, as some idly teach. In play-books, where these Figures are much
used, they are noted thus -- d) This Figure is plain enough, Note 19.
and is commonly noted with this (!) Note that of the nature of an Exclamation
is a pithie sentence in the close to wind up the passage, which Rhetoricians
call Epiphonema: as, Psalm. 49. 20. where the Prophet having discoursed of the
licentious folly of self-admiring worldlings, shuts up thus, Man being in
honor, and understanding not, is like the beasts that perish. e) Any way
speaking, whether objecting, answering, or communing. f) This David speaks not
of himself, but personating Christ. See Act. 13.35. g) Here David speaks, as if
it were to Ionathans face. h) Here Iothan brings in the trees speaking, as if
they were men. i) Here the Prophet speaks to the altar, as if it were a person,
and heard him. k) Compellation is loving, sweet, and beseeming language, as you
see in the first example. Occupation is not (as many ^each) the bringing in of
an objection, for that is rather a personation; (as, O but we are not
book-learned: Thus the Preacher objects many times, personating ignorant
cavillers) but it is when we slily forestall prejudicate thoughts, as in the
second example the Apostle prevents by that protestation, the scruple of
misdoubting his calling^ The other examples be plain. Note 20.
Now lastly you must note, that happily there may be some examples added to
most of the Figures, that will be found somewhat after another manner, As
apples of the same t^ee may differ in color, figure, bigness, and perhaps
somewhat in taste. ^^e the epist.
even as there is some difference betwixt the examples given. For instance; To
Repetition I might add a repetition in manner of the burden of a song, as in
the 136 psalm. To Correction I could add correction by way of counterfeit
mistake, as thus, These Iebusites, Jesuits I would say. To Allusion I might
add allusion by a purposed mistake, as Summers said to King Henry, Your
Frauditours, Conveyers, and Deceivers, and such officers, get all your money;
for Auditors, Purveyers, and Receivers. To Insinuation I might add
insinuation by concession, apology, simulation, etc. And so of other examples
and other figures; all which are so plain and so easy to be apprehended, that
doubtless the distinguishing of them into so many species would rather obscure
them, and puzzle the learner, then be any help to the understanding thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
THus much of Adornation; a word of Action.

Action is a part of Rhetoric exercised in the gesture and utterance.

Gesture is the comely carriage of the body; whereof nothing is needful to be
spoken.

Utterance is the sweet framing of the voice; of which we will note only that
which we call a Emphasis, which is the elevation of some word or words in the
sentence, wherein the chief force lies. Psalm. 76. 7. ^ Thou, Thou art worthy to
be praised.

The Comment.
a) As in every word some syllable is pronounced more acutely; so in every
clause some word is uttered with more vehemency then the rest, as the first 2
words in this clause must be. Now when we put many Emphases together, the
sentence is very moving. Romans 8. 38. Neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, etc. all these must be pronounced Emphatically.

FINIS.
RHETORICES ENCHIRIDION.
CAP. I.
RHETORICA est ar^ poliendae and habendae Orationis, ad incitandos hominum
affectus.

Ejus duae sunt parts, Exornatio and Actio. Exornatio in Tropis and Figuris
lo^ cum habet.

Tropus est, quo vox a nativa significatione in alienam immutatur.

In Tropo considerantur, primo Genus, secundo Affectiones.

Genus Troporum est quadruplex.

1. Metonymia, 2. Synechdoche, 3. Metaphora, 4. Ironia.
CAP. II.
MEtonymia est Tropus, quo vox ex accidentali relatione ad aliam significandam
traducitur. Estque vel Perfecta, vel ^lliptica. Metonymia perfecta est, quando
vox Tropo affecta in Resolutione abjicitur. Estque quadruplex. 1. Causae. 2.
Effecti. 3. Subjecti. 4. Adjuncti.

Metonymia Causae fit duobus modis. dolorem ex oculis effundunt foeminae.
Lacrymas.


1. Sic cum inventor, effector, author, aut primus and clarus in re aliqua, pro
inventis, effectis, aut rebus illis quibus nobilitatus fuerit, usurpatur; ut,
Vini.
Implentur veteris Bacchi pinguisque ferinae.
Ignem, and Metalepti-(...) candelam.
Vulcanum in cornu gerit.


Auditu vestro.
2. Sic, cum Causa instrumentalis ponitur pro Effecto; ut, Haec non sunt digna
auribus vestris.

Gladio.
Quin morere, ut merita es, ferroque averte dolorem.
^atern^.
Vulcanum in cornu gerit.


Sect. 2.
MEtonymia Effecti est, cum ex Effectis causa significatur; ut, Sanguinem
inflamm^t ebrietas Vinum.
Scipio Africae clades. Vastator.


Metonymia Subjecti est, cum ex subjecto res adjuncta significatur; ut, At
illum Hesterni capite induto subiere Quirites. Pil^^.


Sic cum locus, seeds, and continens, pro rebus locatis and contentis
usurpantur; ut, Nihil cerebri, Nihil ingeni^ nihil pruden^tiae. Hispani cum
Anglis.
nihil cordis habent improbi. Hispania cum Anglia aeternum sancivit foedus.
Totum ego ebibam poculum. Potum.


Metonymia. Adjuncti fit, cum Adjunctum locum occupat Subjecti; ut, Ne viro
dominetur colus. Hunc Battum Vicinia tota vocabant. Foemina. Vicini (...).


1. Sic cum nomina virtutum and vitiorum pro bonis and malis viris usurpantur;
ut, Quid non ebrietas designat? operta recludit. Ebrius.



2. Item cum tempus ponitur pro rebus tempori subjectis; ut, Aspera tum positis
mitescent secula bellis. Asperae generaciones.

Est opus ardentem fraenis arcere juventam. Iuvenes.



3. Postremo^ cum signum ponitur pro re signata; ut, Cedant arma togae. Fasces
summam apud populum Romanum obtinebant potestatem. Bellum paci. Consules.


Sect. 3.
ELliptica Metonymia est, cum v^^bum proprium and mutuatum concurrunt simul in
resolutione. Estque primo in Causa; ut^ Lego Virgilium. Virgilii opus.


Secundo in Effecto; ut, Deus est omnium vita. Causa vitae.


Sic cum Epithe^on causam includit, G^lid^m re^^dens, praecipitem reddens,
nobilem r^dden^^
ut g^^idus timor, praeceps ira, nobilis virtus, etc. Ubi notandum, Metonymiam
Ellipticam per unicum verbum aliquando posse resolvi; ut^ Praeceps ira, id est,
Praecipitans ira; quae vox includit, Praecipitem reddens.

Reges and Regi^^ Britannici Londinense mercatorisi adornant. S^atuae Reg^^ and
Regi^^r^^.


1. Sic cum illud, quod Adjuncti proprium est, Subjecto attribuitur; ut,
Milites radiantes circundant murum. Radiantibus ar^i^ instructi.


2. Cum Subjectum etiam ponitur pro Subjecto ea qualitate imbuto; ut, Istis
accumbis manibus? ^i^ illo^is.


3. Porro, cum aliquod Epitheton signum denotet; ut, Ingenuum habet vultum.
(...) in^^^^ium.


Denique, cum possessor pro re possessa ponitur; ut, Ego eo die casu apud
Pompeium coenavi. Domum (...).


timor. Objectum ti^^^^is.


Sic cum illud quod Adjuncto attribuitur proprium est Subjecti; ut, Mortalia
temnitis arma. ^.


CAP. III. De Synechdoche.
SYnechdoche est Tropus, quo vox ex naturali relatione ad aliam significandam
traducitur^ Estque quadruplex. 1. Generis. 2. Spaeci^i. 3. Integri. 4. Membri.

Synechdoche Generis est, cum vox generalis pro particulari ponitur; ut, Exire
ex urbe Consul hostem jubet. ^


Synechdoche Speciei est, cum vox particularis generalem designat; ut, AEoliam
venit loca foetae furentibus Austris. (...).

Hoc lippis and tonsoribus notum. ^


Synechdoche Integri est, cum totum ponitur pro part; ut, Aut Ararim Parthu^
bibet, aut Germania Tygrim. ^

Sic, cum numerus pluralis pro singulari; ut, Nos populo imposuimus, and
Oratores visi sumus. ^go impo^^^, and (...) sum.


Synechdoche Membri est, quando ex membro integrum significatur; ut, Ridiculum
ca^ut. ^


Involvens umbra magna terramque polum que. (...)

1. Sic, cum numerus certus ponitur pro incerto; ut, Heus, tribus verbis te
volo. (...).
Si centum mihi darentur linguae, (...)
haec digne satis explicare non potui. 2. Item cum singularis pro plurali; ut,
(...)
Romanus clarus in armis. Hostis habet muros. (...)
3. Tertio, cum altera circumstantia locum alterius sortitur; ut, Quis hodierno
die suggestum scandit? Quot accumbebant hic? (...) est.
4. Postremo, cum primus coetus familiae, (...)
sectae, etc. universos note^; ut, Caesar Pompeium superavit. ^^^sar and
exercitus suus, P^^po^^^ and copi^ as suas.

CAP. IIII. De Metaphora.
MEtaphora est Tropus a simili ad simile^ ut, Est opus ardentem fraenis a^^^re
juv^nta^^ Latrant Oratores, non loquuntur. Hic juvenas comp^rantur ^quis
indomi^is.


Canibus, quia sine ratione. More homi^um^
1. Huc referuntur primo Anthropopathiae; ut, Deus odio habe^ impro^^^.

2. Antonom^siae a persona, gente, aut loco ductae; ut, Qualis fuit I^us, and
qualis fuit Croesus.
Irus and est subito^ qui modo Croesus erat.
Hic sane vere est Crete^sis (...) casus -- Tendimus in Latium -- Illic fas
reg^^ Mendax, quales erant Cre^enses.
resurgere Trojae. Similia Troja^u^ regnis.


3. AEnigmata, fabulae and hujusmodi; ut, Matter me genuit, eadem mo^ gignitur
e^^ me. Gallus gallinaceus, dum vertio s^ercorari^m, offendit gemmam, etc.

^ubius sum u^^um inco^^^m teneam, ^eluti qui ^u^um auribus ^ene^.

Verum, quale ^utab^tur (...) ^ipode (...).


Proverbia; ut, Lupum auribus teneo. Eu^^^pode dictum.

CAP. V. De Ironia.
IRonia est Tropus, Ironia 3. R^latis.
quo oppositum ex opposito significatur; ut, Tu mihi pater, ego tibi filius;
and pare^o tibi ut par est.

Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla refertis Nullam^ sed potius turp^^
^^decus and (...)

Tuque puerque tuus, magnum and memorabile nomen,
Una dolo divum si foemina victa duorum est.
Quid non mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames? Profana.

Fit etiam cum nos ea tacere and mittere simulamus, (...), Praeteritio.
quae tamen eloquimur; ut, Atqui illud tenebricosissimum tempus incuntis
aetatis tuae Patiar latere, licet impune per me parietes in adolescentia
perfoderis, vicinos compilaris, matrem verberaris.

CAP. VI. De Troporum Affectionibus.
AFfectio tropica est ^^terior Tropi virtus.

Affectiones autem ^unt quinque, 1. Catachresis. 2. Allegoria. 3. Metalepsis.
4. Hyperbole. 5. Tapinosis.
Catachresis fit, cum Tropus est durior aut inaequalior; ut, Vir gregis ipse
caper deerat. Si maritus gregis, mitiori Metaphor^ uteretur.


Allegoria est Troporum ejusdem generis continuatio. Educat discipulos suos e
schola sua, u^ prodeant rabulae loquace^.
Corax Orator excludat pullos suos e nido suo, ut evolent corvi clamosi. Sine
Cerere and Libero friget Venus. Sine pane and vino amor friget.


Metalepsis est Tropi in uno verbo multiplicatio ut, Pro spica, Syn. spica pro
legere, Synleges pro aestate. Met. aestas pro (...), Syn.
Post aliquot mea regna videns mirabor aristas.


Hyperbole fit, quando plus dicimus quam velimus intelligi. Haec fit vel
Auxesi; ut, Sulcavit cutem regis: vel Miosi; ut cum homunculum Pigmaeum voco.

Tapinosis est, cum volumus plus subintelligi quam dicimus; ut, -- Etsi nullum
memorabile nomen
Foeminea in poena est --
Extinxisse nefas tamen, and sumpsisse merentis
Laudabor poenas, etc.


Hanc autem habere suam Auxesin and Miosin, ex Anglicis constat exemplis.
Notandum est praeterea has duas Affectiones in vocibus, ubi nullus est Tropus,
reperiri; ut, Me miserum, quanti montes volvuntur aquaru^


^ustris Nept(...) filius.

Phalaride.


Iam jam tacturos sydera summa putes. Saevior es tristi Busiride, saevior illo

Qui falsum lento torruit igne bovem.

CAP. VII. De figuris.
FIGURA est exornatio Orationis, nulla I^ ea ratione habita Tropicae alicujus
virtu^^^ Figura est duplex, Relativa and Absoluta. Relativae Figurae sunt sex;
Repetitio, Variatio, Gradatio, Correctio, Allusio, and Compositio.

Repetitio est alicujus in sententia recitatio; Heu heu fugaces, Posthume,
Posthume, Epizonxi^.
labuntur anni.

Pierides vos haec facietis maxima Gallo: Anadiplosi^.

Gallo, cujus amor tantum mihi crescit in horas.
Te dulcis conjux, te solo in littore secum, Anapho^^.

Te veniente die, te decedente canebat.
-- Creed mihi, si te quoque pontus haberet, Epis^rophe^

Te sequerer Conjux; and me quoque pontus haberet.
Hujus ero vivus, mortuus hujus ero. ^panalepsis^

Crudelis matter magis, an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque matter.
Variatio est jucunda quaedam verborum Quod si fata virum servant, si vescitur
aura
AEtherea, nec adhuc crudelibus occubat umbris.


Gradatio est, cum clausulae sequentes immediatas Climax
ut, Veni, vidi, vici.

Quod libet id licet his, and quod licet, id sati^ audent;
Quodque audent faciunt: faciunt quodcunque molestum est.
Correctio est, qua priorem clausulam per Epanorthosis.
ut, Filium unicum adolescentulum habeo: Ah I (...) dixi? habere me? Immo
habui, Chreme; nunc habeam necne, incertum est.

Erat hoc mihi dolendum, sed multo magis illud, quod inimicum meum, meum autem^
Immo vero legum, judiciorum, etii, atque t^triae, etc.

Pa^ono^^siae.
Allusio est, qua aliquid prius dictum captamus. Aliquando enim ad sonum
alluditur; ut, Leve est miserias far; perferre, grave^ Hoc etiam fit, cum vel
nostra, vel alioru^ verba antedicta captamus. Ita Ovidius inducit Mercurium
facete rusticam Batti tau^ologiam imitantem: sic Battus, Sub illis Montibus,
inquit, erant, and erant sub montibus illii^ Cui Mercurius, Me mihi perfide
prodis? Me mihi prodis? ait. Sic si quis poemata scribens^ nec non sibi altiora
quaedam aut gravior^ tractanda proponens, carmine Virgilia^ uteretur, Pierides
Musae paulo majora^ ^^^imus.


Fit etiam cum voces in s^atentia inv^^tantur; ut, (...). Alii quod pollicentur
tarde praesta^, tu quod praestas tarde polliceris^ Aliquando sensum captamus;
ut in illo Ciceronis ad Hortensium Oratorem, qui cum defensionis mercedem a
Vario acceperat Sphingem argenteam, Marco Tullio obliquias quid atque
involutius locuto, dixit, Non didici solvere ^nigmata: Atqui (inquit Cicero)
Sphingem habes domi.

Nonnunquam etiam numerum sive quantitatem clausularum captamus; ut, Quis in
voluptatibus inquinatior? quis in laboribus patientior? quis in rapacitate
avarior? quis in largitione effusior?

In aliquibus and sonum, and sensum, and quantitatem simul captamus, quod est
facile observatu.

Compositio est concinna and auribus delectabilis Ingrata esse^ auribus ha^c
sententia, s^ juxta naturalem constructionem ordinaretur. Sed de hac
Collocatione Oratoria lege Doctiss. and Ornatiss. illum Dom. ^larkum in suis
formulis oratoriis.
ut, Doctrinae radicem esse amaram omnes nimis experimur: sed dulcissimos ejus
postmodo fructus degustamus.

CAP. VIII. De Figuris absolutis.
FIGURAE absolutae sunt sex; Descriptio, Diversio, Reticentia, Exclamatio,
Perso^atio, and Insinuatio.

Descriptio est luxuriosa verborum dilatatio, Pleonasmus.
cum parents mei, qui me genuere, filium suum non agnoscant?

C^ronam^
Vidi regium capitis decus cum capite rap^um.
Apostrophe.
Diversio est digressio sermonis ad ali^d quam instituta oration requirit; ut, Et
auro vi potitur. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis, A^^^ sacra fames.

Ecphonesis. Irrisionis. Optationis. Desperationis. Imprecationi^.
Exclamatio est Oration exprimens subitu^ aliquem animi affectum; vel
indignationis, admirationis, gaudii, doloris, etc. ut, O clementiam
admirabilem, atque omni laud, praedicatione, literis, monumentisque decorandam!

Heu quae me tellus (inquit) quae me aequora possunt Accipere!

Et procul, o miseri, quae tanta insania, cives?
Epiphonema.
Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem!
Aporia.
Quid faciam? roger, anne rogem? quid d^inde rogabo?
Ego te, furcifer, si vivo -- Quos ego -- sed motos praestat compone^ fluctus.


P^os^popoeia, ^ictio perso^^^.
Personatio est loquentis aut audientis pe^sonae fictio, vel rei alicujus
tanquam person^^ ut Horatius Satyra prima Mecoenatem inducit audientem.

Qui fit (Mecoenas) ut nemo, quam sibi sorte^
Seu ratio dederit, seu fors objecerit, illa
Contentus vivat, etc. versibus vero sequen^^^ bus, fingit multos aliorum vitae
rationem suae praeferentes.
O fortunati Mercatores, gravis annis
Miles ait, multo jam fractus membra labor.
Contra Mercator, etc.
Hosne mihi fructus, Ter^am h^c fingit loque^^^^om.
hunc fertilitatis honorem
Officiique refers, quod adunci vulnera aratri
Rastror umque fero, totoque exerceor anno?
Parce venturis tibi, mors, paramur; S^^^c^ hic inducit mortem audientem.

Sis licet segnis, properamus ipsi.
Insinuatio est, qua quid praejudicii ab auditorum

At vos obsecro (Auditores benevoli) patientes mihi praebeatis aures dicturo ea
quae attentione vestra nec indigna, Hic of^^cios^ compellatio^ ne sese
insinuare videtur.
nec Reipub. omnino in^^mmoda fuerint.

Cuncta equidem tibi, rex, fuerint quaecunque Hic ^ect^ ^^cupatione, ^^ non
sibi concili^ret ^idem.
fatebor
Vera, inquit, neque me Argolica de gente negab^.
Si ita haberet se tuares, quid consilii aut rationis inires? Hic ap^ellatione
a^ ali^^.

At si ego idem affirmassem, mentitus essem. Hic Ironi^.

Et procul, o miseri, quae tanta insania, cives? Hic Interrogatione, qua^
vocant Er^^^^^^n.

Creditis avectos hosts? aut ulla putatis
Dona ^arere dolis Danaum? Sic notus Ulysses.
CAP. IX. De Action.
ACTIO est decora orationis formatae recitatio. Consistit autem Actio vel in
Corporis gestu, vel in Voce.

Actio, corporis gestus, est decens membrorum in elocutione moderatio.

Actio vocis, est apta vocis in pronunciatione conformatio: ubi imprimis est
Emphasis observanda, quae est illarum vocum pronunciando elevatio; in quibus
praecipua clausularum virtus perspiciatur; ut, Tu dominus, Tu vir, Tu mihi
frater eris.


FINIS.
Introduction to Learning; OR, A SURE GUIDE To the ENGLISH Pronunciation and
Orthography: In plain PROSE for the Ease, and familiar VERSE for the Pleasure,
as well as Profit, of the Learner.
Containing much more on those Subjects than any other Book, in a Method never
before attempted; and by which All who can Read may learn, without a Teacher,
to Speak and W^ite English as Correctly as they that have had a Liberal
Education.

Contrived so as to amuse and exercise the Ingenious, improve and delight the
Less-Knowing, clearly instruct the Ignorant, and allure Youth to a Love of
Learning; though chiefly designed for such GROWN Persons as have had but a
^lender Education, and are desirous of further Improvement.

To make it of General Use are added, I. An alphabetical Collection and clear
Distinction of above a Thousand Words nearly alike in Sound, but different in
S^nse and Spelling. II. A large Table of Words, with their Meaning, made
different in Signification by adding E Final III. An Explanation of
Abbreviations, Notes of Reference, and other Marks which often occur in Books
and Writing.


By SAMUEL HAMMOND, Schoolmaster in NOTTINGHAM^ Author of the Complete and
Comprehensive SPELLING-DICTIONARY.

NOTTINGHAM: Printed for the AUTHOR^ By SAMUEL CRESWELL.


