GREAT BRITAINS, Great Deliverance, from the great danger of Popish Powder By
way of Meditation, upon the late intended Treason against the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and all their Royal issue: With
the high Court of Parliament at Westminster, there to have been Blown up by
the Popish Faction, the fifth of November, 1605. If God of his great mercy had
not prevented the mischief.

Psalm. 5. verse. 11. Destroy thou them, O God, Let them perish through their
own imaginations: Cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness, for they
have Rebelled against thee. LONDON Printed for Arthur Johnson, at the Sign of
the white Horse, over against the great North door of Paul's. 1606.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince, Henry: by the grace of God, Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester: and Heir apparent of the Crown and
Diadem, of this Kingdom of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
PArdon me (my gracious good Lord, and dear Prince) if out of a loyal heart I
present unto your Princely view, what I conceived upon these late intended
Treasons, in solace of my soul, after the Lord had made the land so glorious
by deliverance: I say Deliverance out of the hands of cruel enemies, who
struck at our fairest tree, to have cut it down: both root, bole, and
branches, if the Lord had not been propitious. And because your excellency is
the highest strain in all expectance, and Heir apparent to that Crown and
dignity, whose undoubted right, they have so wronged by sinister thought,
word, and work, as in former ages the like was never devised in any Nation,
nor (by the grace of God) ever shall. I have made bold in these few leaves,
and lines, to lay open the danger, with the deliverance; and the rather to your
Highness: for that in feeling sort, you may justly say, Quorum pars magna fui;
I have had my part of both: for man has endangered me, but God has diliuered
me. If in the delivery and project of this my speech, your Highness shall
find less Method, then Matter, I hope your clemency will bear with my
passionate heart, more affected to grieve for them, who devised the mischief,
and to joy for our selves that missed it, then I can well express without a
troubled style. One says well, Vt luctus sic laetia, loquntur leaves, ingentes
stupent. As are our sorrows, so is our-solace, in their mediocrities: they
speak, but in their extremities they are silent, and say nothing. What marvel
then: if this our rauishment of so great joy for the delivery, and deep
grief of horror because of the danger: either enjoin me silence, or if I
speak, make me to utter my thoughts with such passion as little passes of the
Method, so it meet with matter, to express the meaning of a melting heart,
Nescit ordinem amor, Love is lawless: and a love thus boiling, how can it but
shed over, and keep no current, other then in your Royal acceptance, ever
seasoned with such heavenly sufferance, as is gracious both to God and man:
Digna prorsus and rara virtus, humilitas honorata; It is a rare virtue when
humility is honored, and honor is humbled: the blaze whereof I saw in your
Princely countenance, when at your Highness Court at Saint James, it pleased
your excellency to lick ^p the dust of the Sanctuary there, (upon the Lords
day:) and after the Sermon ended, to yield such grace in public to the
Preacher, as that he might kiss your Princely hand: which ever sithence has
struck so great an impression of exceeding love, and loialtie in my poor
heart, as by the grace of God, I shall never leave to pray for your Highness,
as I am most bounden: and also by all means, study, how either my love, or
life, may express the service and duty I owe for so gracious an aspect. Gold
and silver I have none: such as I have, I give: in the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, be you established. Yet if it please your good grace to receive this
simple New-yeares gift, with the least acceptance, and as the first fruit of my
labors in your highness service: It may be I shall with Ianus, look backward
to the old year, and out of my small store, offer a pearl of an higher price.
Til when, and ever, I pray God safely to keep your Royal person, to his
glory, your own comfort* and Englands joy.

Your Graces Chaplain, most humble at command: W. Leigh.

Great Britains, Great Deliverance, from the great danger of Popish Powder
THe Papists of these our days, falsely called Catholics (unless it be in this,
that they be universally evil) have ever since the first year of Elizabeth,
our late Queen of famous memory, even to this day, endeavored the subuersio^
of their dear Country, to set up their Babel of all confusion: And have sought
by all possible and potent means to make this Church and Country, (the noblest
of Nations) an Akeldema, or field of blood.

Witness all their Rebellions that have been raised since that time, either in
England, Ireland, or Scotland, ever fed with the gross Viands of Popish Bull,
and Indulgence, fetched from Rome, by Saunders, Morton, Felton, Edmond Campion,
and Robert Parsons, most or all factious Priests and Jesuits, and since spread
and divulged by the poisoned breath of thousands of their Seminaries, vermin
of the Church, and bane of Christendom.

These have done much, and devised more against the state then ever was thought
upon in elder times, and not so much by open hostility, as secret treasons,
excommunications, and co^fiscations, against the lives, souls and goods, both
of Prince and people, who were not pleasing to their devotions.

But of all that ever were, this last devise of Gunpowder to blow up all, was
most detestable, devilish, and damnable, as wherein hell was shaken, with all it
furies, to have effected their thrice bloody practice, with this fiery
resolution, of their angry Goddess Juno. Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta
mouebo.

If God will not, 2. King. 8. 11. 12. etc.
the devil shall. Whereupon when I do think, it is with me, as it was with
Elisha, when he looked upon Hazael his person, and saw in his countenance his
intended cruelty toward the Israel of God, he looked upon him steadfastly, till
Hazael was ashamed, and the man of God wept, and Hazael said; Why weepeth my
Lord? Whereunto the Prophet answered, Because I know the evil that thou shall
do to the children of Israel: for their strong Cities shall thou set on fire,
and their young men shall thou slaie with the sword, and shall dash their
Infants against the stones, and rent in pieces their women with child. Then
Hazael said; What is thy servant a dog, that I should do this great thing? And
Elisha answered; The Lord has showed me that thou shall be King of Aram.

We have steadfastly looked upon you, O ye Romish Aramites, more cruel then
Hazael, and less compassionate then he, we have wept over your tyranny as
Elisha did, and ye are not ashamed, as Hazael was, the prints of your former
cruelties have pierced our hearts, but this last impression has even wounded
our souls, wherein we see nothing but traces of blood, and (as it were) the
black face, and countenance of confused desolation.

King, Queen, Prince, with all their Royal issue, the only remain of our
religious hope, Council, Peers, and Prophets, the next support of our happy
estate, grave Judges, and learned at Laws, with the Knights of the Parliament,
and Commo^s there assembled, a third pillar bearing up the kingdom, all these
our honors had gone in a day. Woe unto us that ever we sinned, to deserve the
hazard of so great a judgment.

Which once accomplished to their full, then had we felt (to our woeful
experience) how speedily, the mischief would have spread it self into the body
and bowels of all the kingdom, wherein nothing should have been heard, but
rumbling of shot, and chrashing of armor, outcries of mothers, and yelling of
children: nothing seen but sacking of cities, burning of towns, racing of
towers, and wasting of the land, with destruction of parts, and desolation of
the whole: Quorum animus meminisse horret luctuque refugit. And yet as all this
were nothing, or not enough, we should have seen these miscreants, never sated
with the blood of the Saints, til they had changed our religion for
superstition, our knowledge for ignorance, our preaching for massiing, our
subjects for Rebels, our Counselors for conspirators, and so have brought upon
us, and ours: A most woeful Sabbath, when both the laws of God and man (which
are the sinews of a sanctified state) had been dissolved, and silent.

Now if any shall say as Hazael did, Am I a dog, that I shall do this great
evil? I answer with Elisha, though in differing terms, yet in equal sense,
The Lord has told me, and experience has made it good, that where Romish
Hazael is King, there is cruelty.

Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri. The first walls of Rome were laid in
blood, and ever since they have been symonted with such mortar, as is evident,
by the ten cruel persecutions of Emperors, in the first 300. years after
Christ, and by the cruelty of Popes ever sithence, wherein Emperors have been
Dogs to bite, but Popes have been devils to devour, and make havoc of Gods
Saints, nay worse then devils, and more audatious, according to that, Non audet
stigius Pluto tentare, quod audet effranis Monachus, plenaque fraudis Anus.
Unbridled Monk dare undergo, what devil himself he dare not do.

And here might I seasonably tax the perpetual hatred, and intolerable
cruelty of that Roman Antichrist, toward the professors of Gods truth and
Religion, of whom I may truly say, as the Prophet did of the Babilonians, that
they are and ever have been a people vile in name, and sore in affliction.

Graves are pregnant, and would bring forth their dead to plead their just
cause against their cruelties, and Abels innocent blood cries vengeance out of
the earth against these cursed Canites, and from under the Altar, me think I
hear the souls of them that are killed for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they maintained, cry with a loud voice, saying; How long Lord,
which art holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth.

Of many, take these few for all, Et leonem ex vnguibus, Nor will I kallender
any but modern cruelties, and such as are yet fresh bleeding in the memories
of men living, of this age and clymate.

Mariana tempora, Anglicana stigmata. Mary's times are English stains, and who
gave the dye, but that Romish red Dragon, bloody beast, and whore of Babylon?
not sated with the blood of the Martyrs then living, but ransacked the bones of
their dead, and burned them, to glut up their cruelty. Witnesses the buried
bones of Paulus Fagius, and Martin Bucer.

Andwarpe and Naples, can witness like cruelty upon a mother Queen, and
Prince of great hope, whose Funerals as some say, were solemnized both in one
month. At Naples with joy, and at Andwarpe with grief, done by that
Sanguinary Inquisition of Spain, Revel. 9. 17.
Romish red Dragon, and bloody beast of Babylon, whose Horses mouths fume
nothing but fire, smoke, and brimstone.

Paris and France, do yer stream with the blood of the innocent, murdered
and slain in that cruel massacre on Bartholomew day, 1572. wherein the
Shatilian was slain, and diverse others, noble and excellent men, with all the
flower of the Gentry, and Protestants in France, to the number as is thought of
100. thousand, all done and devised by the two Cardinals of Lorraine, See the
Mutabilitie of France, for the number.
and Peluey, conntenanced by the Queen mother of France, aided with her
Guisian faction, and executed by Mandolet, with such cruelty, that out of the
Court of the Gaile called the Archbishoppes prison, the blood was seen in the
broad daylight, to the great abhorring and fear, of many that beheld it,
run warm, and smoking into the streets of the Town, and so down into the
River of Scene.

So great a dishonor, and so great an infamy to that nation, as the most part
of them are ashamed at this day of their own Country, defiled with two most
filthy spots of Popery, falsehood, and cruelty, of the which, whether has been
the greater in that religion, it is hard to say.

I pass, to speak of the Butchery of Henry, late King of France, by two
Iacobin Friars, with poisoned knives in their hands, and Popish Bull in their
bosoms, which Guignard the Jesuit was not ashamed to call an heroical act,
and a gift of the holy Ghost.

I say nothing of Parry his stab of death, and Lopas his Pill of poison,
intended against Queen Eliza: of famous memory, by their own confession, the
best natured and quallified Queen, that ever lived in England: yet this may I
say, that the dagger was sharpened, and the Pill was poisoned with the venom
of Popery, else Benedetto Palmio, and Hanniball Codrotto, two factious
Jesuits, had never been traduced as bellows to blow the fire, and kindle the
coals of so great a mischief, with this warrantie, to inflame their hellish
hearts, that the fact was lawful and meritorious.

But if all these were clapped in one, they may not balance with the weight and
woe, of our late entented dismal day, if God of his great mercy and wonted
clemency had not put by the deadly blow.

For a day of death, like that of doom, in Ictu oculi, had put out the light
of England, King, Queen, Prince, Peer, and people; All had perished, and all
at once.

Servants had ruled over us: Lamen. 5. 8. etc.
and none could have delivered us, out of their hands: our inheritance had been
turned to the strangers, and our houses, to the Aliants: our Fathers had been
childlesse, and our children fatherless: In our English Rama, had been a voice
heard mourning and weeping, and great howling: Mothers weeping for their
children, and children for their mothers; and neither had been comforted,
because they were not.

We should ere this, Lamen. 5. 4. etc.
have drunken our water by measure, and eaten our bread by weight, our skin
had been black as an Oven, because of the terrible famine, they had defiled
our women in Sion, and our maids in the Cities of Judah, our necks ere this
had been under such persecution, as we should have been weary of our lives, and
never have had rest when our souls had bin put into the hands of so viperous a
generation, who would have shut up our lives in the dungion, Lamen. 3. 5. 3.
and cast a stone up us: I say so general a judgment, so speedy and so
bloody, had never been in any kingdom.

Nay more, that deadly blow at once, and in Ictu oculi, ere this, had taken the
elder from the gate, and the young men from their songs, it had silenced the
Prophets, and dissolved the laws, both of God and the Nation, I say still, as
formerly I have said, so general a judgment, so speedy, and so bloody, had
never been seen in any kingdom.

The Royal Palace of Westminster, City, and Sanctuary there, built by the
Noble Kings of this Land, and now honored with the presence of as mighty a
Monarch as ever went before, with as wise a Council as ever England had, with
as full a Senate of Nobles as ever satte there, with Bishops for learning,
gifts, and graces, equalling (if not above) the reach of former times, and with
Knights and Commons of the lower House of Parliament, in all respects suitable,
this Royal Place and Presence, with all the Honor, Puissance, and Piety
thereof, to have bin blown up at once, and in Ictu oculi, I say still, so
general a judgment, so speedy and so bloody, had never been seen in any
kingdom.

O unnatural and degenerate Englishmen, how could you ever endure, to thirst
after the destruction of so sacred a Senate, and sweet an assembly? how could
you find in your hearts to seek the destruction of so benign a Prince, and
so Royal an issue, with the utter subversion of so glorious a state^ by
bringing into the bowels thereof that Romish Apolion, mentioned in the
Revelation, who where he is victorious, Reu. 9. 11.
staineth the earth with blood, the air with blasphemy, and the heavens with
his abominable, and luxurious incontinences.

The old worthy Romans the two Decij, thought it the most heroical thing that
might be, to vow themselves to death for their Country, and even to spend
their lives in defense of their Altars, Temples, and Monuments, of their
Elders, but you seek to see your Country bathing in the blood of your Prince,
Peers, and Prophets, in the blood of your parents, kindred, and friends, to
see the cities, graves, and temples, of your predecessors, consumed with fire:
to see your Records burned, your Actuaries destroyed, your virgins deflowred,
your women ravished, and finally, to bring the noblest of Nations to a
perpetual slavery, and servitude, by as deadly and dolorous a blow, as ever
was devised, or done, in any kingdom, except in that kingdom of darkness,
where is nothing else but hell, horror, and all confusion.

Surely, surely, for this your intended mischief, and your former murders,
the worm that never dies, will gnaw your rebellious hearts, and the furies of
hell which never give rest, will haunt you in your habitations: where ever ye
go, they will speak in the voice of those Kings, Queens, and Princes, with
whose blood you have embrewed your traiterous hearts, and hands, as it is said
Caesar's ghost did to Brutus and Cassius, whom in the Senate they murdered with
such cruelty.

O unkind Countrymen, and cruel Caitiffes, I have been your bless, but you
are now my bane: I have been your mirth, and you are now my moan: I have been
your wealth and shadow in a flourishing Empire, but you are now my want and woe:
in a decaying estate, I have preserved your wives to your comfort, and your
children to your great joy, but ye have made my wife husbandlesse, and my
children fatherless, to their unspeakable grief, I clothed you with scarlet,
and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel, spotted with the purest
Armines, but you have covered my dead corpse with a Carpet of green grass,
diaperd with my dearest blood. Finally, I have kept your Daggers within your
sheathes, and you have sheathed them within my heart: Fie, fie: Flee, flee: And
whither can you flee, but the Hagge will ever haunt you? nor can you ever fare
well, till the Fury, find you faultlesse. Interim nos ad sepulchra vadimus. We
sleep in peace.

The Lord deliver our Church and Country from all such Brutish and Cassian
cruelties, so as never they be able either to touch the Lords anointed, or do
his Prophets any harm, and praised be the Lord which has not now given us a
pray unto their teeth, for our soul is escaped, eue^ as a bird out of the
snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken, and we are delivered.

Let this suffice for the danger devised by men, but undone by God, and if any
would know by what men, and of what Religion) I answer, by Englishmen, and of
the Popish Religion: Nor will I say that all of that faction were privy to the
practice, yet may I say, that none (for ought I yet hear) were of the
conspiracy, but the popishly affected, and so branded, which when God has the
glory, and the truth is known, then will it appear how far the humor has
spread it self into the body of all the kingdom, too much (God wot) decayed
with that deadly malady.

Yet I hope well in time, if such be the fruits of popish Religion, that few
will gather Apples of that blasted tree, a tree of Sodom* fair in sight: but
in truth, and touch, nothing but Cindars, and rottenness, and of all the
stains that ever Popery had, I am persuaded that this is of the deepest die.

For in stead of blowing up us, they have blown up themselves, and their
Religion, with such a wound to their Cause, as will never be cured by any
craft, being blotted with one of the horriblest Treasons, that ever was
contrived, and such as God and Nature could never brook to be amongst the
cruellest Cannibals, Turks, or Scithians, that ever were. No marvel then* if
Civil states abhor it, Christian Nations detest it; Religious Kings spit at
it; and the Cronicles of all times record it: for such an Antichristian
stratagem, Romish Monster, and Popish prodigy, as never might endure the sight
of any Sun, but was strangeled in the birth, ere it could be borne, and killed
in the blade, ere it came to any growth.

Strangled (I say) and killed, by no other hand then the hand of God, and even
then when the deuisers deemed it done, for the Vault was ready, the Powder was
laid, the trains were made, the match was prepared; Percy was busy, and
Faukes was bloody in resolution to give the charge* with a Crucifix about his
neck, and hair about his loins, to tell you of what Tribe he was, yet even
then, and in the rage of all this fury, the Lord said, Stay thy bloody hand,
the sacrifice is not pleasing.

For what has England done, to deserve so heavy a judgment? I am their God,
they are my people, and for my great name sake, I will be propitious, and make
them glorious by deliverance: The Sunshine is theirs, and the gloomie day is
yours: your designs are upon your own heads, your Daggers are turned upon
your selves, and sheathed in your own bowels, ye have been fighters against
God, ye will not be warned, Acts 5. 39.
that ye might be armed: Wherefore now Discite iustitiam mouiti non temere diuos.

Your own Letters shall discover the treason, and the writing of your own
hands shall betray the mischief of your own hearts, I will fight against you
with your own weapons, and I will weary you in your own ways.

The old Florentines had a Bell, which they called their Martynella, and they
rung it ever before the siedge of any City, to warn the besieged, either to
yield, or die; It was a mercy, to prevent a misery. But your Martynella has
given no such warning to us: and therein were you less merciful then the
Florentines; How be it, so it is, that your Bell has rung your passing Peale,
and the Lord has turned your own writings, to be death to you, and life to
us, blessed be his name therefore.

One says well, Vbicun que fuerit prouidentia, frustrantur Vniuersa contraria,
Where the Lord has a providence, all other encounters are defeated; If his
providence be upon the fire, it burns not: If upon the seas, they swell not:
If upon the winds, they blow not: Joshua. 10. 12. etc.
If upon the air, it infecteth not: If upon the Lions, they devour not: If
upon the Sun, it goes not, but stands still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the
valley of Agelon: If I say, his providence be upon the graves, they detain
not, but yield to deliver their dead, and Lazarus must come forth.

How then should any creature stir to the subversion of so blessed a state,
whilst the providence of God houered over it, like the wings of the Cherubims
over the mercy seat: yea his providence it was, to prevent us with mercy and
loving kindness, and ere ever we prayed to be propitious, to think upon us,
ere we thought upon him, to deliver us from the blow, before we saw the
danger. And to conclude, it was his merciful providence to turn your prayers
into our bosom, a cross to that you meant it, ominous to you, but giorious to
us. I hope (says the Writer) God will give you the grace to make good use of
it, and what better use could ever have been made, either to Gods glory, the
good of his Church, the safety of the King, Queen, and Prince, with all their
Royal issue (I say) what better use could ever the receiver have made to show
his loyalty to his Prince, and love to his Country, then by dealing as he did?
Eccle. 44. 8. etc.
for which he shall be honorable in this generation, well reported of in his
time, and be of them that have left their name behind them, so as his praise
shall be spoken of.

I may conclude with Zachary, and make good the Lords providence over this
English Nation, to the great comfort of all the godly, and the astonishment of
the wicked elsewhere in the world: Cease your attempts against the Truth, Zach.
4. 9. etc.
for the hands of Zorobabel have laid the foundation of this house, his hands
shall also finish it: and who seeing the stone of Tin in the hands of
Zorobabel, shall despise the day of the small thing?

The house is the church of God here in England, Zorobabel is our Christ here
in England, he has laid the foundation in England, he will also finish it in
England: And who seeing the line in his hand to* build by, which is his word,
in England, and the stone of Tin to build up, which is his people of England,
dares ever despise the ^ay of the small things? small to the ^e^ly and sensual
eye of flesh and blood, despicable to the worldly monarchies, and of small
beginnings, Psalm. 149. 4
yet precious to God, and now made glorious by deliverance. Zach. 4. 10. 11. etc.
His providence is over all: And as the Prophet says, these seven are the eyes
of the Lord, that go through the whole world, his graces still abound, and are
a continual current in his Church, like the two Olive branches, emptying
themselves through the golden pipes into the gold.

Golden Prince, golden Peer, golden Prophet, golden people, fined from the
dross of sin, and superstition, to be pure metal, and as it were spangles of
gold in the holy Sanctuary of your God: Empty, o empty your praises, pipe by
pipe, from the highest Majesty, even to the lowest of the people, and give God
the glory.

And thou virgin daughter London, write upon thy walls Peniel, Genesis 32. 3^.
and say the face of God was toward me: Thou Princely Palace Westminster,
write upon thy seats of Justice, and high Court of Parliament, write upon thy
Vaults, Cells, and Sepulchers, write upon thy doors, Genesis 1^. 14
posts, and passages, Beer-lahai-roy^, and say, Thou God look on me, thou
Imperial seat of great Britain, fragrant for thy flowers, and for thy
Collar of Mirtles twisted with the Roses of both houses, dignified with the
Diadem of Rubies, wreathed with the Arms and supporters of both kingdoms, (I
say) thou great Britain, famous as at the first for thy old name, honorable
now for thy new birth, and ever blessed for thy happy and so desired an union,
whereby our former ruins are repaired, streams of blood are stopped, old
malice is worn out, and deadly fude is forgotten: for all which abundant
great mercy, as also for this thy late deliverance, Hose. 2. 1.
write Ruhamah, Ruhamah, Mercy, mercy. Write upon thy Ports, Holds, and
Castles, Mercy. Write upon thy Towers, Towns, and Temples, Mercy. Write upon
thy fields, ways, and wastes, Mercy. Write upon thy Corn, Coin, and Cattle.
Mercy. Say the Lord has had mercy upon us, he has had pleasure in his people,
Psalm. 149. 4
and has made the meek glorious by deliverance.

For all which Mercies, Psalm. 74. 13
say God is my King of old, the help that is done upon the earth, he does it
himself.

Say with Elephus Job his friend, Job. 22. 29. 30.
but Great Britains Prophet, when others are cast down, then shall thou say, I
am lifted up, and God shall save the humble person, for the innocent shall
deliver the Island, and it shall be preserved by the pureness of thine hands.

Innocent King, Genesis 18. 23. etc.
innocent Queen, innocent Prince, Peer, Prophet, and people, If not for
fifty sake, yet for forty: If not for forty, yet for thirty: If not for
thirty, yet for twenty: If not for twenty, yet for ten just persons, the
Lord has put by this terrible blow of these wicked Shebaes: For should not
the God of all the world do according to right?

Plead thou our cause (O Lord) with them that strive with us, Psalm. 35. 1. 25.
and fight thou against them that fight against us: Let them not say in their
hearts, there, there, so would we have it: Neither let them say, We have
devoured them. Which and if they had, then might we have said with the Prophet,
Esaias 24. 11. 12.
There is a crying in the streets, all our joy is darkened, the mirth of the
world is gone away, in the City is left desolation, the gate is stricken with
destruction.

Then might we have sung with David, that mournful Lamentation he uttered of
his King to his Country; 2. Sam. 1. 19. etc.
O noble Israel, he is slain upon thy high places, how are thy mighty
overthrown, Saul and Jonathan, were lovely in their lives, and at their deaths
they were not divided.

Then might we have said, that upon the fifth day of November, we should never
have kept merry feast, the day of the dissolution of so blessed an estate.

We might have said indeed, that this year 1605. had been a year of
Revolution, and that Tuesday were our dismal day Critical in Scotland, the
fifth of August, for Gowry his treason. And dismal in England, the fifth of
November, for Faukes his design, plotted by bloody Papists, the bane of
Christendom: and Dolmans dogs now warranted by a new doctrine, to bark at
Kings, and bite the Lords anointed, if they be not pleasing to their devotions.

Thus endaungered, and yet thus delivered; endangered by men, but delivered by
God: Now let us jointly give him the glory.

Dread Sovereign, dear Queen, sweet Prince and progeny, cast down your
Crowns at the feet of your Savior, and say, We have been saved by thee.
Earls, Nobles, and Barons, lay by your Robes of state, with your ensigns of
honor, praise him who has preserved you, and say, We have been saved by thee.
You Officers in Court, resign up your staves into the hands of God, and say,
We have been supported by thee. Ye learned Bishops, and Fathers of the Church,
slide from your Consistories, and say to the great Bishop of your souls, We
have been kept by thee. Ye Knights, Squiers, and Gentry of the Land, unarm
your selves, and with your Crests lay your Laurel in the lap of Christ, and
say, We have conquered through thee. Thou high Court of Parliament, dissolve
for a time, and say, O Angel of the great Council, We will consult with thee.
And lastly, Thou Lord God of Gods, and preserver of men, let there be silence
in heaven, for the space of half an hour, Reave. 8. 1, etc.
till these Saints praises and prayers be offered up.

So shall we sing with a godly Ouation, and a grace in our hearts, Kings of the
earth, and all people, Princes, and all Judges of the world, young men, and
maids, old men, Psalm. 148. 11. etc.
and babes, praise the name of the Lord, for his name only is excellent, and
his praise above heaven and earth: he has exalted the horn of his people,
and his Saints shall praise him, even the children of England, whom he loves,
and has made so glorious by deliverance.

Praise the Lord, o virgin daughter London, Praise thy God o England, the
Glory of Kingdoms, and beauty of all Europes honor, Psalm. 147. 12. etc.
for he has made fast the bars of thy gates, and has blessed thy children
within thee, he has set peace in thy borders, and satisfied thee with the
flower of wheat, Let the praise of God therefore be ever in thy mouth, and a
sharp two edged sword in thy hands, to be avenged of the heathenish Atheist,
Psalm. 149. 6 etc.
and to rebuke the bloody Papist, such honor have all Saints.

And now to speak to you Authors, and Abetters, of these desperate Treasons,
Cease your Rebellions, lay by your bloody designs, recou^t wc your selves;
your former, both faithless, and fruitless attempts, against the Lord, and
against his anointed; Reckon with your selves your former losses, in the year
1588. when the winds, the Seas, Rocks, and Shelues, fought for us, Judge. 5.
20. 21.
when the River Kishon swept them away, from our English Coast, to Dingle Cush
in Ireland, with a Beesome of such destruction to their great Armado, and
frighting to our English Fugitives abroad, and of their favorites at home, as
by the grace of God has brought them out of all heart, out of all ability,
and possibility ever to attempt the like.

Learn what it is to fight with God, We must increase, you must decrease, for
Babylon is fallen, so told you by the Angel, Io. 3. 30.
as a thing already past and done, Reave. 18. 2. etc.
and doubled in speech like Phan^^s dream, to tell you of the certainty and
expedition thereof. Cease, Gene. 41. 32.
O cease to provoke the Lord any longer, and end your malice against his
Saints, ere malice end you, lest he say unto you, as he did unto Mount Seir,
Because thou have had a perpetual hatred, Ezec. 35. 56.
and have put the Israel of God to flight by the force of the sword in the time
of their calamity, when their iniquity had an end: Therefore as I live, says
the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood: and blood shall pursue thee:
except thou hate blood, even blood shall pursue thee.

God is witness, before whom I stand in the sight of men and Angels, that I
speak not this to seek the blood of any, their blood be upon themselves, and
theirs, till they have dried it up by unfeigned repentance: I wish the
conversion of all (vijs and modis) by all good means. I wish our Laws may
still be written in milk, and that his Majesty's Royal heart, may continue a
depth of rare mercy. I wish our preaching may savor peace, and that the
Magistrate may still strike with a trembling hand.

Yet give me leave to pray withal, that the rage of the enemy never grow so
sower as to turn our milk into blood, mercy into judgment, peace into war,
sythes into swords, and them to be hallowed in the blood one of another, which
I fear, both must and will ensue, if they grow so great in the contempt of God,
so grievous to their Sovereign, and so intolerable to the state: which if
they do, then be wise o ye Kings, Psalm. 2. 10. etc.
be learned, ye that be Judges of the earth: Let mercy and truth meet together
in you: Psalm. 45. 10
Let righteousness and peace kiss each other. Judge. 8. 20. 21.
Take the sword into your own hands, and strike, o ye Worthies of Israel, for
Zeba and Zalmana will never be killed by the weak hands of Iethro: for as the
man is, so is his strength: the Minister may speak, and the inferior
Magistrate may strike: and both with a trembling heart and hand, like the child
Iethro: but assure your selves, that Romish Zeba, and Popish Zalmana, will
never die till you rise up, and with your own hands fall upon them, as Gedeon
did: for as the man is, so is his strength.

Sit in vobis materna pietas, and paterna seueritas: exhibit vos matres
fouendo, patres corripiendo: extendite vbera, sed producite verbera. That is,
Let there be in you a motherly pity, and a fatherly severity; show your
selves Mothers in cherishing, but Fathers in correcting: Lay out your breasts,
but withal draw forth your rods, and ever so, Vt nec vigor, sit rigor, nec
mansuetudo dissoluta, as neither your force be rigorous, nor your forbearing
retchlesse, but say with the Orator in the temper of both, Nature a me clementem
fecit, Respub: seuerum postulat. sed neque natura, nequeresp: me crudelem,
efficiet: Nature has made me mild, the commo^-weale requires I should be
severe: yet neither Nature, nor the commonweal, shall ever make me cruel.

And if any man shall scandilize thee of cruelty in thy just severity, and
say, o where is love! I answer: Ne timeas co^tra charitate^ esse, sivnius
scandalu^ multoru^pace co^pensaueris. Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas,
Never fear the breach of Charity, where with the scandal of one, ye may
recompense the peace of many; for better it is that one dye of many, then that
the unity of all should be dissolved.

He was wise that said it, Prou. 25. 4.
and I hope the wisdom of this age will approve it, take the dross from the
silver, and there shall proceed a vessel for the Finer: take away the wicked
from the King, and his throne shall be established in righteousness: but
beware of delays, for they are dangerous: and in the execution of justice they
are deadly dangerous: according to that; Eccl. 8. 11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil.

Witnesses Ely, his impunitie toward his children, which lost him the
Priesthood with his life, 1. Sam. 4. 21. 22.
and brought upon him and all Israel so heavy a judgment, as Phinchas wife
dying, left the memory thereof for all succeeding ages, when she bore a son,
and called him Iuabod: that is, the glory is gone from Israel.

Happily Ely spared them, for that they were his children, and out of his love
and fatherly affection toward them. He deemed it less sin to show some
indulgence, but one says well; Iustitia non nouit patre^, non nouit maetrem,
non nouit seipsum, Responde mihi Iuditium dixit Nathan, and sic David dedit
inditium contra seipsum. David gave judgment against himself in a Plea of
faith, 2. Sam. 12. 5. etc.
and fact: How then may Princes spare others, if they be found guilty in
either of both. Hierome is more peremptory in a case of like importance, When
he says; Licet paruulus excollo pendeat nepos, licet sparso crine, and
scissis vestibus Vbera (quibus tenutriuit) matter ostendit, licet inlimine pater
iaciat, percucatum perge patrem, and siuis oculis ad vexillum crucis euola,
solum pietatis genus est in hacre esse crudelem, gladium tenet hostis, vt me
perimat, and ego de matris lacrimis cogitabo? propter Patrem: Christi militiam
deseram? cui etiam sepulturam christi cause non debeo, which I may English
thus; Although thy little Grandchild cling about thy neck, and say spare
father; Although the mother come forth, with spread hair, and torn raiment,
and show thee the pappes: where once thou-sucked thy life, with her love, and
say; spare son: Although the father cast himself down upon thy threshold to
keep them, tread upon thy father, and with dry cheeks fly to the execution of
thy profession. It is an only point of godliness in this case to be cruel, and
a sovereign Pity, to be pitiless: Shall the enemy hold up his hand to
Wound the Church? and shall I think upon the tears of my mother? shall I
because of my father, cease to fight for my Christ? to whom I owe no burial,
for the cause of my Christ, but am to leave the dead, to bury the dead:
whilst I follow him.

Whereupon I may well say, that mercy may have it excess, and pity may be
great cruelty: especially then, when it ouerflow ^^to the good man's danger:
mistake me not, I like of love, but when it is tempred with fear, I like it
better: I know it may do much with the better sort, but not with the greater:
according to that of Augustine, Meliores sunt quos dirigit Amor, sed plures
sunt quos corrigit timor. They be better who^ love directs, but they be more,
who^ fear corrects: and therefore the temper of both is melodious in the ear
of a sanctified and settled estate.

And so to draw toward an end, and at last to conclude, out of that which has
been spoken, both of former Popish cruelties, and out of our happy deliverance
from their last intended treasons, powdered with so many mischiefs: (I say) in
caution of future peril by me^ of that generation; Take heed of Popery, take
heed of Papists, and tolerate neither their cause nor person: for if you
tolerate the cause, it will infect the person: if you tolerate the person, it
will credit the cause: therefore to tolerate neither of both, in a state so
sanctified as ours is, I hold it safest. What then is to be done, will some
say, away with both head, and tail: for Popery kept under, will practice
treason: if it get aloft, it will play the tyrant: therefore no way to have it,
is safest, and with least danger.

Further my advise is, that you trust them as little as you may, and never
co^uerse with the^ but for their co^uersio^, and if after once or twice
admonition they grow refractary Deuita, knowing yt he that is such is perverted
and sins, being damned of his own self: I say trust them not, for they are
faithless, and hold it for a doctrine, that fides non ^st seruanda-cum
Hereticis, of which number, they reckon all the Protestants of this land to be.

Again, take heed of them, for they are busy bodies, and walk inordinately
amongst you: they are impatient of our profession, great peace, and much
plenty, Mat. 23. 15.
they compass Sea and land, to make one of their own profession, and when he
is made, he becomes twofold more the child of hell, then he was before. Reave.
14. 11.
These busy bodies take no rest, and to have no rest day nor night, is proper
to such as worship the beast and his Image, and to whomsoever receives the
print of his name.

Beware of their blind guides, Jesuits, Seminaries, and Seedsmen, who to betray
the truth, sow the tares of all treasons, at all times, and in all places;
they are the Frogs of Egypt, that leap into kings chambers, and busily possess
the Courts of Princes, and mighty men, either to poison their hearts with the
enchaunted Cup of Romish superstition, or to bereave them of their lives: if
they fashion not to their devotions, they leave the Pulpits, they fly from the
horns of the Altar, they disclaim the Oratories, and they become men of
estate, managing the Empire, and marshalling the commonweal of Princes: so as
I may well say of these new Nouices, as was said of the Monks of old.

Quicquid agit Mundus, Monachus vult esse secundus; Where ever the world is
one, the Romish Clergy will be another.

Lastly, beware of mixture, and shun the sins of Samaria, who were a mixed
people, and of a confused Religion, tollerating both the persons and causes of
Idolatry: As you may read in the 2. of Kings. 17. verse. 24. for the persons.
And verse. 23. for the cause. And the Jews in the days of Christ, thought it
as grievous an imputation as they could devise, Joel. 8. 48.
to lay upon him, when they said, Say we not well, that thou arta Samaritan,
and have a devil? And surely so it is, for to be of two religions, is to be of
no religion: and to tolerate both, is to confound all, either in a kingdom,
or in a conscience.

It is memorable, and it may go for a Caution to all Christian Kings and
Princes, what is recorded in this case, of the unconscionable offer, of great
Chan, the Tartarian Prince, of whom Lipsius reports, that when Stephanus,
that mighty King of Poland was dead; he amongst others, sent his Legate to the
assembly where the new Creation was, with these three motives, to move them to
make him King. 1. First, that he was mighty, and could bring myriads of
horsemen out of his own lands, either for the defense or enlarging of their
kingdom of Poland. 2 Secondly, Lipsij monita and Exemp.
that he was frugall, and could live in time of famine, only with horse flesh.
3. Thirdly, for the Religion, whereof he heard there was much dispute among
them, Polit. 3. lib. 20. 11.
that he was indifferent, saying; Tuus pontefex meus pontefex esto: tuus
Lutherus meus Lutherus esto. Your Pope, shall be my Pope: and your Luther,
shall be my Luther: It was the Tartarians sin, to be so indifferent, and so
readily to offer a tollerance: and it was the Polonians sin, so long to
suffer a mixture of many or more religions then one in a kingdom. And yet how
ever, either fear or folly, moved the Polonians for the time to endure it, and
to stain their kingdom and conscience, with so great a brand of wickedness,
(notwithstanding the Emperors large offers otherwise) yet that of Religion was
thought so idle, as they rejected it with laughter, saying; Ecce hominem
paratum, omnia sacra and deos deserere regnandi causa.

But good Lord, how inestimably are we beholding to thee our good God, for so
great a mercy, as to give us a King in thy love, when we were a people not to
be beloved: whose Princely relish savoring true piety: did so much distaste
either an alteration of ye religion we have: or a tolleratio^ of any other, as
in public he did co^test against both, in these words. I do protest before
God and his Angels, that I am so constant for the maintenance of the Religion
publicly professed in England, as that I would spend my dearest blood in
defense thereof, Rather then the truth should be over thrown: And if I had
ten times as many more Kingdoms as I have, I would dispend them all, for the
safety and protection thereof: And likewise, if I had any children, that
should yield either to the Popish faith or faction, I desire of God, that I
may rather see them brought to their graves before me, that their shame may be
buried in my life time, never to be spoken of in future ages.

By the Law of GOD, Deuteronomy. 22. 11.
no man may wear a coat of Linsey-wolsey: If I may not wear a garment so
woven upon my back, may I wear a Religion so twisted within my heart? May
Princes tolerate it in their Kingdoms? May fathers in their families? It were
a grievous imputation to either of both, and that which the adversary himself
would never yield us, they will neither tolerate us nor ours, and why should
we endure either them or theirs? If the evil will not yield to the good, why
should the good yield to the evil?

Do but mention a tolleration of Religion in Rome, and Rome will be ragious:
do but speak of such a thing in Spain, and it will be thought prodigious.
France is fearful in delivering it Edicts, and whole Italy is resolute never
to yield either to our cause or persons. Why should we then endure either
them or theirs in their known Idolatry?

Were the Law of God on foot, Deuteronomy. 13. 9.
that Idolaters should die the death, soon would the controversy be
determined, and motions for tollerations in Christian commonwealths, would
seldom be mentioned: but whilst we demurre upon the point, and stand a
disputing whether Papists be Idolaters, whether Rome be Babylon, the Pope
Antichrist, his Religion antichristian, and whether his lovers and friends be
enemies to the state, and dangerous to a Kingly rule, (I say) whilst we
demurre upon such doubts, and are a debating the Question, Popery will
increase; and presume to gain, if not an alteration, yet a tolleration: If not
a tolleration, yet a connivence: and if not that, yet such a personal respect,
and favor of some, as will endanger the state of all, if we endure it any
longer.

By the law of God, the Idolater (I say again) must die the death. Exodus 22.
20. And if an Israelite will go in and dally with a Midianite before Moses,
and in the sight of all the congregation: zealous Phinehas, with his spear in
his hand, may enter the Tent, and thrust them through, that the plague may
cease from Israel. Numbers. 25. 6.

The Lord has sworn that he will war with Amaleck, from generation to
generation. Exodus 17. And amongst other ordinances laid down by God for his
people, this was urged again to be remembered, thus. When the Lord has given
thee rest from all thine enemies, and the land for an Inheritance to possess
it, then shall thou put out the remembrance of Amaleck from under heaven,
forget it not. Deuteronomy. 25. 19.

And 400. years after Saul was plagued for sparing Agag of the Amalekites, 1.
Sam. 15.
and not executing of that law.

The Lord (I can assure you) requires a through conversion from sin: And why
not a through subversion of sin? The Tabernacle of God has it Censer,
Snuffers, and Beesome, to purge the Sanctuary, and sweep away the filth: and
if you build, the rubbish must be removed ere you lay the foundation, be the
body never so healthful, it will decay, without an euacuation: and until you
take away the dross from the silver, ye can never make a vessel for the Finer.

It was Ieremies moan at Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin, Jeremy. 6. 29. 30.
the bellows are burned, the lead is consumed in the fire, the founder melts
in vain, for the wicked are not taken away. As if he should say, All our
labor is lost, and it is in vain, that we have wearied our selves, with our
prayer and Preaching; if the wicked be not taken away.

As it is apparent this day by the baser sort of these audatious Rebels, too
much emboldened by his Majesty's most gracious and godly clemency, which they
have abused, and whom if they had requited with such an unkind kiss of
killing cruelty; yet might he have said with the Orator, Non vitiu^ nostru^
sed virtus nostra nos afflixit.

Yea and to speak from a more powerful spirit, his Mastie and Senate, being
then about a work of so great consequence, both for the good of the Church and
commonweal; If that Court then had been their coffin, and they had died so
doing, yet might they have said in the silence of their souls; Happy is the
servant, whom when the master comes, he shall find so doing.

The Lord direct all, as may be most for his glory, though never so much to our
trial; and keep us: O keep us Lord from this ill kind of men: Psalm. 12. 7.
Root out Popery from the hearts of this people, set up thy truth o Lord, and
save thine anointed: In Sionis gaudium, and Anglo papistarum luctum. Lord save
thine anointed, that he and his, Isaiah. 32. 2. etc.
may be still unto us and ours, as an hiding place from the wind, and as a
refuge for the tempest: as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of
a great-Rock in a weary land.

Then shall our-land take up this proverb against the King of Locusts, Isaiah.
14. 4.
and all his crawling Agents: It shall say as Israel and Judah did of their
Luciferian tyrant. How has the oppressor ceased, and the goldthirstie Babel
rested? the Lord has broken the rod of the wicked, and the Scepter of the
Rulers, which would have smitten this Land in anger with a continual plague,
and ruled our Nation in their wrath: but thy pomp o Lucifer is brought down
to the grave, and the sound of thy vialls: The worm is spread under thee, and
the worms cover thee, while England is at rest and quiet, o sing for joy, and
sing to the praise of God in all your flocks and families, the Psalm. 124.

Dauidica sentit, qui Dauidica patitur; Sing it with David's passion, and it
will be Mel in ore, in aure melos, in cord Iubiseus, honey to the mouth,
music to the ear, and a joy to the heart.

And thou Lord God almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and preserver of men,
so bless us out of Sion, as we may see still the beauty of our Church and
Country, the Sovereign safety of our King, Queen, Prince, and Royal
progeny, the honorable Bench of our worthy Counselors, Peers, and reverend
Fathers, with the subversion of Antichrist, and peace in this our Israel. Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.

