A THE True Chronicle History of King LEIR, and his three daughters, Gonorill,
Ragan, and Cordella.

As it has been diverse and sundry times lately acted.

LONDON,

Printed by Simon Stafford for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop at
Christ's Church door, next Newgate-Market. 1605.

A2 The true Chronicle History of King Leir and his three daughters.
ACTVS I.
Enter King Leir and Nobles. THus to our grief the obsequies performd
Of our (too late) deceast and dearest Queen,
Whole soul I hope, possessed of heavenly joys,
Does ride in triumph mo^gst the Cherubins;
Let us request your grave advice, my Lords,
For the disposing of our princely daughters,
For whom our care is specially imployd,
As nature binds to advance their states,
In royal marriage with some princely mates:
For wanting now their mothers good advice,
Under whose government they have received
A perfect pattern of a virtuous life:
Left as it were a ship without a stern,
Or silly sheep without a Pastors care;
Although our selves do dearly tender them,
Yet are we ignorant of their affairs:
For fathers best do know to govern sons;
But daughters steps the mothers counsel turns.
A son we want for to succeed our Crown,
And course of time has cancelled the date
Of further issue from our withered loins
One foot already hangs in the grave,
And age has made deep furrows in my face:
The world of me, I of the world am weary,
And I would feign resign these earthly cares,
And think upon the welfare of my soul:
Which by no better means may be effected,
Then by resigning up the Crown from me,
In equal dowry to my daughters three.

Skalliger. A worthy care, my Liege, which well declares,
The zeal you bare unto our quondam Queen:
And since your Grace has licensed me to speak,
I censure thus* Your Majesty knowing well,
What several Suitors your princely daughters have,
To make them each a Ioynter more or less,
As is their worth, to them that love profess.

Leir. No more, nor less, but even all alike,
My zeal is fixed, all fashiond in one mould:
Wherefore impartial shall my censure be,
Both old and young shall have alike for me.

Nobl. My gracious Lord, I heartily do wish,
That God had lent you an heir indubitate,
Which might have set upon your royal throne,
When fates should loose the prison of your life,
By whose succession all this doubt might cease;
And as by you, by him we might have peace.
But after-wishes ever come too late,
And nothing can revoke the course of fate:
Wherefore, my Liege, my censure deemes it best,
To match them with some of your neighbor Kings,
Bordring within the bounds of Albion,
By whose united friendship, this our state
May be protected against all forrayne hate.

Leir. Herein, my Lords, your wishes sort-with mine,
And mine (I hope) do sort with heavenly powers:
For at this instant two near neyghbouring Kings
Of Cornwall and of Cambria, motion love
To my two daughters, Gonorill and Ragan.
My youngest daughter, fair Cordella, vows
No liking to a Monarch, unless love allows,
She is solicited by diverse Peers;
But none of them her partial fancy hears.
Yet, if my policy may her beguyle,
I Will match her to some King within this I Will,
And so establish such a perfect peace,
As fortunes force shall never prevail to cease.

Perillus. Of us and ours, your gracious care, my Lord,
Deserves an everlasting memory,
To be inrol'd in Chronicles of fame,
By neuer-dying perpetuity:
A3 Yet to become so provident a Prince,
Lose not the title of a loving father:
Do not sorce love, wherefancy cannot dwell,
Lest streams being stopped, above the banks do swell.

Leir. I am resolved, and even now my mind
Does meditate a sudden stratagem,
To try which of my daughters loves me best:
Which till I know, I cannot be in rest.
This granted, when they jointly shall contend,
Each to exceed the other in their love:
Then at the vantage will I take Cordella,
Even as she does protest she loves me best,
I Will say, Then, daughter, grant me one request,
To show thou love me as thy sisters do,
Accept a husband, whom my self will woo.
This said, she cannot well deny my suit,
Although (poor soul) her senses will be mute:
Then will I triumph in my policy,
And match her with a King of Brittany.

Skal. I Will to them before, and bewray your secrecy.

Per. Thus fathers think their children to beguile,
And oftentimes themselves do first repent,
When heavenly powers do frustrate their intent.

Exeunt. Enter Gonorill and Ragan. Gone. I marvel, Ragan, how you can endure
To see that proud pert Peat, our youngest sister,
So slightly to account of us, her elders,
As if we were no better then her self!
We cannot have a quaynt device so soon,
Or new made fashion, of our choice invention;
But if she like it, she will have the same,
Or study newer to exceed us both.
Besides, she is so nice and so demure;
So sober, courteous, modest, and precise,
That all the Court has work enough to do,
To talk how she exceeds me and you.

Ra. What should I do? would it were in my power,
To find a cure for this contagious ill:
Some desperate medicine must be soon applied,
To dim the glory of her mounting fame;
Else ere't belong, she will have both prick and praise,
And we must be set by for working days.
Do you not see what several choice of Suitors
She daily has, and of the best degree?
Say, amongst all, she hap to fancy one,
And have a husband when as we have none:
Why then, by right, to her we must give place,
Though it be never so much to our disgrace.

Gone. By my virginity, rather then she shall have
A husband before me,
I Will marry one or other in his shirt:
And yet I have made half a grant already
Of my good will unto the King of Cornwall.

Ra. Swear not so deeply (sister) here comes my L. Skalliger*
Something his hasty coming does import.

Enter Skal. Skal. Sweet Princesses, I am glad I met you here so luckily,
Having good news which does concern you both,
And craves speedy expedition.

Ra. For Gods sake tell us what it is, my Lord,
I am with child until you utter it.

Skal. Madam, to save your longing, this it is:
Your father in great secrecy to day,
Told me, he means to marry you out of hand,
Unto the noble Prince of Cambria;
You, Madam, to the King of Cornwalls Grace:
Your younger sister he would feign bestow
Upon the rich King of Hibernia:
But that he doubts, she hardly will consent;
For hitherto she never could fancy him.
If she do yield, why then, between you three,
He will divide his kingdom for your dowries.
But yet there is a further mystery,
Which, so you will conceal, I will disclose.

Gone. What e're thouspeakst to us, kind Skalliger,
Think that thou speakst it only to thy self.

Skal. He earnestly desires for to know,
A4 Which of you three do bear most love to him,
And on your loves he so extremely dotes,
As never any did, I think, before.
He presently does mean to send for you,
To be resolved of this tormenting doubt:
And look, whose answer pleases him the best,
They shall have most unto their marriages.

Ra. O that I had some pleasing Mermayds voice,
For to inchaunt his senseless senses with!

Skal. For he supposes that Cordella will
(Striving to go beyond you in her love)
Promise to do what ever he desires:
Then will he straight enjoin her for his sake,
The Hibernian King in marriage for to take.
This is the sum of all I have to say;
Which being done, I humbly take my leave,
Not doubting but your wisdoms will foresee,
What course will best unto your good agree.

Gone. Thanks, gentle Skalliger, thy kindness undeserved,
Shall not be unrequited, if we live.

Exit Skalliger. Ra. Now have we fit occasion offered us,
To be revenged upon her vnperceyu'd.

Gone. Nay, our revenge we will inflict on her,
Shall be accounted piety in us:
I will so flatter with my doting father,
As he was never so flattred in his life.
Nay, I will say, that if it be his pleasure,
To match me to a beggar, I will yield:
For why, I know what ever I do say,
He means to match me with the Cornwall King.

Ra. I Will say the like: for I am well assured;
What e're I say to please the old man's mind.
Who dotes, as if he were a child again;
I shall enjoy the noble Cambrian Prince:
Only, to feed his humor, will ^^ffice,
To say, I am content with any one
Whom heel appoint me; this will please him more.
Then e're Apolloes music pleased Jove.

Gone. I smile to think, in what a woeful plight
Cordella will be, when we answer thus:
For she will rather dye, then give consent
To join in marriage with the Irish King:
So will our father think, she loves him not,
Because she will not grant to his desire,
Which we will aggrauate in such bitter terms,
That he will soon convert his love to hate:
For he, you know, is always in extremes.

Rag. Not all the world could lay a better plot,
I long till it be put in practice.

Exeunt. Enter Leir and Perillus. Leir. Perillus, go seek my daughters,
Will them immediately come and speak with me.

Per. I will, my gracious Lord.

Exit. Leir. Oh, what a combat feels my panting heart,
Twixt childrens love, and care of Common weal!
How dear my daughters are unto my soul,
None knows, but he, that knows my thoghts and secret deeds.
Ah, little do they know the dear regard,
Wherein I hold their future state to come:
When they securely sleep on beds of down,
These aged eyes do watch for their behalf:
While they like wantons sport in youthful toys,
This throbbing heart is pearst with dire annoyes.
As does the Sun excceed the smallest Star,
So much the fathers love exceeds the child's.
Yet my complaynts are causlesse: for the world.
Affords not children more conformable:
And yet, me thinks, my mind presageth still
I know not what: and yet I fear some ill.
Enter Perillus, with the three daughters. Well, here my daughters come me: I
have found out
A present means to rid me of this doubt.

Gone. Our royal Lord and father, in all duty,
We come to know the tenor of your will,
Why you so hastily have sent for us?

Leir Dear Gonorill, kind Ragan, sweet Cordella
B Ye flourishing branches of a Kingly stock,
Sprung from a tree that once did flourish green,
Whose blossoms now are nipt with Winters frost,
And pale grym death does wayt upon my steps,
And summons me unto his next Assizes.
Therefore, dear daughters, as ye tender the safety
Of him that was the cause of your first being,
Resolve a doubt which much molests my mind,
Which of you three to me would prove most kind;
Which loves me most, and which at my request
Will soonest yield unto their fathers hest.

Gone. I hope, my gracious father makes no doubt
Of any of his daughters love to him:
Yet for my part, to show my zeal to you,
Which cannot be in windy words rehearst,
I prize my love to you at such a rate,
I think my life inferior to my love.
Should you inioyne me for to tie a millstone
About my neck, and leap into the Sea,
At your command I willingly would do it:
Yea, for to do you good, I would ascend
The highest Turret in all Brittany,
And from the top leap headlong to the ground:
Nay, more, should you appoint me for to marry
The meanest vassayle in the spacious world,
Without reply I would accomplish it:
In brief, command what ever you desire,
And if I fail, no favor I require.

Leir. O, how thy words revive my dying soul!

Cor. O, how I do abhor this flattery!

Leir. But what says Ragan to her fathers will?

Rag. O, that my simple utterance could suffice,
To tell the true intention of my heart,
Which burns in zeal of duty to your grace,
And never can be quenched, but by desire
To show the same in outward for wardnesse.
Oh, that there were some other maid that durst
But make a challenge of her love with me
I Would make her soon confess she never loved
Her father half so well as I do you.
I then, my deeds should prove in playner case.
How much my zeal abounds to your grace:
But for them all, let this one mean suffice,
To ratify my love before your eyes:
I have right noble Suitors to my love,
No worse then Kings, and happily I love one:
Yet, would you have me make my choice anew,
I Would bridle fancy, and be ruled by you.

Leir. Did never Philomel sing so sweet a note.

Cord. Did never flatterer tell so false a tale.

Leir. Speak now, Cordalla, make my joys at full,
And drop down Nectar from thy honey lips.

Cor. I cannot paynt my duty forth in words,
I hope my deeds shall make report for me:
But look what love the child does owe the father,
The same to you I bear, my gracious Lord.

Gone. Here is an answer answerlesse indeed:
Were you my daughter, I should scarcely brook it.

Rag. Do thou not blush, proud Peacock as thou art,
To make our father such a slight reply?

Leir. Why how now, Minion, are you grown so proud;
Does our dear love make you thus peremptory:
What, is your love become so small to us,
As that you scorn to tell us what it is:
Do you love us, as every child does love
Their father? True indeed, as some,
Who by disobedience short their fathers days,
And so would you; some are so father-sick,
That they make means to rid them from the world;
And so would you: some are indifferent,
Whether their aged parents live or dye;
And so are you. But did thou know, proud gyrle,
What care I had to foster thee to this,
Ah, then thou would say as thy sisters do:
Our life is less, then love we owe to you.

Cord. Dear father, do not so mistake my words,
B2 Nor my plain meaning be misconstrued;
My tongue was never used to flattery.

Gone. You were not best say I flatter: if you do,
My deeds shall show, I flatter not with you.
I love my father better then thou can.

Cor. The praise were great, spoke from another mouth:
But it should seem your neighbors dwell far off.

Rag. Nay, here is one, that will confirm as much
As she has said, both for my self and her.
I say, thou do not wish my fathers good.

Cord. Dear father. --

Leir. Peace, bastard Impe, no issue of King Leir,
I will not hear thee speak one tittle more.
Call not me father, if thou love thy life,
Nor these thy sisters once presume to name:
Look for no help henceforth from me nor mine;
Shist as thou will, and trust unto thy self:
My Kingdom will I equally divide
Twixt thy two sisters to their royal dowre,
And will bestow them worthy their deserts:
This done, because thou shall not have the hope,
To have a child's part in the time to come,
I presently will dispossess my self,
And set up these upon my princely throne.

Gone. I ever thought that pride would have a fall.

Ra. Plain dealing, sister: your beauty is so sheene,
You need no dowry, to make you be a Queen.

Exeunt Leir, Gonorill, Ragan. Cord. Now whither, poor forsaken, shall I go,
When mine own sisters tryumphin my woe:
But unto him which does protect the just,
In him will poor Cordella put her trust.
These hands shall labor, for to get my spending;
And so i will live until my days have ending.

Per. Oh, how I grieve, to see my Lord thus fond,
To dote so much upon vain flattering words.
Ah, if he but with good advice had weighed,
The hidden tenure of her humble speech,
Reason to rage should not have given place,
Nor poor Cordella suffer such disgrace.

Exit. Enter the Gallian King with Mumford, and three Nobles more. King.
Dissuade me not, my Lords, I am resolved,
This next fair wynd to sail for Brittany,
In some disguise, to see if flying fame
Be not too prodigal in the wondrous praise
Of these three Nymphs, the daughters of King Leir.
If present view do answer absent praise,
And eyes allow of what our ears have heard,
And Venus stand auspicious to my vows,
And Fortune favor what I take in hand;
I will return seyz'd of as rich a prize
As Jason, when he wanne the golden fleece.

Mum. Heavens grant you may; the match were full of honor,
And well beseeming the young Gallian King.
I would your Grace would favor me so much,
As make me partner of your Pilgrimage.
I long to see the gallant British Dames,
And feed mine eyes upon their rare perfections:
For till I know the contrary, I Will say,
Our Dames in France are far more fair then they.

Kin. Lord Mumford, you have saved me a labor,
In offering that which I did mean to ask:
And I most willingly accept your company.
Yet first I will inioyne you to observe
Some few conditions which I shall propose.

Mum. So that you do not tie mine eyes for looking
After the amorous glaunces of fair Dames:
So that you do not tie my tongue from speaking,
My lips from kissing when occasion serves,
My hands from congees, and my knees to bow
To gallant Gyrles; which were a task more hard,
Then flesh and blood is able to endure:
Command what else you please, I rest content.

Kin. To bind thee from a thing thou can not leave,
Were but a mean to make thee seek it more:
B3 And therefore speak, look, kiss, salute for me;
In these my self am like to second thee.
Now hear thy task. I charge thee from the time
That first we set sail for the British shore,
To use no words of dignity to me,
But in the friendliest manner that thou can,
Make use of me as thy companion:
For we will go disguisde in Palmers weeds,
That no man shall mistrust us what we are.

Mum. If that be all, i will fit your turn, I warrant you. I am some kin to the
Blunts, and I think, the bluntest of all my kindred; therefore if I be too
blunt with you, thank your self for praying me to be so.


King. Thy pleasant company will make the way see me short.
It rests now, that in my absence hence,
I do commit the government to you
My trusty Lords and faithful Counselors.
Time cutteth off the rest I have to say:
The wynd blows fair, and I must needs away.

Nobles. Heavens send your voyage to as good effect,
As we your land do purpose to protect.

Exeunt. Enter the King of Cornwall and his man booted and spurd, a riding
wand, and a letter in his hand. Corn. But how far distant are we from the Court?

Ser. Some twenty miles, my Lord, or thereabouts.

Corn. It seems to me twenty thousand miles:
Yet hope I to be there within this hour.

to himself. Ser. Then are you like to ride alone for me.
I think, my Lord is weary of his life.

Corn. Sweet Gonorill, I long to see thy face,
Which have so kindly gratified my love.

Enter the King of Cambria booted and spurd, and his man with a wand and a
letter. Came. He looks on the letter. Get a fresh horse: for by my soul I
swear,
I am past patience, longer to forbear
The wished sight of my beloved mistress,
Dear Ragan, stay and comfort of my life.

Ser. to himself. Now what in Gods name does my Lord intend?
He thinks he never shall come at's iourneyes end.
I would he had old Dedalus waxen wings,
That he might fly, so I might stay behind:
For e're we get to Troynouant, I see,
He quite will tire himself, his horse and me.

Cornwall and Cambria look one upon another, and start to see each other
there. Corn. Brother of Cambria, we greet you well,
As one whom here we little did expect.

Came. Brother of Cornwall, met in happy time:
I thought as much to have met with the Souldan of Persia,
As to have met you in this place, my Lord.
No doubt, it is about some great affairs,
That makes you here so slenderly accompanied.

Corn. To say the truth, my Lord, it is no less,
And for your part some hasty wind of chance
Has blown you hither thus upon the sudden.

Came. My Lord, to break off further circumstances,
For at this time I cannot brook delays:
Tell you your reason, I will tell you mine.

Corn. In faith content, and therefore to be brief;
For I am sure my haste's as great as yours:
I am sent for, to come unto King Leir,
Wh by these present letters promises
His eldest daughter, lovely Gonorill,
To me in marriage, and for present dowry,
The moity of half his Regiment.
The Ladies love I long ago possessed:
But until now I never had the fathers.

Came. You tell me wonders, yet I will relate
Strange news, and henceforth we must brothers call;
Witness these lines: his honorable age,
Being weary of the troubles of his Crown,
His princely daughter Ragan will bestow
On me in marriage, with half his Seigniories,
Whom I would gladly have accepted of,
With the third part, her complements are such.

Corn. If I have one half, and you have the other,
B4 Then between us we must needs have the whole.

Came. The hole! how mean you that? Zlood, I hope,
We shall have two holes between us.

Corn. Why, the whole Kingdom.

Came. I, that is very true.

Cor. What then is left for his third daughters dowry,
Lovely Cordella, whom the world admires?

Came. It Is very strange, I know not what to think,
Unless they mean to make a Nun of her.

Corn. 'T were pity such rare beauty should be hid
Within the compass of a Cloisters wall:
But howsoever, if Leirs words prove true,
It will be good, my Lord, for me and you.

Came. Then let s haste, all danger to prevent,
For fear delays do alter his intent.

Exeunt. Enter Gonorill and Ragan. Gone. Sister, when did you see Cordella last,
That pretty piece, that thinks none good enough
To speak to her, because (sir-reuerence)
She has a little beauty extraordinary?

Ra. Since time my father warnd her from his presence,
I never saw her, that I can remember.
God giver her joy of her surpassing beauty;
I think, her dowry will be small enough.

Gone. I have incenst my father so against her,
As he will never be reclaymd again.

Rag. I was not much behind to do the like.

Gone. Faith, sister, what moves you to bear her such good will?

Rag. In truth, I think, the same that moves you;
Because she does surpass us both in beauty.

Gone. Beshrew your fingers, how right you can guess:
I tell you true, it cuts me to the heart.

Rag. But we will keep her low enough, I warrant,
And clip her wings for mounting up too hye.

Gone. Who ever has her, shall have a rich marriage of her.

Rag. She were right fit to make a Parsons wife:
For they, men say, do love fair women well,
And many times do marry them with nothing.

Gone. With nothing! marry God forbid: why, are there any such?

Rag. I mean, no money.

Gone. I cry you mercy, I mistook you much:
And she is far too stately for the Church;
She Will lay her husbands Benefice on her back,
Even in one gown, if she may have her will.

Ra. In faith, poor soul, I pity her a little.
Would she were less fair, or more fortunate.
Well, I think long until I see my Morgan,
The gallant Prince of Cambria, here arrive.

Gone. And so do I, until the Cornwall King
Present himself, to consummate my joys.
Peace, here comes my father.

Enter Leir, Perillus and others. Leir. Cease, good my Lords, and sue not to
reuerse
Our censure, which is now irreuocable*
We have dispatched letters of contract
Unto the Kings of Cambria and of Cornwall;
Our hand and seal will justify no less:
Then do not so dishonor me, my Lords,
As to make shipwreck of our kingly word.
I am as kind as is the Pelican,
That kills itself, to save her young ones lives:
And yet as ielous as the princely Eagle,
That kills her young ones, if they-do but dazell
Upon the radiant splendour of the Sun.
Enter Kings of Cornwall and Cambria. Within this two days I expect their
coming.
But in good time, they are arrived already.
This haste of yours, my Lords, does testify
The fervent love you bear unto my daughters:
And think your selves as welcome to King Leir,
As ever Pryams children were to him.

Corn. My gracious Lord, and father too, I hope,
Pardon, for that I made no greater haste:
But were my horse as swift as was my will,
I long ere this had seen your Majesty.

Came. No other scuse of absence can I frame,
C Then what my brother has informed your Grace:
For our undeserved welcome, we do vow,
Perpetually to rest at your command.

Corn. But you, sweet Love, illustrious Gonorill,
The Regent, and the Sovereign of my soul,
Is Cornwall welcome to your Excellency?

Gone. As welcome, as Leander was to Hero,
Or brave Aeneas to the Carthage Queen:
So and more welcome is your Grace to me.

Came. O, may my fortune prove no worse then his,
Since heavens do know, my fancy is as much.
Dear Ragan, say, if welcome unto thee,
All welcomes else will little comfort me.

Rag. As gold is welcome to the covetous eye,
As sleep is welcome to the Traveler,
As is fresh water to sea-beaten men,
Or moystned showers unto the parched ground,
Or any thing more welcomer then this,
So and more welcome lovely Morgan is.

Leir. What rests then, but that we consummate,
The celebration of these nuptial Rites?
My Kingdom I do equally divide.
Princes, draw lots, and take your chance as falls.
Then they draw lots. These I resign as freely unto you,
As erst by true succession they were mine.
And here I do freely dispossess my self,
And make you two my true adopted heirs:
My self will soiorne with my son of Cornwall,
And take me to my prayers and my beads.
I know, my daughter Ragan will be sorry,
Because I do not spend my days with her:
Would I were able to be with both at once;
They are the kindest Gytles in Christen dome.

Per. I have bin silent all this while, my Lord,
To see if any worthyer then my self,
Would once have spoke in poor Cordellaes cause:
But love or fear ties silence to their toungs.
Oh, hear me speak for her, my gracious Lord,
Whose deeds have not deserved this ruthlesse doom,
As thus to disinherit her of all.

Leir. Urge this no more, and if thou love thy life:
I say, she is no daughter, that does scorn
To tell her father how she loves him.
Who ever speaks hereof to me again,
I will esteem him for my mortal foe.
Come, let us in, to celebrate vith joy,
The happy Nuptials of these lovely payres.

Exeunt omnes, manet Perillus. Per. Ah, who so blind, as they that will not see
The near approach of their own misery?
Poor Lady, I extremely pity her:
And whilst I live, each drop of my heart blood,
Will I strain forth, to do her any good.

Exit. Enter the Gallian King, and Mumford, disguised like Pilgrims. Mum. My
Lord, how do you brook this British air

King. My Lord? I told you of this foolish humor,

And bound you to the contrary, you know.
Mum. Pardon me for once, my Lord; I did forget.

King. My Lord again? then let us have nothing else,
And so be cane for spies, and then it is well.

Mum. Swounds, I could bite my tongue in two for angert
For Gods sake name your self some proper name.

King. Call me Trofillus: I Will call thee Denapoll.

Mum. Might I be made the Monarch of the world,
I could not hit upon these names, I swear.

King. Then call me Will, i will call thee Jack.

Mum. Well, be it so, for I have well deserved to be called lack.

King. Stand close; for here a British Lady comes:
Enter Cordella. A fayrer creature never mine eyes beheld.

Cord. This is a day of joy unto my sisters,
Wherein they both are married unto Kings;
And I, by birth, as worthy as themselves,
Am turned into the world, to seek my fortune.
How may I blame the fickle Queen of Chance.
C2 That makes me a pattern of her power?
Ah, poor weak maid, whose imbecility
Is far unable to endure these brunts.
Oh, father Leir, how do thou wrong thy child,
Who always was obedient to thy will!
But why accuse I fortune and my father?
No, no, it is the pleasure of my God:
And I do willingly embrace the rod.

King. It is no Goddess; for she does complaynt
On fortune, and th'vnkindnesse of her father.

Cord. These costly robes ill fitting my estate,
I will exchange for other meaner habit.

Mum. Now if I had a Kingdom in my hand,
I would exchange it for a milkmaids smock and petycoate,
That she and I might shift our clothes together.

Cord. I will betake me to my thread and Needle,
And earne my huing with my fingers ends.

Mum. O brave! God willing, thou shall have my custom,
By sweet S. Denis, here I sadly swear,
For all the shirts and night gear that I wear.

Cord. I will profess and vow a maidens life.

Mum. The^ I protest thou shall not have my custom.

King. I can forbear no longer for to speak:
For if I do, I think my heart will break.

Mum. Sblood, Will, I hope you are not in love with my Se^pster.

King. I am in such a laborinth of love,
As that I know not which way to get out.

Mum. You Will never get out, unless you first get in,

King. I prithy lack, cross not my passions.

Mum. Prithy Will, to her, and try her patience.

King. Thou fairest creature, whatsoere thou art,
That ever any mortal eyes be held,
Vouchsafe to me, who have o'reheard thy woees,
To show the cause of these thy sad laments.

Cor. Ah Pilgrims, what auailes to show the cause,
When there is no means to find a remedy?

King. To utter grief, does ease a heart over charged.

Cor. To touch a sore, does aggravate the pain.

King. The silly mouse, by virtue of her teeth,
Released the princely Lion from the net.

Cor. Kind Palmer, which so much defir'st to hear
The tragic tale of my unhappy youth:
Know this in brief, I am the hapless daughter
Of Leir, sometimes King of Btittany.

King. Why, who debarres his honorable age,
From being still the King of Brittany?

Cor. None, but himself has dispossessed himself,
And given all his Kingdom to the Kings
Of Cornwall and of Cambria, with my sisters.

King. Has he given nothing to your lovely self?

Cor. He loved me not, and therfote gave me nothing,
Only because I could not flatter him:
And in this day of triumph to my sisters,
Does Fortune triumph in my overthrow.

King. Sweet Lady, say there should come a King,
As good as either of your sisters husbands,
To crave your love, would you accept of him?

Cor. Oh, do not mock with those in misery,
Nor do not think, though fortune have the power,
To spoil mine honor, and debase my state,
That she has any interest in my mind:
For if the greatest Monarch on the earth,
Should sue to me in this extremity,
Except my heart could love, and heart could like,
Better then any that I ever saw,
His great estate no more should move my mind,
Then mountains move by blast of every wind.

King. Think not, sweet Nymph, it is holy Palmers guise,
To grieved souls fresh torments to devise:
Therefore in witness of my true intent,
Let heaven and earth bear record of my words:
There is a young and lusty Gallian King,
So like to me, as I am to my self,
That earnestly does crave to have thy love,
And join with thee in Hymen's sacred bonds.

Cor. The like to thee did never these eyes behold;
C3 Oh live to add new torments to my grief:
Why did thou thus entrap me unawares?
Ah Palmer, my estate does not befit
A kingly marriage, as the case now stands.
Whilome when as I lived in honors height,
A Prince perhaps might postulate my love:
Now misery, dishonor and disgrace,
Has light on me, and quite reuerst the case.
Thy King will hold thee wise, if thou surcease
The suit, whereas no dowry will ensue.
Then be advised, Palmer, what to do:
Cease for thy King, seek for thy self to woo.

King. Your birth's too high for any, but a King.

Cor. My mind is low enough to love a Palmer,
Rather then any King upon the earth.

King. O, but you never can endure their life,
Which is so straight and full of penury.

Cor. O yes, I can, and happy if I might:
I Will hold thy Palmers staff within my hand,
And think it is the Scepter of a Queen.
Sometime i will set thy Bonnet on my head,
And think I wear a rich imperial Crown.
Sometime i will help thee in thy holy prayers,
And think I am with thee in Paradise.
Thus i will mock fortune, as she mocketh me,
And never will my lovely choice repent:
For having thee, I shall have all content.

King. 'Twere sin to hold her longer in suspense,
Since that my soul has vowed she shall be mine.
Ah, dear Cordella, cordial to my heart,
I am no Palmer, as I seem to be,
But hither come in this unknown disguise,
To view th'admired beauty of those eyes.
I am the King of Gallia, gentle maid,
(Although thus slenderly accompanied)
And yet thy vassayle by imperious Love,
And sworn to serve thee everlastingly.

Cor. What e're you be, of high or low descent,
All Is one to me, I do request but this:
That as I am, you will accept of me,
And I will have you whatloe're you be:
Yet well I know, you come of royal race,
I see such sparks of honor in your face:

Mum. Have Paliners weeds such power to win fair Ladies?
Faith, then I hope the next that falls is mine:
Upon condition I no worse might speed,
I would for ever wear a Palmers weed.
I like an honest and plain dealing wench,
That swears (without exceptions) I will have you.
These foppets, that know not whether to love a man or no, except they first go
ask their mothers leave, by this hand, I hate them ten times worse then poison.


King. What rests then our happiness to procure?

Mum. Faith, go to Church, to make the matter sure.

King. It shall be so, because the world shall say,
King Leirs three daughters were wedded in one day:
The celebration of this happy chance,
We will defer, until we come to France.

Mum. I like the wooing, that is not long a doing.
Well, for her sake, I know what I know:
I Will never marry whilst I live,
Except I have one of these British Ladies,
My humor is alienated from the mayds of France.

Exeunt. Enter Perillus solus. Per. The King has dispossessed himself of all,
Those to advance, which scarce will give him thanks:
His youngest daughter he has turned away,
And no man knows what is become of her.
He soiournes now in Cornwall with the eldest,
Who flattred him, until she did obtain
That at his hands, which now she does possesses
And now she sees he has no more to give,
It grieves her heart to see her father live.
Oh, whom should man trust in this wicked age,
When children thus against their parents rage?
But he, the myrrour of mild patience,
C4 Puts up all wrongs, and never gives reply:
Yet shames she not in most opprobrious sort,
To call him fool and doterd to his face,
And sets her Parasites of purpose often,
In scoffing wise to offer him disgrace.
Oh iron age! O times! O monstrous, vilde,
When parents are contemned of the child!
His pension she has half restrained from him,
And will, e're long, the other half, I fear:
For she thinks nothing is bestowde in vain,
But that which does her fathers life maintain.
Trust not alliance; but trust strangers rather,
Since daughters prove disloyal to the father.
Well, I will counsel him the best I can:
Would I were able to redress his wrong.
Yet what I can, unto my utmost power,
He shall be sure of to the latest hour.

Exit. Enter Gonorill, and Skalliger. Gone. I prithy, Skalliger, tell me what
thou think:
Could any woman of our dignity
Endure such quips and peremptory taunts,
As I do daily from my doting father?
Doth't not suffice that I him keep of alms,
Who is not able for to keep himself?
But as if he were our better, he should think
To check and snap me up at every word.
I cannot make me a new fashioned gown,
And set it forth with more then common cost;
But his old doting doltish withered wit,
Is sure to give a sense less check for it.
I cannot make a banquet extraordinary,
To grace my self, and spread my name abroad,
But he, old fool, is captious by and by,
And says, the cost would well suffice for twice.
Judge then, I pray, what reason is it, that I
Should stand alone charged with his vain expense,
And that my sister Ragan should go free,
To whom he gave as much, as unto me?
I prithy, Skalliger, tell me, if thou know,
By any means to rid me of this woe.

Skal. Your many favors still bestowde on me,
Bind me in duty to advise your Grace,
How you may soonest remedy this ill.
The large allowance which he has from you,
Is that which makes him so forget himself:
Therefore abridge it half, and you shall see,
That having less, he will more thankful be:
For why, abundance makes us forget
The fountaynes whence the benefits do spring.

Genesis Well, Skalliger, for thy kind advice herein,
I will not be ungrateful, if I live:
I have restrained half his portion already,
And I will presently restrain the other,
That having no means to relieve himself,
He may go seek elsewhere for better help.

Exit. Skal. Go, viperous woman, shame to all thy sex:
The heavens, no doubt, will punish thee for this:
And me a villayne, that to curry favor,
Have given the daughter counsel against the father.
But us the world does this experience give,
That he that cannot flatter, cannot live.

Exit. Enter King of Conrwall, Leir, Perillus and Nobles. Corn. Father, what
ayleth you to be so sad?
Me thinks, you frollike not as you were wont.

Leir. The nearer we do grow unto our graves,
The less we do delight in worldly joys.

Corn. But if a man can frame himself to mirth,
It is a mean for to prolong his life.

Leir. Then welcome sorrow, Leirs only friend,
Who does desire his troubled days had end.

Corn. Comfort your self, father, here comes your daughter,
Who much will grieve, I know, to see you sad.

Enter Gonorill. Leir. But more does grieve, I fear, to see me live.

Corn. My Gonorill, you come in wished time,
To put your father from these pensive dumps.
In faith, I fear that all things go not well.

D Gone. What, do you fear, that I have angered him?
Has he complaynd of me unto my Lord:
I Will provide him a piece of bread and cheese;
For in a time heel practice nothing else,
Then carry tales from one unto another.
It Is all his practice for to kindle strife,
'Twixt you, my Lord, and me your loving wife:
But I will take an order, if I can,
To cease the effect, where first the cause began.

Corn. Sweet, be not angry in a partial cause,
He never complaynd of thee in all his life.
Father, you must not weygh a woman's words.

Leir. Alas, not I: poor soul, she breeds young bones,
And that is it makes her so tuteliy sure.

Gone. What, breeds young bones already! you will make
An honest woman of me then, belike.
O vild old wretch! who ever heard the like,
That seeks thus his own child to defame?

Corn. I cannot stay to hear this discord sound.

Exit. Gone. For any one that loves your company,
You may go pack, and seek some other place,
To sow the seed of discord and disgrace.

Exit. Leir. Thus, say or do the best that e're I can,
It Is wrested straight into another sense.
This punishment my heavy sins deserve,
And more then this ten thousand thousand times:
Else aged Leir them could never find
Cruel to him, to whom he has bin kind.
Why do I ouer-liue my self, to see
The course of nature quite rouerst in me?
Ah, gentle Death, if ever any wight
Did wish thy presence with a perfect zeal:
Then come, I pray thee, even with all my heart,
And end my sorrows with thy fatal dart.

He weeps. Per. Ah, do not so disconsolate your self,
Nor dew your aged cheeks with wasting tears.

Leir. What man art thou that take any pity
Upon the worthless state of old Leir?

Per. One, who does be are as great a share of grief,
As if it were my dearest fathers case.

Leir. Ah, good my friend, how ill art thou aduisde,
For to consort with miserable men:
Go learn to flatter, where thou may in time
Get favor amongst the mighty, and so clyme;
For now I am so poor and full of want.
As that I never can recompense thy love.

Per. What Is got by flattery, does not long endure;
And men in favor live not most secure.
My conscience tells me, if I should forsake you,
I were the hatefulst excrement on the earth:
Which well do know, in course of former time,
How good my Lord has bin to me and mine.

Leir. Did I ererayse thee higher then the rest
Of all thy ancestors which were before?

Per. I never did seek it; but by your good Grace,
I still inioyed my own with quietness,

Leir. Did I ere give thee living, to increase
The due reuennues which thy father left?

Per. I had enough, my Lord, and having that,
What should you need to give me any more?

Leir. Oh, did I ever dispossess my self,
And give thee half my Kingdom in good will:

Per. Alas, my Lord, there were no reason, why
You should have such a thought, to give it me.

Leir. Nay, if thou talk of reason, then be mute;
For with good reason I can thee confute.
If they, which first by natures sacred law,
Do owe to me the tribute of their lives;
If they to whom I always have bin kind,
And bountiful beyond comparison;
If they, for whom I have undone my self,
And brought my age unto this extreme want,
Do now reject, contemn, despise, abhor me,
What reason moves thee to sorrow for me:

Per. Where reason fayles, let tears confirm my love,
And speak how much your passions do me move.
D2 Ah, good my Lord, condemn not all for one:
You have two daughters left, to whom I know
You shall be welcome, if you please to go.

Leir. Oh, how thy words add sorrow to my soul,
To think of my unkindness to Cordella!
Whom causelesle I did dispossess of all,
Upon th'vnkind suggestions of her sisters:
And for her sake, I think this heavy doom
Is fallen on me, and not without desert:
Yet unto Ragan was I always kind,
And gave to her the half of all I had:
It may be, if I should to her repair,
She would be kinder, and entreat me fair.

Per. No doubt she would, and practice ere't be long,
By force of Arms for to redress your wrong.

Leir. Well, since thou do advise me for to go,
I am resolved to try the worst of woe.

Exeunt. Enter Ragan solus. Rag. How may I bless the hour of my nativity,
Which bodeth unto me such happy Stars!
How may I thank kind fortune, that vouchsafes
To all my actions, such desired event!
I rule the King of Cambria as I please:
The States are all obedient to my will;
And look what ere I say, it shall be so;
Not any one, that dares answer no.
My eldest sister lives in royal state,
And wants nothing fitting her degreet
Yet has she such a cooling card withal,
As that her honey sauoureth much of gall,
My father with her is quartermaster still,
And many times restraynes her of her will:
But if he were with me, and served me so,
I Would send him packing some where else to go,
I Would entertayne him wi^^ such slender cost,
That he should quickly wish to change his host.

Exit. Enter Cornwall, Gonorill, and attendants. Corn. Ah, Gonorill, what dire
unhappy chance
Has sequestered thy father from our presence,
That no report can yet be heard of him:
Some great unkindness has bin offered him,
Exceeding far the bounds of patience:
Else all the world shall never me persuade,
He would forsake us without notice made.

Gone. Alas, my Lord, whom does it touch so near,
Or who has interest in this grief, but I,
Whom sorrow had brought to her longest home,
But that I know his qualities so well?
I know, he is but stolen upon my sister
At unawares, to see her how she fares,
And spend a little time with her, to note
How all things go, and how she likes her choice:
And when occasion serves, heel steal from her,
And unawares return to us again.
Therefore, my Lord, be frolic, and resolve
To see my father here again e're long.

Corn. I hope so too; but yet to be more sure,
I Will send a Post immediately to know
Whether he be arrived there or no.

Exit. Gone. But I will intercept the Messenger,
And temper him before he does depart,
With sweet persuasions, and with sound rewards,
That his report shall ratify my speech,
And make my Lord cease further to inquire.
If he be not gone to my sisters Court,
As sure my mind presageth that he is,
He happily may, by traveling unknown ways,
Fall sick, and as a common passenger,
Be dead and buried: would God it were so well;
For then there were no more to do, but this,
He went away, and none knows where he is,
But say he be in Cambria with the King,
And there exclayme against me, as he will:
I know he is as welcome to my sister,
As water is into a broken ship.
Well, after him I Will send such thunderclaps
D3 Of slander, scandal, and inuentedtales,
That all the blame shall be removed from me,
And vnperceiu'd rebound upon himself.
Thus with one nail another I Will expel,
And make the world judge, that I used him well.

Enter the Messenger that should go to Cambria, with a letter in his band. Gone.
My honest friend, whither away so fast?

Mes. To Cambria, Madam, with letters from the king.

Gone. To whom?

Mess. Unto your father, if he be there.

Gone. Let me see them.

She opens them. Mess. Madam, I hope your Grace will stand
Between me and my neck-verse, if I be
Called in question, for opening the Kings letters.

Gone. 'Twas was I that opened them, it was not thou.

Mes. I, but you need not care: and so must I,
A hansome man, be quickly trust up,
And when a man's hanged, all the world cannot save him,

Gone. He that hangs thee, were better hang his father,
Or that but hurts thee in the least degree.
I tell thee, we make great account of thee.

Mes. I am o're-ioy'd, I surfeit of sweet words:
Kind Queen, had I a hundred lines, I would
Spend ninety nine of them for you, for that word.

Gone. I, but thou would keep one life still,
And that is as many as thou art like to have.

Mes. That one life is not too dear for my good Queen; this sword, this
buckler, this head, this heart, these hands, arms, legs, tripes, bowels, and
all the members else whatsoever, are at your dispose; use me, trust me,
command me: if I fail in any thing, tie me to a dung cart, and make a
Scauengers horse of me, and whip me, so long as I have any skin on my back.


Gone. In token of further employment, take that.

Flings him a purse. Mes. A strong Bond, a firm Obligation, good in law, good
in law: if I keep not the condition, let my neck be the forfeyture of my
negligence.


Gone. I like thee well; thou have a good tongue.

Mes. And as bad a tongue if it be set on it, as any Oysterwife at Billingsgate
has: why, I have made many of my neighbors forsake their houses with railing
upon them, and go dwell else where; and so by my means houses have bin good
cheap in our parish: My tongue being well whetted with choler, is more sharp
then a Razer of Palerno.


Gone. O, thou art a fit man for my purpose.

Mes. Commend me not, sweet Queen, before you try me. As my deserts are, so do
think of me.


Gone. Well said, then this is thy trial: Instead of carrying the Kings letters
to my father, carry thou these letters to my sister, which contain matter
quite contrary to the other: there shall she be given to understand, that my
father has detracted her, given out slaundrous speeches against her; and that
he has most intollerably abused me, let my Lord and me at variance, and made
mutinyes amongst the commons.

These things (although it be not so)
Yet thou must affirm them to be true,
With oaths and protestations as will serve,
To drive my sister out of love with him,
And cause my will accomplished to be.
This do, thou winst my favor for ever,
And make a hye way of preferment to thee
And all thy friends.

Mess. It suffices, conceyt it is already done:
I will so toung-whip him, that I will
Leave him as bare of credit, as a Poulter
Leaves a Cony, when she pulls off his skin.

Gone. Yet there is a further matter.

Mes. I thirst to hear it.

Gone. If my sister thinks convenient, as my letters imports, to make him
away, have thou the heart to effect it?

Mess. Few words are best in so small a matter:
These are but trifles. By this book I will.

kiss the paper. D4 Gone. About it presently, I long till it be done,

Mes. I fly, I fly.

Exeunt. Enter Cordella solus. I have bin ouer-negligent to day,
In going to the Temple of my God,
To render thanks for all his benefits,
Which he miraculously has bestowed on me,
In raising me out of my mean estate,
When as I was deuoyd of worldly friends,
And placing me in such a sweet content,
As far exceeds the reach of my deserts.
My kingly husband, my rrour of his time,
For zeal, for justice, kindness, and for care
To God, his subjects, me, and Common weal,
By his appointment was ordaynd for me.
I cannot with the thing that I do want;
I cannot want the thing but I may have,
Save only this which I shall never obtain,
My fathers love, oh this I never shall gain.
I would abstain from any nutryment,
And pyne my body to the very bones:
Bare foot I would on pilgrimage set forth
Unto the furthest quarters of the earth,
And all my life time would I sackcloth wear,
And mourning-wise power dust upon my head:
So he but to forgive me once would please,
That his gray hairs might go to heaven in peace.
And yet I know not how I him offended,
Or wherein justly I have deserved blame.
Oh sisters! you are much to blame in this,
It was not he, but you that did me wrong.
Yet God forgive both him, and you and me,
Even as I do in perfect charity.
I will to Church, and pray unto my Savior,
That ere I dye, I may obtain his favor.

Exit. Enter Leir and Perillus fayntly. Per. Rest on me, my Lord, and stay your
self,
The way seems tedious to your aged lymmes.

Leir. Nay, rest on me, kind friend, and stay thy self,
Thou art as old as I, but more kind.

Per. Ah, good my Lord, it ill befits, that I
Should lean upon the person of a King.

Leir. But it fits worse, that I should bring thee forth,
That had no cause to come along with me,
Through these uncouth paths, and tirefull ways,
And never ease thy faynting limbs a whit.
Thou have left all, I, all to come with me,
And I, for all, have naught to guerdon thee.

Per. Cease, good my Lord, to aggrauate my woes,
With these kind words, which cuts my heart in two,
To think your will should want the power to do.

Leir. Cease, good Perillus, for to call me Lord,
And think me but the shadow of my self.

Per. That honorable title will I give,
Unto my Lord, so long as I do live.
Oh, be of comfort; for I see the place
Whereas your daughter keeps her residence.
And lo, in happy time the Cambrian Prince
Is here arrived, to gratify our coming.

Enter the Prince of Cambria, Ragan and Nobles: look upon them, and whisper
together. Leir. Were I best speak, or sit me down and dye:
I am ashamed to tell this heavy tale.

Per. Then let me tell it, if you please, my Lord:
It Is shame for them that were the cause thereof.

Came. What two old men are those that seem so sad?
Me thinks, I should remember well their looks.

Rag. No, I mistake not, sure it is my father:
I must dissemble kindness now of force.
She runs to him, and kneeles down, saying: Father, I bid you welcome, full
of grief,
To see your Grace used thus unworthily,
And ill befitting for your reverend age,
To come on foot a journey so indurable.
Oh, what disaster chance has bin the cause,
To make your cheeks so hollow, spare and lean?
E He cannot speak for weeping: for Gods love, come.
Let us refresh him with some needful things,
And at more leisure we may better know,
Whence springs the ground of this unlooked for woe.

Came. Come, father, e're we any further talk,
You shall refresh you after this weary walk.

Exeunt, manet Ragan. Rag. Comes he to me with finger in the eye,
To tell a tale against my sister here?
Whom I do know, he greatly has abusde:
And now like a contentious crafty wretch,
He first begins for to complain himself,
When as himself is in the greatest fault.
I Will not be partial in my sisters cause,
Nor yet believe his doting vain reports:
Who for a trifle (safely) I dare say,
Upon a spleen is stolen thence away:
And here (forsooth) he hops to have harbor,
And to be moan'd and made on like a child:
But ere't be long, his coming he shall curse,
And truly say, he came from bad to worse:
Yet will I make fair weather, to procure
Convenient means, and then i will strike it sure.

Exit. Enter Messenger solus, Mes. Now happily I am arrived here,
Before the stately Palace of the Cambrian King:
If Leir be here safe-seated, and in rest,
To rowse him from it I will do my best.
Enter Ragan. Now bags of gold, your virtue is (no doubt)
To make me in my message bold and stout.
The King of heaven preserve your Majesty.
And send your Highness everlasting reign.

Ra. Thanks, good my friend; but what imports thy message message*

Mes. Kind greetings from the Cornwall Queen:
The residue these letters will declare.

She opens the letters. Rag. How fares our royal sister?

Mes. I did leave her at my parting, in good health.
She reads the letter, frowns and stamps. See how her color comes and goes
again,
Now red as scarlet, now as pale as ash:
She how she knits her brow, and bytes her lips,
And stamps, and makes a dumb show of disdain,
Mixed with revenge, and violent extremes.
Here will be more work and more crowns for me.

Rag. Alas, poor soul, and has he used her thus
And is he now come hither, with intent
To set divorce betwixt my Lord and me?
Does he give out, that he does hear repore,
That I do rule my husband as I list,
And therefore means to alter so the case,
That I shall know my Lord to be my head*
Well, it were best for him to take good heed,
Or I will make him hop without a head,
For his presumption, dottard that he is.
In Cornwall he has made such mutinies,
First, setting of the King against the Queen;
Then stirring up the Commons against the King;
That had he there continued any longer,
He had bin called in question for his fact.
So upon that occasion thence he fled,
And comes thus slily stealing unto us:
And now already since his coming hither,
My Lord and he are grown in such a league,
That I can have no conference with his Grace:
I fear, he does already intimate
Some forged cauillations'gainst my state:
It Is therefore best to cut him off in time,
Lest slanderous rumors once abroad dispersed,
It is too late for them to be reuerst.
Friend, as the tennour of these letters shows,
My sister puts great confidence in thee.

Mes. She never yet committed trust to me,
But that (I hope) she found me always faithful*
So will I be to any friend of hers,
That has occasion to employ my help.

Rag. Have thou the heart to act a stratagem,
E2 And give a stabbe or two, if need require?

Mes. I have a heart compact of Adamant,
Which never knew what melting pity meant.
I weigh no more the murdring of a man,
Then I respect the cracking of a Flea,
When I do catch her biting on my skin.
If you will have your husband or your father,
Or both of them sent to another world,
Do but command me do it, it shall be done.

Rag. It is enough, we make no doubt of thee:
Meet us to morrow here, at nine a clock:
Mean while, farewell, and drink that for my sake.

Exit. Mes. I, this is it will make me do the deed:
Oh, had I every day such customers,
This were the gainefulst trade in Christendom!
A purse of gold given for a paltry stabbe!
Why, here is a wench that longs to have a stabbe.
Well, I could give it her, and never hurt her neither.

Enter the Gallian King, and Cordella. King. When will these clouds of sorrow
once disperse,
And smiling joy triumph upon thy brow:
When will this Scene of sadness have an end,
And pleasant acts ensue, to move delight?
When will my lovely Queen cease to lament,
And take some comfort to her grieved thoughts;
If of thy self thou daignst to have no care,
Yet pity me, whom thy grief makes despair.

Cor. O, grieve not you, my Lord, you have no cause:
Let not my passions move your mind a whit:
For I am bound by nature, to lament
For his ill will, that life to me first lent.
If so the stock be dried with disdain,
Withered and sere the branch must needs remain.

King. But thou art now graft in another stock;
I am the stock, and thou the lovely branch:
And from my root continual sap shall flow,
To make thee flourish with perpetual spring.
Forget thy father and thy kindred now,
Since they forsake thee like inhumane beasts,
Think they are dead, since all their kindness dies,
And bury them, where black oblivion lies.
Think not thou art the daughter of old Leir,
Who did unkindly disinherit thee:
But think thou art the noble Gallian Queen,
And wife to him that dearly loves thee:
Embrace the joys that present with thee dwell,
Let sorrow pack and hide her self in hell.

Cord. Not that I miss my country or my kin,
My old acquaintance or my ancient friends,
Does any whit distemperate my mind,
Knowing you, which are more dear to me,
Then Country, kin, and all things else can be.
Yet pardon me, my gracious Lord, in this:
For what can stop the course of natures power?
As easy is it for foure-footed beasts,
To stay themselves upon the liquid air,
And mount aloft into the element,
And ouerstrip the feathered Fowls in flight:
As easy is it for the slimy Fish,
To live and thrive without the help of water:
As easy is it for the Blackamoore,
To wash the tawny color from his skin,
Which all oppose against the course of nature,
As I am able to forget my father.

King. Myrrour of virtue, Phoenix of our age!
Too kind a daughter for an unkind father,
Be of good comfort; for I will dispatch
Ambassadors immediately for Brittayne,
Unto the King of Cornwalls Court, whereas
Your father keeps now his residence,
And in the kindest manner him entreat,
That setting former grieuances apart,
He will be pleased to come and visit us.
If no entreaty will suffice the turn,
I Will offer him the half of all my Crown:
If that moves not, we will furnish out a Fleet,
E3 And sail to Cornwall for to visit him;
And there you shall be firemly reconcilde
In perfect love, as erst you were ^^fore.

Cor. Where tongue cannot suf^^^^^^t thanks afford,
The King of heaven remunerate my Lord.

King. Only be blithe, and frolic (sweet) with me:
This and much more i will do to comfort thee.

Enter Messenger solus. Mes. It is a world to see now I am flush,
How many friends I purchase every where!
How many seeks to creep into my favor,
And kiss their hands, and bend their knees to me!
No more, here comes the Queen, now shall I know her mind,
And hope for to derive more crowns from her.

Enter Raga^. Rag. My friend, I see thou mind'st thy promise well,
And art before me here, me thinks, to day.

Mes. I am a poor man, and it like your Grace;
But yet I always love to keep my word.

Ra. Well, keep thy word with me, and thou shall see,
That of a poor man I will make thee rich.

Mes. I long to hear it, it might have bin dispatched,
If you had told me of it yesternight.

Ra. It is a thing of right strange consequence,
And well I cannot utter it in words.

Mes. It is more strange, that I am not by this
Beside my self, with longing for to hear it.
Were it to meet the Devil in his den,
And try a bout with him for a scratcht face,
I Would undertake it, if you would but bid me.

Ra. Ah, good my friend, that I should have thee do,
Is such a thing, as I do shame to speak;
Yet it must needs be done.

Mes. I Will speak it for thee, Queen: shall I kill thy father?
I know it is that, and if it be so, say.

Rag. I.

Mes. Why, that's enough.

Rag. And yet that is not all.

Mes. What else?

Rag. Thou must kill that old man that came with him.

Mes. Here are two hands, for each of them is one

Rag. And for each hand here is a recompense

Give him two purses. Mes. Oh, that I had ten hands by miracle,
I could tear ten in pieces with my teeth,
So in my mouth yould put a purse of gold.
But in what manner must it be effected?

Rag. To morrow morning ere the break of day,
I by a wyle will send them to the thicket,
That is about some two miles from the Court,
And promise them to meet them there my self,
Because I must have private conference,
About some news I have receyu'd from Cornwall.
This is enough, I know, they will not fail,
And then be ready for to play thy part:
Which done, thou may right easily escape,
And no man once mistrust thee for the fact:
But yet, before thou prosecute the act,
Show him the letter, which my sister sent,
There let him read his own indictment first,
And then proceed to exertion:
But see thou faint not; for they will speak fair.

Mes. Could he speak words as pleasing as the pipe
Of Mercury, which charmed the hundred eyes
Of watchful Argos, and enforced him sleep:
Yet here are words so pleasing to my thoughts,
To the purst. As quite shall take away the sound of his.

Exit. Rag. About it then, and when thou have dispatched,
I Will find a means to send thee after him.

Exit. Enter Cornwall and Gonorill. Corn. I wonder that the Messenger does stay,
Whom we dispatched for Cambria so long since*
If that his answer do not please us well,
And be do show good reason for delay,
I Will teach him how to dally with his King,
And to detayne us in such long suspense.

Gone. My Lord, I think the reason may be this:
My father means to come along with him*
E4 And therefore it is his pleasure he shall stay,
For to attend upon him on the way.

Corn. It may be so, and therefore till I know
The truth thereof, I will suspend my judgment.

Enter Servant. Ser. And't like your Grace, there is an Ambassador
Arrived from Gallia, and craves admittance to your Majesty.

Corn. From Gallia? what should his message
Hither import? is not your father happily
Gone thither? well, whatsoere it be,
Bid him come in, he shall have audience.
Enter Ambassador. What news from Gallia? speak Ambassador.

Am. The noble King and Queen of Gallia first salutes,
By me, their honorable father, my Lord Leir:
Next, they commend them kindly to your Graces,
As those whose welfare they entirely wish,
Letters I have to deliver to my Lord Leir,
And presents too, if I might speak with him.

Gone. If you might speak with him? why, do you think,
We are afraid that you should speak with him?

Am. Pardon me, Madam; for I think not so,
But say so only, cause he is not here.

Corn. Indeed, my friend, upon some urgent cause,
He is at this time absent from the Court:
But if a day or two you here repose.
It Is very likely you shall have him here,
Or else have certain notice where he is.

Gone. Are not we worthy to receive your message:

Am. I had incharge to do it to himself.

Gone. It may be then 'twill not be done in haste.
to herself. How does my sister brook the air of France?

Am. Exceeding well, and never sick one hour,
Since first she set her foot upon the shore.

Gone. I am the more sorry.

Am. I hope, not so, Madam.

Gone. Did thou not say, that she was ever sick,
Since the first hour that she arrived there?

Amb. No, Madam, I said quite contrary.

Gone. Then I mistook thee.

Corn. Then she is merry, if she have her health.

Am. Oh no, her grief exceeds, until the time,
That she be reconciled unto her father.

Gone. God continue it.

Am. What, Madam?

Gone. Why, her health.

Am. Amen to that: but God release her grief,
And send her father in a better mind,
Then to continue always so unkind.

Corn. I Will be a mediator in her cause,
And seek all means to expiat his wrath.

Am. Madam, I hope your Grace will do the like.

Gone. Should I be a mean to exasperate his wrath
Against my sister, whom I love so dear? no, no.

Am. To expiate or mittigate his wrath:
For he has misconceyued without a cause.

Gone. O, I, what else?

Am. It Is pity it should be so, would it were other wise.

Gone. It were great pity it should be otherwise.

Am. Then how, Madam?

Gone. Then that they should be reconcilde again.

Am. It shows you bear an honorable mind.

Con. It shows thy understanding to be blind,
Speaks to her self. And that thou had need of an interpreter:
Well, I will know thy message ere't be long,
And find a mean to cross it, if I can.

Corn. Come in, my friend, and frolic in our Court,
Till certain notice of my father come.

Exeunt. Enter Leir and Perillus. Per. My Lord, you are up to day before your
hour,
It Is news to you to be abroad sorathe.

Leir. It Is news indeed, I am so extreme: heavy,
That I can scarcely keep my eyelids open.

Per. And so am I, but I impute the cause
To rising sooner then we use to do.

Leir. Hither my daughter means to come disguised
F I Will sit me down, and read until she come.

Pull out a book and sit down. Per. She Will not belong, I warrant you, my Lords
But say, a couple of these they call good fellows.
Should step out of a hedge, and set upon us,
We were in good case for to answer them.

Leir. 'Twere not for us to stand upon our hands*

Per. I fear, we scant should stand upon our legs.
But how should we do to defend our selves?

Leir. Even pray to God, to bless us from their hands:
For fervent prayer much ill hap withstands.

Per. I Will sit and pray with you for company;
Yet was I never so heavy in my life.

They fall both asleep. Enter the Messenger or murderer with two daggers in
his hands. Mess. Were it not a mad jest, lest two or three of my profession
should meet me, and lay me down in a ditch, and play rob thiere with me, and
perforce take my gold away from me, whilst I act this stratagem, and by this
means the gray beards should escape? Faith, when I were at liberty again, I
would make no more to do, but go to the next tree, and there hang my self.

See them and start. But stay, me thinks, my youths are here already,
And with pure zeal have prayed themselves asleep.
I think, they know to what intent they came,
And are provided for another world.
He takes their books away. Now could I stab them bravely, while they sleep,
And in a manner put them to no pain;
And doing so, I showed them mighty friendship:
For fear of death is worse then death it self.
But that my sweet Queen willed me for to show
This letter to them, ere I did the deed.
Mass, they begin to stir: i will stand aside;
So shall I come upon them unawares.

They wake and rise. Leir. I marvel, that my daughter stays so long.

Per. I fear, we did mistake the place, my Lord.

Leir. God grant we do not miscarry in the place:
I had a short nap, but so full of dread,
As much amazeth me to think thereof.

Per. Fear not, my Lord, dreams are but fantasies,
And slight imaginations of the brain.

Mes. Persuade him so; but i will make him and you
Confess, that dreams do often prove too true.

Per. I pray, my Lord, what was the effect of it?
I may go near to guess what it pretends.

Mes. Leave that to me, I will expound the dream.

Leir. Me thought, my daughters, Gonorill and Ragan,
Stood both before me with such grim aspects,
Each brandishing a Faulchion in their hand,
Ready to lop a lymme off where it fell,
And in their other hands a naked poynyard,
Wherewith they stabd me in a hundred places,
And to their thinking left me there for dead:
But then my youngest daughter, fair Cordella,
Came with a box of Balsome in her hand,
And powered it into my bleeding wounds,
By whose good means I was recovered well,
In perfect health, as erst I was before:
And with the fear of this I did awake,
And yet for fear my feeble joints quake.

Mes. I Will make you quake for something presently.
Stand, Stand.

They reele. Leir. We do, my friend, although with much ado.

Mes. Deliver, deliver.

Per. Deliver us, good Lord, from such as he.

Mes. You should have prayed before, while it was time,
And then perhaps, you might have escaped my hands:
But you, like faithful watchmen, fell asleep,
The whilst I came and took your Halberds from you*
Show their Books. And now you want your weapons of defense,
How have you any hope to be delivered?
This comes, because you have no better stay,
F2 But fall asleep, when you should watch and pray:

Leir. My friend, thou seemst to be a proper man.

Mes. Sblood, how the old slave claws me by the elbow?
He thinks, belike, to escape by scraping thus.

Per. And it may be, are in some need of money.

Mes. That to be false, behold my evidence.

Shows his purses. Leir. If that I have will do thee any good,
I give it thee, even with a right good will.

Take it. Per. Here, take mine too, and wish with all my heart,
To do thee pleasure, it were twice as much.

Take his, and weygh them both in his hands. Mes. I Will none of them, they are
too light for me.

Puts them in his pocket. Leir. Why then farewell: and if thou have occasion
In any thing, to use me to the Queen,
It Is like enough that I can pleasure thee.

They proffer to go. Mes. Do you hear, do you hear, sir:
If I had occasion to use you to the Queen,
Would you do one thing for me I should ask?

Leir. I, any thing that lies within my power.
Here is my hand upon it, so farewell.

Proffer to go. Mes. Hear you sir, hear you? pray, a word with you.
Me thinks, a comely honest ancient man
Should not dissemble with one for a vantage.
I know, when I shall come to try this gear,
You will recant from all that you have said.

Per. Mistrust not him, but try him when thou will:
He is her father, therefore may do much.

Mes. I know he is, and therefore mean to try him:
You are his friend too, I must try you both.

Ambo. Prithy do, prithy do.

Proffer to go out. Mes. Stay gray-beards then, and prove men of your words:
The Queen has tied me by a solemn oath,
Here in this place to see you both dispatched:
Now for the safeguard of my conscience,
Do me the pleasure for to kill your selves:
So shall you save me labor for to do it,
And prove your selves true old men of your words.
And here I vow in sight of all the world,
I never will trouble you whilst I live again.

Leir. Affright us not with terror, good my friend,
Nor strike such fear into our aged hearts.
Play not the Cat, which dallieth with the mouse;
And on a sudden makes her a pray:
But if thou art marked for the man of death
To me and to my Damion, tell me plain,
That we may be prepared for the stroke,
And make our selves fit for the world to come.

Mes. I am the last of any mortal race,
That ere your eyes are likely to behold,
And hither sent of purpose to this place,
To give a final period to your days,
Which are so wicked, and have lived so long,
That your own children seek to short your life.

Leir. Camst thou from France, of purpose to do this?

Mes. From France? zoones, do I look like a Frenchman? Sure I have not mine
own face on; some body has changed faces with me, and I know not of it: But I
am sure, my apparel is all English. Sir, what meanest thou to ask that
question? I could spoil the fasion o this face for anger. A French face!


Leir. Because my daughter, whom I have offended,
And at whose hands I have deserved as ill,
As ever any father did of child,
Is Queen of France, no thanks at all to me,
But unto God, who my injustice see.
If it be so, that she does seek revenge,
As with good reason she may justly do,
I will most willingly resign my life,
A sacrifice to mittigate her ire:
I never will entreat thee to forgive,
Because I am unworthy for to live.
Therefore speak soon, and I will soon make speed:
Whether Cordella willed thee do this deed?

Mes. As I am a perfect gentleman, thou speakst French to me:
F3 I never heard Cordellaes name before,
Nor never was in France in all my life:
I never knew thou had a daughter there,
To whom thou did prove so unkind a churl:
But thy own tongue declares that thou have bin
A vile old wretch, and full of heinous sin.

Leir. Ah no, my friend, thou art deceived much:
For her except, whom I confess I wronged,
Through doting frenzy, and o're-ielous love.
There lives not any under heavens bright eye,
That can convict me of impiety.
And therefore sure thou do mistake the mark:
For I am in true peace with all the world.

Mes. You are the fitter for the King of heaven:
And therefore, for to rid thee of suspense,
Know thou, the Queens of Cambria and Cornwall,
Thy own two daughters, Gonorill and Ragan,
Appointed me to massacre thee here.
Why would thou then persuade me, that thou art
In charity with all the world? but now
When thy own issue hold thee in such hate,
That they have hired me t'abbridge thy fate,
Oh, fie upon such vile dissembling breath,
That would deceive, even at the point of death.

Per. Am I awake, or is it but a dream?

Mes. Fear nothing, man, thou art but in a dream,
And thou shall never wake until doomes day,
By they, I hope, thou will have slept enough.

Leir. Yet, gentle friend, grant one thing ere I die.

Mes. I Will grant you any thing, except your lives.

Leir. Oh, but assure me by some certain token,
That my two daughters hired thee to this deed:
If I were once resolved of that, then I
Would wish no longer life, but crave to dye.

Mes. That to be true, in sight of heaven I swear.

Leir. Swear not by heaven, for fear of punishment:
The heavens are guiltless of such heinous acts.

Mes. I swear by earth, the mother of us all.

Leir. Swear not by earth; for she abhors to bear
Such bastards, as are murderers of her sons.

Mes. Why then, by hell, and all the devils I swear.

Leir. Swear not by hell; for that stands gaping wide,
To swallow thee, and if thou do this deed.

Thunder and lightning. Mes. I would that word were in his belly again,
It has frighted me even to the very heart:
This old man is some strong Magician:
His words have turned my mind from this exployt.
Then neither heaven, earth, nor hell be witness;
But let this paper witness for them all.
Shows Gonorils letter: Shall I relent, or shall I prosecute?
Shall I resolve, or were I best recant?
I will not crack my credit with two Queens,
To whom I have already past my word.
Oh, but my conscience for this act does tell,
I get heavens hate, earths scorn, and pains of hell.

They bless themselves. Per. Oh just Iehoua, whose almighty power
Does govern all things in this spacious world,
How can thou suffer such outrageous acts
To be committed without just revenge?
O viperous generation and accursed,
To seek his blood, whose blood did make them first!

Leir. Ah, my true friend in all extremity,
Let us submit us to the will of God:
Things past all sense, let us not seek to know;
It is Gods will, and therefore must be so.
My friend, I am prepared for the stroke:
Strike when thou will, and I forgive thee here,
Even from the very bottom of my heart.

Mes. But I am not prepared for to strike.

Leir. Farewell, Perillus, even the truest friend,
That ever lived in adversity:
The latest kindness i will request of thee,
Is that thou go unto my daughter Cordella,
F4 And carry her her fathers latest blessing:
Withal desire her, that she will forgive me;
For I have wronged her without any cause.
Now, Lord, receive me, for I come to thee,
And dye, I hope, in perfect charity.
Dispatch, I pray thee, I have lived too long.

Mes. I, but you are unwise, to send an errand
By him that never means to deliver it:
Why, he must go along with you to heaven:
It were not good you should go all alone.

Leir. No doubt, he shall, when by the course of nature,
He must surrender up his due to death:
But that time shall not come, till God permit.

Mes. Nay, presently, to bear you company.
I have a Pasport for him in my pocket,
Already sealed, and he must needs ride Post.

Show a bag of money. Leir. The letter which I read, imports not so,
It only touches me, no word of him.

Mess. I, but the Queen commands it must be so,
And I am paid for him, as well as you.

Per. I, who have borne you company in life,
Most willingly will bear a share in death.
It skilleth not for me, my friend, a whit,
Nor for a hundred such as thou and I.

Mes. Mary, but it does, sir, by your leave; your good days are past: though
it be no matter for you, it is a matter for me, proper men are not so rife.


Per. Oh, but beware, how thou do lay thy hand
Upon the high anointed of the Lords
O, be advised ere thou do begin:
Dispatch me straight, but meddle not with him.

Leir. Friend, thy commission is to deal with me,
And I am he that has deserved all:
The plot was laid to take away my life:
And here it is, I do entreat thee take it:
Yet for my sake, and as thou art a man,
Spare this my friend, that hither with me came?
I brought him forth, whereas he had not bin,
But for good will to bear me company.
He left his friends, his country and his goods,
And came with me in most extremity.
Oh, if he should miscarry here and dye,
Who is the cause of it, but only I?

Mes. Why that am I, let that never trouble thee.

Leir. O no, it is I. O, had I now to give thee
The monarchy of all the spacious world
To save his life, I would bestow it on thee:
But I have nothing but these tears and prayer,
And the submission of a bended knee. kneels.
O, if all this to mercy move they mind,
Spare him, in heaven thou shall like mercy find.

Mes. I am as hard to be moved as another, and yet me thinks the strength of
their persuasions stirs me a little.


Per. My friend, if fear of the almighty power
Have power to move thee, we have said enough:
But if thy mind be moveable with gold,
We have not presently to give it thee:
Yet to thy self thou may do greater good,
To keep thy hands still vndefilde from blood:
For do but well consider with thy self,
When thou have finished this outrageous act,
What horror still will haunt thee for the deed:
Think this again, that they which would incense
Thee for to be the Butcher of their father,
When it is done, for fear it should be known,
Would make a means to rid thee from the world:
Oh, then art thou for ever tied in chains
Of everlasting torments to endure,
Even in the hotest hole of grisly hell,
Such pains, as never mortal tongue can tell.

It thunders. He quakes, and lets fall the Dagger next to Perillus. Leir. O,
heavens be thanked, he will spare my friend,
Now when thou will come make an end of me.

G He lets fall the other dagger. Per. Oh, happy sight. He means to save my
Lord.
The King of heaven continue this good mind.

Leir. Why stayst thou to do execution?

Mes. I am as wilful as you for your life:
I will not do it, now you do entreat me.

Per. Ah, now I see thou have some spark of grace.

Mes. Beshrew you for it, you have put it in me:
The parlosest old men, that ere I heard.
Well, to be flat, i will not meddle with you:
Here I found you, and here i will leave you:
If any ask you why the case so stands?
Say that your tongue as were better then your hands.
Exit. Mess.
Per. Farewell. If ever we together me,
It shall go hard, but I will thee regreet.
Courage, my Lord, the worst is ouerpast;
Let us give thanks to God, and hye us hence.

Leir. Thou art deceived; for I am past the best,
And know not whither for to go from hence:
Death had bin better welcome unto me,
Then longer life to add more misery.

Per. It were not good to return from whence we came,
Unto your daughter Ragan back again.
Now let us go to France, unto Cordella,
Your youngest daughter, doubtless she will succor you.

Leir. Oh, how can I persuade myself of that,
Since the other two are quite deuoyd of love;
To whom I was so kind, as that my gifts,
Might make them love me, if 'twere nothing else?

Per. No worldly gifts, but grace from God on hye,
Does nourish virtue and true charity.
Remember well what words Cordella spoke,
What time you asked her, how she loved your Grace.
Se said, her love unto you was as much,
As ought a child to bear unto her father.

Leir. But she did find, my love was not to her,
As should a father bear unto a child.

Per. That makes not her love to be any less,
If she do love you as a child should do:
You have tried two, try one more for my sake,
I Will never entreat you further trial make.
Remember well the dream you had of late,
And think what comfort it foretells to us.

Leir. Come, truest friend, that ever man possessed,
I know thou counsailst all things for the best:
If this third daughter play a kinder part,
It comes of God, and not of my desert.

Exeunt. Enter the Gallian Ambassador solus. Am. There is of late news come
unto the Court,
That old Lord Leir remaynes in Cambria:
I Will hye me thither presently, to impart
My letters and my message unto him.
I never was less welcome to a place
In all my life time, then I have bin hither,
Especially unto the stately Queen,
Who would not cast one gracious look on me,
But still with lowering and suspicious eyes,
Would take exceptions at each word I spoke,
And feign she would have undermined me,
To know what my Embassage did import:
But she is like to hop without her hope,
And in this matter for to want her will,
Though (by report) she will hau't in all things else.
Well, I will post away for Cambria:
Within these few days I hope to be there,
Exit.
Enter the King and Queen of Gallia, and Mumford. King. By this, our father
understands our mind,
And our kind greetings sent to him of late;
Therefore my mind presageth ere't be long,
We shall receive from Brittayne happy news.

Cord. I fear, my sister will dissuade his mind;
For she to me has always bin unkind.

King. Fear not, my love, since that we know the worst,
The last means helps, if that we miss the first:
If he will not come to Gallia unto us,
Then we will sail to Brittayne unto him.

G2 Mum. Well, if I once see Brittayne again,
I have sworn, i will never come home without my wench,
And i will not be forsworn,
I Will rather never come home while I live.

Cor. Are you sure, Mumford, she is a maid still?

Mum. Nay, i will not swear she is a maid, but she goes for one:
I Will take her at all adventures, if I can get her.

Cord. I, that's well put in.

Mum. Well put in: nay, it was ill put in; for had it
Bin as well put in, as ere I put in, in my days,
I would have made her follow me to France.

Cor. Nay, you would have bin so kind, as take her with you,
Or else, were I as she,
I would have bin so loving, as i would stay behind you:
Yet I must confess, you are a very proper man,
And able to make a wench do more then she would do.

Mum. Well, I have a pair of slops for the nonce,
Will hold all your mocks.

King. Nay, we see you have a hansome hose.

Cor. I, and of the newest fashion.

Mum. More bobs, more: put them in still, They Will serve instead of bumbast, yet
put not in too many, lest the seames crack, and they fly out amongst you
again: you must not think to outface me so easily in my mistress quarrel, who
if I see once again, ten teame of horses shall not draw me away, till I have
full and whole possession.


King. I, but one teame and a cart will serve the turn.

Cor. Not only for him, but also for his wench.

Mum. Well, you are two to one, i will give you over:
And since I see you so pleasantly disposed,
Which indeed is but seldom seen, i will claim
A promise of you, which you shall not deny me:
For promise is debt, and by this hand you promisd it me.
Therefore you owe it me, and you shall pay it me,
Or i will sue you upon an action of unkindness.

King. Prithy, Lord Mumford, what promise did I make thee?

Mum. Faith, nothing but this,
That the next fair weather, which is very now,
You would go in progress down to the sea side,
Which is very near.

King. Faith, in this motion I will join with thee,
And be a mediator to my Queen.
Prithy, my Love, let this march go forward,
My mind foretells, 'twill be a lucky voyage.

Cor. Entreaty needs not, where you may command,
So you be pleased, I am right well content:
Yet, as the Sea I much desire to see;
So am I most unwilling to be seen.

King. We Will go disguised, all unknown to any.

Cor. Howsoever you make one, i will make another.

Mum. and I the third: oh, I am ouer-ioyed!
See what love is, which gets with a word,
What all the world besides could never obtain!
But what disguises shall we have, my Lord?

King. Faith thus: my Queen and I will be disguisde,
Like a plain country couple, and you shall be Roger
Our man, and wayt upon us: or if you will,
You shall go first, and we will wayt on you.

Mum. 'Twere more then time; this device is excelent.
Come le us about it.

Exeunt. Enter Cambria and Ragan, with Nobles. Came. What strange mischance or
unexpected hap
Has thus deprived us of our fathers presence?
Can no man tell us what is become of him,
With whom we did converse not two days since?
My Lords, let every where light horse be sent,
To scour about through all our Regiment.
Dispatch a Post immediately to Cornwall,
To see if any news by of him there;
My self will make a strickt inquiry here,
And all about our Cities near at hand,
Till certain news of his abode be brought.

Rag. All sorrow is but counterfeit to mine,
Whose lips are almost sealed up with grief:
Mine is the substance, whilst they do but seem
To weep the less, which tears cannot redeem.
G3 O, never was heard so strange a misaduenture,
A thing so far beyond the reach of sense,
Since no man's reason in the cause can enter.
What has removed my father thus from hence?
O, I do fear some charm or invocation
Of wicked spirits, or infernal fiends,
Stird by Cordella, moves this innovation,
And brings my father timelesse to his end.
But might I know, that the detested Witch
Were certain cause of this uncertain ill,
Myself to France would go in some disguise,
And with these nails scratch out her hateful eyes:
For since I am deprived of my father,
I loath my life, and wish my death the rather.

Came. The heavens are just, and hate impiety,
And will (no doubt) reveal such heinous crimes:
Censure not any, till you know the right:
Let him be Judge, that brings truth to light.

Ra. O, but my grief, like to a swelling tide,
Exceeds the bounds of common patience:
Nor can I moderate my tongue so much,
To conceal them, whom I hold in susect.

Came. This matter shall be sifted: if it be she,
A thousand Fraunces shall not harbor her.

Enter the Gallian Ambassador. Am. All happiness unto the Cambrian King.

Came. Welcome, my friend, from whence is thy Embassage?

Am. I came from Gallia, unto Cornwall sent,
With letters to your honorable father,
Whom there not finding, as I did expect,
I was directed hither to repair.

Rag. Frenchman, what is thy message to my father?

Am. My letters, Madam, will import the same,
Which my Commission is for to deliver.

Ra. In his absence you may trust us with your letters.

Am. I must perform my charge in such a manner,
As I have strict commandment from the King.

Ra. There is good packing twixt your King and you:
You need not hither come to ask for him,
You know where he is better then our selves.

Am. Madam, I hope, not far off.

Ra. Has the young murdresse, your outrageous Queen,
No means to color her detested deeds,
In finishing my guiltless fathers days,
(Because he gave her nothing to her dowre)
But by the color of a fayn'd Embassage,
To send him letters hither to our Court?
Go carry them to them that sent them hither,
And bid them keep their scroules unto themselves:
They cannot blind us with such slight excuse,
To smother up so monstrous vild abuse.
And were it not, it is against law of Arms,
To offer violence to a Messenger,
We would inflict such torments on thy self,
As should enforce thee to reveal the truth.

Am. Madam, your threats no whit apall my mind,
I know my conscience guiltless of this act;
My King and Queen, I dare be sworn, are free
From any thought of such impiety:
And therefore, Madam, you have done them wrong,
And ill beseeming with a sisters love,
Who in mere duty tender him as much,
As ever you respected him for dowre.
The King your husband will not say as much.

Came. I will suspend my judgment for a time,
Till more appearance give us further light:
Yet to be plain, your coming does enforce
A great suspicion to our doubtful mind,
And that you do resemble, to be brief,
Him that first robs, and then cries, Stop the thief.

Am. Pray God some near you have not done the like.

Rag. Hence, saucy mate, reply no more to us;
She strikes him. For law of Arms shall not protect thy tongue.

Am. Never was I offered such discourtesy;
God and my King, I trust, ere it be long,
Will find a mean to remedy this wrong,
Exit Amb.
G4 Rag. How shall I live, to suffer this disgrace,
At every base and vulgar peasants hands?
It ill befitteth my imperial state,
To be thus used, and no man take my part.
She weeps.
Came. What should I do? infringe the law of Arms,
Were to my everlasting obloquy:
But I will take revenge upon his master,
Which sent him hither, to delude us thus.

Rag. Nay, if you put up this, be sure, ere long,
Now that my father thus is made away.
She Will come and claim a third part of your Crown,
As due unto her by inheritance.

Came. But I will prove her title to be naught
But shame, and the reward of Parricide,
And make her an example to the world,
For after-ages to admire her penance.
This will I do, as I am Cambriaes King,
Or lose my life, to prosecute revenge.
Come, first let us learn what news is of our father,
And then proceed, as best occasion fits.

Exeunt. Enter Leir, Perillus, and two Mariners, in sea-gownes and sea-caps.
Per. My honest friends, we are ashamed to show
The great extremity of our present state,
In that at this time we are brought so low,
That we want money for to pay our passage.
The truth is so, we met with some good fellows,
A little before we came aboard your ship,
Which stripped us quite of all the coin we had,
And left us not a penny in our purses:
Yet wanting money, we will use the mean,
To see you satisfied to the uttermost.

Look on Leir. 1. Mar. Here Is a good gown, 'twould become me passing well,
I should be fine in it.

Look on Perillus. 2. Mar. Here Is a good cloak, I marvel how I should look in
it,

Leir. Faith, had we others to supply their room,
Though never so mean, you willingly should have them.

1. Mar. Do you hear, sir? you look like an honest man;
I Will not stand to do you a pleasure: here is a good strong motly gaberdine, cost
me xiiij. good shillings at Billinsgate, give me your gown for it, and your
cap for mine, and i will forgive your passage.


Leir. With all my heart, and xx. thanks.

Leir and he changes. 2. Mar. Do you hear, sir? you shall have a better match
the^ he, because you are my friend: here is a good sheeps russet seagowne, will
bide more stresse, I warrant you, then two of his, yet for you seem to be an
honest gentleman, I am content to change it for your cloak, and ask you
nothing for your passage more.


Pull off Perillus cloak. Per. My own I willingly would change with thee,
And think my self indebted to thy kindness:
But would my friend might keep his garment still.
My friend, i will give thee this new dublet, if thou will
Restore his gown unto him back again.

1. Mar. Nay, if I do, would I might never eat powderd beef and mustard more,
nor drink Can of good liquor whilst I live. My friend, you have small reason to
seek to hinder me of my bargain: but the best is, a bargayne's a bargayne.


Leir. Leir to Perillus. Kind friend, it is much better as it is;
For by this means we may escape unknown;
Till time and opportunity do fit.

2. Mar. Hark, hark, they are laying their heads together,
They Will repent them of their bargayne anon,
'Twere best for us to go while we are well.

1. Mar. God be with you, sir, for your passage back again,
I Will use you as unreasonable as another.

Leir. I know thou will; but we hope to bring ready money
With us, when we come back again.
Exeunt Mariners. Were ever men in this extremity,
In a strange country, and deuoyd of friends,
And not a penny for to help our selves?
Kind friend, what think thou will become of us?

Per. Be of good cheer, my Lord, I have a dublet,
Will yield us money enough to serve our turns,
Until we come unto your daughters Court:
And then, I hope, we shall find friends enough.

Leir. Ah, kind Perillus, that is it I fear,
H And makes me faint, or ever I come there.
Can kindness spring out of ingratitude?
Or love be reapt, where hatred has bin sown?
Can Henbane join in league with Methridate?
Or Sugar grow in Wormwoods bitter stalk?
It cannot be, they are too opposite:
And so am I to any kindness here.
I have thrown Wormwood on the sugared youth,
And like to Henbane poisoned the Fount,
Whence flowed the Methridate of a child's goodwil:
I, like an envious thorn, have pricked the heart,
And turned sweet Grapes, to sour vnrelisht Sloes:
The causelesseire of my respectlesse breast,
Has sowrd the sweet milk of dame Natures paps:
My bitter words have gauld her honey thoughts,
And weeds of rancour chokt the flower of grace.
Then what remainder is of any hope,
But all our fortunes will go quite aslope?

Per. Fear not, my Lord, the perfect good indeed,
Can never be corrupted by the bad:
A new fresh vessel still retaynes the taste
Of that which first is powered into the same:
And therefore, though you name yourselfe the thorn,
The weed, the gall, the henbane and the wormwood;
Yet she will continue in her former state,
The honey, milk, Grape, Sugar, Methridate.

Leir. Thou pleasing Orator unto me in woe,
Cease to beguile me with thy hopeful speeches
O join with me, and think of naught but crosses,
And then we will one lament another losses.

Per. Why, say the worst, the worst can be but death,
And death is better then for to despair:
Then hazard death, which may convert to life;
Banish despair, which brings a thousand deaths.

Leir. Overcome with thy strong arguments, I yield,
To be directed by thee, as thou will:
As thou yeeldst comfort to my crazed thoughts,
Would I could yield the like unto thy body,
Which is full weak, I know, and ill apayd,
For want of fresh meat and due sustenance.

Per. Alack, my Lord, my heart does bleed, to think
That you should be in such extremity.

Leir. Come, let us go, and see what God will send;
When all means fail, he is the surest friend.

Exeunt. Enter the Gallian King and Queens, and Mumford, with a basket,
disguised like Country folk. King. This tedious journey all on foot, sweet
Love,
Cannot be pleasing to your tender joints,
Which never were used to these toylesome walks.

Card. I never in my life took more delight
In any journey, then I do in this:
Ic did me good, when as we hapt to light
Amongst the merry crew of country folk,
To see what industry and pains they took,
To win them commendations among their friends.
Lord, how they labor to bestir themselves,
And in their quirks to go beyond the Moon,
And so take on them with such antike fits,
That one would think they were beside their wits!
Come away, Roger, with your basket.

Mum. Soft, Dame, here comes a couple of old youths,
I must needs make my self fat-with testing at them.

Cor. Nay, prithy do not, they do seem to be
Enter Leir and Perillus very faintly. Men much o'regone with grief and misery.
Let Us stand aside, and harken what they say.

Leir. Ah, my Perillus, now I see we both
Shall end our days in this vntrustfull soil.
Oh, I do faint for want of sustenance:
And thou, I know, in little better case.
No gentle tree affords one taste of fruit,
To comfort us, until we meet with men:
No lucky path conducts our lucklesse steps
Unto a place where any comfort dwells.
Sweet rest betyde unto our happy souls;
For here I see our bodies must have end.

Per. Ah, my dear Lord, how does my heart lament,
To see you brought to this extremity!
O, if you love me, as you do profess,
H2 Or ever thought well of me in my life,
He strips up his arm. Feed on this flesh, whose veins are not so dry,
But there is virtue left to comfort you,
O, feed on this, if this will do you good,
I Will smile for joy, to see you suck my blood.

Leir. I am no Caniball, that I should delight
To slake my hungry jaws with humane flesh:
I am no devil, or ten times worse then so,
To suck the blood of such a peerless friend.
O, do not think that I respect my life
So dearly, as I do thy loyal love.
Ah, Brittayne, I shall never see thee more,
That have unkindly banished thy King:
And yet not thou do make me to complain,
But they which were more near to me then thou.

Cor. What do I hear: this lamentable voice,
Me thinks, ere now I oftentimes have heard.

Leir. Ah, Gonorill, was half my Kingdoms gift
The cause that thou did seek to have my life:
Ah, cruel Ragan, did I give thee all,
And all could not suffice without my blood?
Ah, poor Cordella, did I give thee naught,
Nor never shall be able for to give?
O, let me warn all ages that insueth,
How they trust flattery, and reject the truth.
Well, unkind Girls, I here forgive you both,
Yet the just heavens will hardly do the like;
And only crave forgiveness at the end
Of good Cordella, and of thee, my friend;
Of God, whose Majesty I have offended,
By my transgression many thousand ways:
Of her, dear heart, whom I for no occasion
Turned out of all, through flatterers persuasion:
Of thee, kind friend, who but for me, I know,
Had never come unto this place of woe.

Cor. Alack, that ever I should live to see
My noble father in this misery.

King. Sweet Love, reveal not what thou art as yet,
Until we know the ground of this ill.

Cor. O, but some meat, some meat: do you not see,
How near they are to death for want of food?

Per. Lord, which did help they servants at their need,
Or now or never send us help with speed.
Oh comfort, comfort! yonder is a banquet,
And men and women, my Lord: be of good cheer;
For I see comfort coming very near.
O my Lord, a banquet, and men and women!

Leir. O, let kind pity mollify their hearts,
That they may help us in our great extremes.

Per. God save you, friends; and if this blessed banquet
Affords any food or sustenance,
Even for his sake that saved us all from death,
Vouchsafe to save us from the gripe of famine.

Cor. Here father, sit and eat, here, sit and drink:
She brings him to the table And would it were far better for your sakes.

Perillus takes Leir by the hand to the table. Per. I Will give you thanks anon:
my friend does faint,
And needs present comfort.

Leir drinks. Mum. I warrant, he never stays to say grace:
O, there is no sauce to a good stomach.

Per. The blessed God of heaven has thought upon us.

Leir. The thanks be his, and these kind courteous folk,
By whose humanity we are preserved.

They eat hungerly, Leir drinks. Cor. And may that draught be unto him, as was
That which old Eson drank, which did renew
His withered age, and made him young again.
And may that meat be unto him, as was
That which Elias ate, in strength whereof
He walked forty days, and never faynted.
Shall I coneale me longer from my father?
Or shall I manifest my self to him?

King. Forbear a while, until his strength return,
Lest being ouer-ioyed with seeing thee,
His poor weak senses should forsake their office,
And so our cause of joy be turned to sorrow.

Per. What chere, my Lord? how do you feel your self?

Leir. Me thinks, I never ate such sauory meat:
It is as pleasant as the blessed Manna,
H3 That raynd from heaven amongst the Israelites:
It has recalled my spirits home again,
And made me fresh, as erst I was before.
But how shall we congratulate their kindness?

Per. Infayth, I know no how sufficiently;
But the best mean that I can think on, is this:
I Will offer them my dublet in requital;
For we have nothing else to spare.

Leir. Nay, stay, Perillus, for they shall have mine.

Per. Pardon, my Lord, I swear they shall have mine.

Perillus proffers his dublet: they will not take it. Leir. Ah, who would think
such kindness should remain
Among such strange and unacquainted men:
And that such hate should harbor in the breast
Of those, which have occasion to be best?

Cor. Ah, good old father, tell to me thy grief,
I Will sorrow with thee, if not add relief.

Leir. Ah, good young daughter, I may call thee so;
For thou art like a daughter I did owe.

Cor. Do you not owe her still? what, is she dead?

Leir. No, God forbid: but all my interest's gone,
By showing my self too much unnatural:
So have I lost the title of a father,
and me be called a stranger to her rather.

Cor. Your title's good still; for it is always known,
A man may do as him list with his own.
But have you but one daughter then in all?

Leir. Yes, I have more by two, then would I had.

Cor. O, say not so, but rather see the end:
They that are bad, may have the grace to mend:
But how have they offended you so much?

Leir. If from the first I should relate the cause,
'T would make a heart of Adamant to weep;
And thou, poor soul, kind-hearted as thou art,
Do weep already, ere I do begin.

Cor. For Gods love tell it, and when you have done,
I Will tell the reason why I weep so soon.

Leir. The know this first, I am a Brittayne borne,
and had three daughters by one loving wife:
And though I say it, of beauty they were sped;
Especially the youngest of the three,
For her perfections hardly matched could be:
On these I doted with a ielous love,
And thought to try which of them loved me best,
By asking them, which would do most for me?
The first and second flattred me with words,
And vowed they loved me better then their lives:
The youngest said, she loved me as a child
Might do^: her answer I esteemed most vild,
And presently in an outrageous mood,
I turned her from me to go sink or swym:
And all I had, even to the very clothes,
I gave in dowry with the other two:
And she that best deserved the greatest share,
I gave her nothing, but disgrace and care.
Now mark the sequel: When I had done thus,
I soiourned in my eldest daughters house,
Where for a time I was entreated well,
And lived in state sufficing my content:
But every day her kindness did grow cold,
Which I with patience put up well enough,
And seemed not to see the things I saw:
But at the last she grew so far incenst
With moody fury, and with causlesse hate,
That in most vild and contumelious terms,
She bade me pack, and harbor some where else.
Then was I feign for refuge to repair
Unto my other daughter for relief,
Who gave me pleasing and most courteous words;
But in her actions showed her self so sore,
As never any daughter did before:
She prayed me in a morning out betime,
To go to a thicket two miles from the Court,
Poynting that there she would come talk with me:
There she had set a shaghayrd murdring wretch,
To massacre my honest friend and me.
Then judge your self, although my tale be brief,
If ever man had greater cause of grief.

H4 King. Nor never like impiety was done,
Since the creation of the world begun.

Leir. And now I am constraind to seek relief
Of her, to whom I have bin so unkind;
Whose censure, if it do award me death,
I must confess she pays me but my due:
But if the show a loving daughters part,
It comes of God and her, not my desert.

Cor. No doubt she will, I dare be sworn she will.

Leir. How know you that, not knowing what she is?

Cor. My self a father have a great way hence,
Used me as ill as ever you did her;
Yet, that his reverend age I once might see,
I Would creep along, to meet him on my knee.

Leir. O, no men's children are unkind but mine.

Cor. Condemn not all, because of others crime:
But look, dear father, look, behold and see
Thy loving daughter speaks unto thee.

She kneeles. Leir. O, stand thou up, it is my part to kneel,
And ask forgiveness for my former faults.

he kneeles. Cor. O, if you wish I should enjoy my breath,
Dear father rise, or I receive my death.

he rises. Leir. Then I will rise, to satisfy your mind,
But kneel again, til pardon be resignd.

he kneeles. Cor. I pardon you: the word beseemes not me:
But I do say so, for to ease your knee.
You gave me life, you were the cause that I
Am what I am, who else had never bin.

Leir. But you gave life to me and to my friend,
Whose days had else, had an untimely end.

Cor You brought me up, when as I was but young,
And far unable for to help my self.

Leir. I cast thee forth, when as thou wast but young,
And far unable for to help thy self.

Cor. God, world and nature say I do you wrong,
That can endure to see you kneel so long.

King Let me break off this loving controversy,
Which does rejoice my very soul to see.
Good father, rise, she is your loving daughter,
He rises And honors you with as respective duty,
As if you were the Monarch of the world.

Cor. But I will never rise from off my knee,
She kneeles. Until I have your blessing, and your pardon
Of all my faults committed any way,
From my first birth unto this present day.

Leir. The blessing, which the God of Abraham gave
Unto the trybe of Judah, light on thee,
And multiply thy days, that thou may see
Thy childrens children prosper after thee.
Thy faults, which are just none that I do know,
God pardon on high, and I forgive below.

she rises. Cor. Now is my heart at quiet, and does leap
Within my breast, for joy of this good hap:
And now (dear father) welcome to our Court,
And welcome (kind Perillus) unto me,
Myrrour of virtue and true honesty.

Leir. O, he has bin the kindest friend to me,
That ever man had in adversity.

Per. My tongue does fail, to say what heart does think,
I am so ravished with exceeding joy.

King. All you have spoke: now let me speak my mind,
And in few words much matter here conclude:
he kneeles. If ere my heart do harbor any joy,
Or true content repose within my breast,
Till I have rooted out this viperous sect,
And repossest my father of his Crown,
Let me be counted for the periurdst man,
That ever spoke word since the world began.

rise. Mum. Let me pray to, that never prayed before;
Mumford kneeles. If ere I resalute the British earth,
(As (ere't be long) I do presume I shall)
And do return from thence without my wench,
Let me be gelded for my recompense.

rise. King. Come, let us to arms for to redress this wrong:
Till I am there, me thinks, the time seems long.

Exeunt. Enter Ragan sola. Rag. I feel a hell of conscience in my breast,
Tormenting me with horror for my fact,
I And makes me in an agony of doubt,
For fear the world should find my dealing out.
The slave whom I appointed for the act,
I never set eye upon the peasant since:
O, could I get him for to make him sure,
My doubts would cease, and I should rest secure.
But if the old men, with perswasiue words,
Have saved their lives, and made him to relent;
Then are they fled unto the Court of France,
And like a Trumpet manifest my shame.
A shame on these white-liuerd slaves, say I,
That with fair words so soon are overcome.
O God, that I had bin but made a man;
Or that my strength were equal with my will!
These foolish men are nothing but mere pity,
And melt as butter does against the Sun.
Why should they have preeminence over us,
Since we are creatures of more brave resolve?
I swear, I am quite out of charity
With all the heartlesse men in Christendom.
A pox upon them, when they are affrayd
To give a stab, or slit a paltry Windpipe,
Which are so easy matters to be done.
Well, had I thought the slave would serve me so,
My self would hau^e bin executioner:
It Is now undone, and if that it be known,
I Will make as good shift as I can for one.
He that repines at me, how ere it stands,
'Twere best for him to keep him from my hands.

Exit. Sound Drums and Trumpets: Enter the Gallian King, Leir, Mumford and the
army. King. Thus have we brought our army to the sea,
Whereas our ships are ready to receive us:
The wind stands fair, and we in four hours sail,
May easily arrive on British shore,
Where unexpected we may them surprise,
And gain a glorious victory with ease.
Wherefore, my loving Countrymen, resolve,
Since truth and justice fights on our sides,
That we shall march with conquest where we go.
My self will be as forward as the first,
And step by step march with the hardiest wight:
And not the meanest soldier in our Camp
Shall be in danger, but i will second him.
To you, my Lord, we give the whole command
Of all the army, next unto our self,
Not doubting of you, but you will extend
Your wonted valor in this needful case,
Encouraging the rest to do the like,
By your approved magnanimity.

Mum. My Liege, it is needless to spur a willing horse,
That's apt enough to run himself to death:
For here I swear by that sweet Saints bright eye,
Which are the stars, which guide me to good hap,
Either to see my old Lord crowned anew,
Or in his cause to bid the world adieu.

Leir. Thanks, good Lord Mumford, it is more of your good will,
Then any merit or desert in me.

Mum. And now to you, my worthy Country men,
Ye valiant race of Genouestan Gawles,
Surnamed Red-thanks, for your chyualry,
Because you fight up to the thanks in blood;
Show your selves now to be right Gawles indeed,
And be so bitter on your enemies,
That they may say, you are as bitter as Gall.
Gall them, brave Shot, with your Artillery:
Gall them, brave Halberts, with your sharp point Bills,
Each in their poynted place, not one, but all,
Fight for the credit of your selves and Gawle.

King. Then what should more persuasion need to those,
That rather with to deal, then hear of blows?
Let Us to our ships, and it that God permit,
In four houressayle, I hope we shall be there.

Mum. And in five hours more, I make no doubt,
But we shall bring our wished desires about.

Exeunt Enter a Captain of the watch, and two watchmen. Cap. My honest
friends, it is your turn to night,
To watch in this place, near about the Beacon.
I2 And vigilantly have regard,
If any fleet of ships paste hitherward:
Which it you do, your office is to fire
The beacon presently, and raise the town.

Exit. 1. Wat. I, I, I, fear nothing; we know our charge, I warrant: I have
bin a watchman about this Beacon this xxx. year, and yet I never see it stir,
but stood as quietly as might be.


2. Wat. Faith neighbor, and you will follow my vice, instead of watching the
Beacon, we will go to goodman Gennings, and watch a pot of Ale and a rasher of
Bacon: and if we do not drink our selves drunk, then so; I warrant, the Beacon
will see us when we come out again.


1. W. I, but how if some body excuse us to the Captain?


2. W. I is no matter, i will prove by good reason that we watch the Beacon: ass
for example.


1. W. I hope you do not call me ass by craft, neighbor.


2. W. No, no, but for example: Say here stands the pot of ale, that's the
Beacon.


1. W. I, I, it is a very good Beacon.


2. W. Well, say here stands your nose, that's the fire.


1. W. Indeed I must confess, it is somewhat red.


2. W. I see come marching in a dish, half a score pieces of salt Bacon.


1. W. I understand your meaning, that's as much to say, half a score ships.


2 W. True, you conster right; presently, like a faithful watch man, I fire
the Beacon; and call up the town.


1. W. I, that's as much as to say, you set your nose to the pot, and drink up
the drink.


2. W. You are in the right; come, let us go fire the Beacon.


Exeunt. Enter the King of Gallia with a still march, Mumford and soldiers,
King. Now march our ensigns on the British earth,
And we are near approaching to the town:
Then look about you, valiant Countrymen,
And we shall finish this exployt with ease.
Th'ihabitants of this mistrustfull place,
Are dead asleep, as men that are secure:
Here shall we skirmish but with naked men,
Deuoyd of sense, new waked from a dream,
That know not what our coming does pretend,
Till they do feel our meaning on their skins:
Therefore assail: God and our right for us.

Exeunt. Alarm, with men and women half naked: Enter two Captains without
dublets, with swords. 1. Cap. Where are these villains that were set to watch,
And fire the Beacon, if occasion served,
That thus have suffered us to be surprisde,
And never given notice to the town?
We are betrayed, and quite deuoyd of hope,
By any means to fortify our selves.

2. Cap. It Is ten to one the peasants are overcome with drink and sleep, and so
neglect their charge.


1. Cap. A whirlwind carry them quick to a whirl-poole, That there the slaves
may drink their bellies full.


2. Cap. This it is, to have the Beacon so near the Alehouse.


Enter the watchmen drunk, with each a pot. 1. Cap. Out on ye, villaynes,
whither run you now?


1. Wat. To fire the town, and call up the Beacon.


2 Wat. No, no, sir, to fire the Beacon.


He drinks. 2. Cap. What, with a pot of ale, you drunken Rogues?


1. Cap. You Will fire the Beacon, when the town is lost:
I Will teach you how to tend your office better.

draw to stab them. Enter Mumford, Captains run away. Mum. Yield, yield, yield.


He kicks down their pots. 1. Wat. Reele? no, we do not reele:
You may lack a pot of Ale ere you dye.

Mum. But in mean space, I answer, you want none. Well, there is no dealing with
you, you are tall men, and well weapo^d, I would there were no worse then you in
the town.


Exit. 2. Wat. A speaks like an honest man, my cholers past already. Come,
neighbor, let us go.


1. Wat. Nay, first let us see and we can stand.


Exeunt. Alarm, excursions, Mumford after them, and some half naked, Enter
the Gallian King, Leir, Mumford, Cordella, Perillus, and soldiers, with the
chief of the town bound. King. Fear not, my friends, you shall receive no
hurt,
If you will subscribe unto your lawful King,
And quite revoke your fealty from Cambria,
And from aspiring Cornwall too, whose wives
Have practisde treason against their fathers life.
We come in justice of your wronged King,
I3 And do intend no harm at all to you,
So you submit unto your lawful King.

Leir. Kind Countrymen, it grieves me, that perforce,
I am constraind to use extremities.

Noble. Long have you here bin looked for, good my Lord,
And wished for by a general consent:
And had we known your Highness had arrived,
We had not made resistance to your Grace:
And now, my gracious Lord, you need not doubt,
But all the Country will yield presently,
Which since your absence have bin greatly taxed,
For to maintain their ouerswelling pride.
We Will presently send word to all our friends;
When they have notice, they will come apace.

Leir. Thanks, loving subjects; and thanks, worthy son,
Thanks, my kind daughter, thanks to you, my Lord,
Who willingly adventured have your blood,
(Without desert) to do me so much good.

Mum. O, say not so:
I have bin much beholding to your Grace:
I must confess, I have bin in some skirmishes,
But I was never in the like to this:
For where I was wont to meet with armed men,
I was now incountred with naked women,

Cord. We that are feeble, and want use of Arms,
Will pray to God, to sheeld you from all harms.

Leir. The while your hands do manage ceaselesse toil,
Our hearts shall pray, the foes may have the foil.

Per. We Will fast and pray, whilst you for us do fight,
That victory may prosecute the right.

King. Me thinks, your words do amplify (my friends)
And add freth vigor to my willing limbs:
Drum. But hark, I hear the adverse Drum approach.
God and our right, Saint Denis, and Saint George,

Enter Cornwall, Cambria, Gonorill, Ragan, and the army. Corn. Presumptuous
King of Gawles, how dare thou
Presume to enter on our British shore?
And more then that, to take our towns perforce,
And draw our subjects hearts from their true King?
Be suit to buy it at as dear a price,
As ere you bought presumption in your lives.

King. Ore-daring Cornwall, know, we came in right.
And just reuengement of the wronged King,
Whose daughters there, fell vipers as they are,
Have sought to murder and deprive of life:
But God protected him from all their spite,
And we are come in justice of his right.

Came. Nor he nor thou have any interest here,
But what you win and purchase with the sword.
Thy slanders to our noble virtuous Queens,
We Will in the battle thrust them down thy throat,
Except for fear of our revenging hands,
Thou fly to sea, as not secure on lands.

Mum. Welshman, i will so f^^rit you ere night for that word,
That you shall have no mind to crake so well this tweluemonth.

Gone. They lie, that say, we sought our fathers death.

Rag. It Is merely forged for a colors sake,
To set a gloss on your invasion.
Me thinks, an old man ready for to dye,
Should be ashamed to breach so foul a lie.

Cord. Fie shamelesle sister, so deuoyd of grace,
To call our father liar to his face.

Gone. Peace (Puritan) dissembling hypocrite,
Which art so good, that thou will prove stark naught:
Anon, when as I have you in my fingers,
I Will make you wish your self in Purgatory.

Per. Nay, peace thou monster, shame unto thy sex:
Thou fiend in likeness of a humane creature.

Rag. I never heard a fouler spoken man.

Leir. Out on thee, viper, scum, filthy parricide,
More odious to my sight then is a Toade,
Know thou these letters?

She snatches them and tears them. Rag. Think you to outface me with your
paltry scrowles?
You come to drive my husband from his right,
Under the color of a forged letter.

Leir. Who ever heard the like impiety?

Per. You are our debtour of more patience:
We were more patient when we stayed for you,
I4 Within the thicket two long hours and more.

Rag. What hours? what thicket?

Per. There, where you sent your servant with your letters,
Sealed with your hand, to send us both to heaven,
Where, as I think, you never mean to come.

Rag. Alas, you are grown a child again with age,
Or else your senses dote for want of sleep.

Per. Indeed you made us rise betimes, you know,
Yet had a care we should sleep where you bade us stay,
But never wake more till the latter day.

Gone. Peace, peace, old fellow, thou art sleepy still.

Mum. Faith, and if you reason till to morrow,
You get no other answer at their hands.
It Is pity two such good faces
Should have so little grace between them.
Well, let us see if their husbands with their hands,
Can do as much, as they do with their toungs.

Came. I, with their swords they will make your tongue unsay
What they have said, or else they will cut them out.

King. To It, gallants, to it, let us not stand brawling thus.

Exeunt both armies. Sound alarm: excursions* Mumford must chase Cambria away:
then cease. Enter Cornwall. Corn. The day is lost, our friends do all revolt,
And join against us with the adverse part:
There is no means of safety but by flight,
And therefore i will to Cornwall with my Queen.

Exit. Enter Cambria. Came I think, there is a devil in the Camp has haunted
me to day: he has so tired me, that in a manner I can fight no more.

Enter Mumford. Zounds, here he comes, I Will take me to my horse.


Exit. Mumford follows him to the door, and returns. Mum. Farewell (Welshman)
give thee but thy due,
Thou have a light and nimble pair of legs:
Thou are more in debt to them then to thy hands:
But if I meet thee once again to day,
I Will cut them off, and set them to a better heart.

Exit. Alarums and excursions, then sound victory. Enter Leir, Perillus, King,
Cordella, and Mumford. King. Thanks be to God, your foes are overcome,
And you again possessed of your right.

Leir. First to the heavens, next, thanks to you, my son,
By whole good means I repossesse the same:
Which if it please you to accept your self,
With all my heart I will resign to you:
For it is yours by right, and none of mine.
First, have you raisd, at your own charge, a power
Of valiant Soldiers; (this comes all from you)
Next have you ventured your own persons scathe.
And lastly, (worthy Gallia never staynd)
My kingly title I by thee have gaynd.

King. Thank heavens, not me, my zeal to you is such,
Command my utmost, I will never grutch.

Cor. He that with all kind love entreats his Queen,
Will not be to her father unkind seen.

Leir. Ah, my Cordella, now I call to mind,
The modest answer, which I took unkind:
But now I see, I am no whit beguild,
Thou louedst me dearly, and as ought a child.
And thou ( Perillus) partner once in woe,
Thee to requite, the best I can, I Will do:
Yet all I can, I, were it never so much,
Were not sufficient, thy true love is such.
Thanks (worthy Mumford) to thee last of all,
Not greeted last, 'caus^ thy desert was small;
No, thou have Lion-like laid on to day,
Chasing the Cornwall King and Cambria;
Who with my daughters, daughters did I say?
To save their lives, the fugitives did play.
Come, son and daughter, who did me advance,
Repose with me awhile, and then for France.

Sound Drums and Trumpets. Exeunt. FINIS.

