THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT OVT OF ENGLAND TO DON BERNARDIN MENDOZA AMBASSADOVR
IN FRANCE FOR the King of Spain, declaring the state of England, contrary to
the opinion of Don Bernardin, and of all his partisans Spaniardes and others.

This Letter, although it was sent to Don Bernardin Mendoza, yet, by good hap,
the Copies thereof as well in English as in French, were found in the chamber of
one Richard Leigh a Seminary Priest, who was lately executed for high treason
committed in the time that the Spanish Armada was on the seas.

Whereunto are adjoined certain late Aduertisements, concerning the losses and
distresses happened to the Spanish Navy, as well in fight with the English
Navy in the narrow seas of England, as also by tempests, and contrary winds,
upon the West, and North coasts of Ireland, in their return from the Northern
Isles beyond Scotland.

Imprinted at London by I. Vautrollier for Richard Field. 1588.

THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT OVT OF ENGLAND TO DON BERNARDINE MENDOZA
AMBASSADOVR IN FRANCE FOR THE KING OF SPAIN.
MY Lord Ambassador, though at the time of my last large writing to you of the
state of this country, and of our long desired expectation of succors
promised, I did not think to have had such a sorrowful occasion of any second
writing, as now I have of a lamentable change of matters of estate here: yet I
can not forbear (though it be with as many sighs as lives) to advertise you of
the truth of our miserable condition, as now to me and others of our party the
same appears to be: that by comparing of all things past in hope, with the
present now in despair, your L. who have had the principal managing hitherto
of all our causes of long time both here and there in France, betwixt the King
Catholic assisted with the Potentates of the holy League, and all our
countrymen which have professed obedience to the Church of Rome, may now fall
into some new and better consideration, how our state both for our selves at
home, and our brethren abroad, now at this present fallen (as it were) into
utter despair, may be revived and restored to some new hope, with better
assurance of success then has happened hitherto. In what terms England
stands in the opinion of the Catholics.
For which purpose I have thought it necessary to advertise you in what terms
this country now stands, far otherwise then of late, both we at home, and
others abroad did make account of.

You know how we have depended in firm hope of a change of the state of this
country by the means of the devout and earnest incitations of the Popes
holiness, and the King Catholic, and of other Potentates of the holy League,
to take upon them the Invasion and conquest of this Realm: and by your
assurances, and firm promises, we were now of a long season past persuaded,
that the King Catholic had taken upon him the same glorious Act, and thereof
from year to year we looked for the execution: being continually fed and
nourished from you to continue our hope, and sundry times solicited by your
earnest requests, and persuasions, to encourage our party at home not to
waver, as many were disposed, by sight of continual delays, but to be ready
to join with the outward forces that should come for this Invasion.
Nevertheless the delays and prolongations of times appointed for the coming
of the Kings forces, specially by Sea, have been so many, as until this last
Spring, we were in despair: at what time you advertised us with great
assurance that all the Kings preparations, The Spanish preparation three years
in making.
which had been in making ready these three or four years together, were now
in full perfection, and without fail would this Summer come into our Seas with
such mighty strength, as no Navy of England, or of Christendom, could resist
or abide their force: and for more surety, and for avoiding of all doubts, to
make the intended conquest sure, the same should also have joined to it, the
mighty Army which the Duke of Parma had made ready, The Duke of Parmas army
in Flaunders.
and kept in readiness in the low countries all this year past, wherewith he
should land, and so both by Sea and land, this Realm should be invaded, and a
speedy conquest made thereof, to the which were always added sundry reasons:
whereupon was gathered, No foreign force could invade England, without a
strong party in England.
that neither by sea, nor by land, there would be any great resistance found
here, but a strong party in this Realm to join with the foreign force. For
otherwise then with such helps, to be assuredly had from hence, I know, it was
always doubted that no foreign force could prevail against this Hope of
victory by the Spanish Army with assistance of a party in England this Summer.
realm, being (as it is) environed by sea, and notably replenished with more
mighty and stronger people then any country in Christendom. But with the hope
of the landing of these great Armies and our assistance in taking part, we here
continued all this year past in assured hope of a full victory, until this
last month. But alas and with a deadly sorrow, we must all at home, and
abroad, lament our sudden fall, from an immeasurable high joy, to an
unmeasurable deep despair, and that so hastily fallen out, as I may say, we
have seen in the space of eight or nine days in this last month of July, All
Spanishe hope fallen in nine days.
which was from the appearance of the Catholic great Navy upon the coast of
England, until it was forced to fly from the coast of Flanders near Callice,
toward the unknown parts of the cold North, all our hopes, all our
buildings, as it now appears but upon an imagined conquest, utterly
overthrown, and as it were with an earthquake, all our castles of comfort
brought to the ground, which now (it seems) were builded but in the air, or
upon waves of the sea, for they are all perished, all vanished away from our
thoughts.

And here with I am astonished what I may best think of such a work so long
time in framing, to be so suddenly ouerthrown, as by no reason could proceed of
man, or of any earthly power, The Catholics doubt, of their cause seeing the
hand of God is against the Army.
but only of God. And if so it be (as no body can otherwise impute this late
change and fall from our expected fortune, but to God almighty) then surely our
case is either dangerous or doubtful how to judge thereof, whether we have
been these many years in the right or not. For I do find, and know, that many
good, and wise men, which of long time have secretly continued in most earnest
devotion to the Popes authority, Many English Catholics mislike of the Popes
reformation by force.
begin now to stagger in their minds, and to conceive that this way of
reformation intended by the Popes holiness is not allowable in the sight of God,
by leaving the ancient course of the Church by Excommunication, which was the
exercise of the spiritual sword, and in place thereof to take the temporal
sword, and put it into a Monarchs hand to invade this realm with force and
Arms, yea to destroy the Queen thereof, and all her people addicted to her:
which are in very truth now feene, by great proof this year, to be in a sort
infinite, and invincible, so as some begin to say that this purpose by
violence, by blood, by slaughter, and by conquest, agrees not with Christ's
doctrine, nor the doctrine of S. Peter, or S. Paul. And to tell your Lordship
truly, I find presently a great number of wise and devout people, though they
continue in their former religion, yet do they secretly condemn this intended
reformation by blood and force. Insomuch that I heard a good divine allege a
textout of S. Gregory in these words, Quid de Episcopis qui verberibus timeri
volunt Canones dicunt been paternitas vestra nouit, pastores sumus no^
percussores. Noua enim est predicatio quae verberibus exigit fidem. This
sentence I obtained of him, because it seems to be charitably written. But
leaving this authority among Doctors, I must needs say that in very truth no
one thing has done at this time more hurt to the action, then the untimely
hasty publishing abroad in this Realm before this Army of Spain was ready
to come forth to the seas, The untimely publishing of the intended conquest
before the Spanish navy was ready, did great hurt.
of sundry things written and put in Print, and sent into this realm, to
notify to the people, that all the Realm should be invaded and conquered,
that the Queen should be destroyed, all the Nobility, and men of reputation,
of honor, and wealth that did obey her, and would defend her, or that would
withstand the Invasion, should be with all their families rooted out, and their
places, The hearts of all sorts of people enflamed against the Spaniards
vaunting to conquer the land.
their honors, their houses and lands bestowed upon the conquerers: things
universally so odiously taken, as the hearts of all sorts of people were
enflamed: some with ire, some with fear, but all sorts almost, without
exception, resolved to venture their lives for the withstanding of all manner of
conquest, wherewith every body can say this Realm was not threatened these five
hundredth years and more.

These reports were brought to this realm with good credit, not in secret but
in public writings and printings, and took deep root in all kind of people
of this land, and in deed was of the more credit, The untimely publication of
the Popes Bull did hurt to the common cause.
first by reason of a new Bull lately published at Rome by the Popes holiness,
which I have seen, with more severity then other of his predecessors,
whereby the Queen here was accursed, and pronounced to be deprived of her
Crown and the Invasion, and conquest of the Realm committed by the Pope, to
ye King Catholic, to execute the same with his armies both by sea and land,
and to take the Crown to him self, or to limit it to such a Potentate as the
Pope and he should name. And secondly, there followed a large explanation of
this Bull, by sending hither a number of English books printed in Antwerp even
when the Navy of Spain was daily looked for, the original whereof was written
by the reverend father Cardinal Allen in April last, Cardinal Allens books
have done much hurt to the intended invasion and conquest.
called in his own writing the Cardinal of England, which book was so
violently, sharply, and bitterly written, yea (say the Adversaries) so
arrogantly, falsely, and slanderously, against the person of the Queen,
against her father King Henry the eight, against all her Nobility and
Counsel, as in very truth I was heartily sorry to perceive so many good men of
our own religion offended therewith, in that there should be found in one
accounted a father of the Church, who was also a borne subject of this crown
(though by the Adversaries reported to be very basely borne) such foul, vile,
irreuerent, and violent speeches, such ireful and bloody threatenings, of a
Queen, of a Nobility, yea of the whole people of his own nation.

Sorry, The Cardinals rash and violent writing missiked by the Catholics.
and most sorry I am to report the general cuill conceit of these inordinate
and unadvised proceedings of this Cardinal, of whose rash choice to such a
place, the world speaks strangely, as though he came to it through corruption
of the Popes sister, without liking of the College of Cardinals, where
otherwise the blessed intention of our holy Father, and the desire also of the
said Cardinal, might without such fatal bloody premonitions and threatenings
of future Invasions and conquests by the Catholic Kings noble forces, have
taken better place.

There was also to add the more credit to these terrible prognostications,
The multitude of books published to show the greatness of the Spanishe Navy,
did also hurt
such kind of other books printed in Spain and translated into French, (as it
is said by your Lorship) containing particular long descriptions, and
catalogues of Armadas of Castile, of Andaluzia, of Biscaye, of Guipusque, of
Portingall, of Naples, of Sicil, of Ragusa, and other Countries of the Leuant,
with a mass of all kind of provisions, beyond measure, for the said Armadas,
sufficient in estimation, to be able to make conquest of many kingdoms or
countries. And one great Argument is published by the Adversaries to stir up
the minds of the Nobility of England against the Spaniards, which is very
maliciously invented, to show the intention of the conquest, not only of
England, but of the whole Isle of Britain: moving all men specially to mark
by the description of the Armada, that there are specially named such a number
of Noblemen, as Princes, Marquises, Condes and Dons, that are called
Adventurers, without any office or pay, and such another number also of men
with great titles of honor, and many of them named Captains and Alferez,
without office, but yet in sold, and therefore called Entertenidos, as all
those being for no service in the Armada may be well presumed (say they) to have
come to have possessed the rooms of all the Noblemen in England, and Scotland:
and this fiction has taken more place then it is worth. And though these
armies were in deed exceeding great and mighty, yet they were so amplified
beyond all measure in these books, as in no preparation of Christendom in
former times against the Sarracins or Turks could be greater. The forewarninges
of the Armadas greatness caused the Queen to put all her Realm in force beyond
all former.
By this means this Queen and her realm, being thus forewarned and
terrified, took occasion with the aid of her people, being not only firmly
(as she was persuaded) devoted to her, but thoroughly irritated, to stir up
their whole forces for their defense, against such prognosticated conquests, as
in a very short time all her whole Realm and every corner were speedily
furnished with armed people on horseback, and on foot, and those continually
trained, exercised, and put into Bands, in warlike manner, as in no age ever was
before in this Realm. Here was no sparing of money to provide, horse, armor,
weapon, powder, and all necessaries, no not want of provision of Pioners,
carriages, and victuals in every County of the realm, without exception, to
attend upon the Armies. And to this general furniture every man voluntarily
offered, very many their service personally without wages, others money for
armor and weapons, and to wage soldiers, a matter strange and never the like
heard of in this realm or else where: And this general reason moved all men to
large contributions, that to withstand a Conquest where all should be lost,
there was no time to spare a portion.

The numbers made ready in the Realm I cannot affirm of mine own knowledge,
but I have heard it reported, when I was grieved to think the same to be so
true, that there was through England no quarter East, West, North and South,
The Armies made ready Navy England in every quarter of the realm.
but all concurred in one mind to be in readiness to serve for the Realm: and
that some one country was able to make a sufficient Army of twenty thousand
men fit to fight, and fifteen thousand of them well armed and weaponed: and in
some countries the number of forty thousand able men.

The maritime Countries from Cornwall, The Maritime Countries provided at
lading places with twenty thousand men.
all along the Southside of England, to Kent: and from Kent Eastward, by Essex,
Suffolk, and Norfolk to Lincolnshire (which Countries with their Havens were
well described unto you in perfect Plots, when Francis Throgmorton, first did
treat with your Lordship about the same) were so furnished of men of war,
both of themselves, and with resort of aid from their next shires, as there
was no place to be doubted for landing of any foreign forces, but there were
within eight and forty hours to come to the place above twenty thousand
fighting me^ on horseback and on foot, with field ordinance, victuals,
pioners and cariages, and all those governed by the principal Noble men of the
Countries and reduced under Captains of knowledge.

And one thing I heard of, that was very politikely ordered and executed at
this time, as of many late years was not used: that as the Leaders and
officers of the particular Ba^ds were men of experience in the wars: so to
make the Bands strong and constant, All the bands were under the principal
Knights of the realm compounded of the most mighty men being their tenants
and servants.
choice was made of the principal Knights of all Countries to bring their
renantes to the field, being men of strength, and landed, and of wealth:
whereby all the forces of compounded were of a resolute disposition to stick
to their Lords and Chieftaines, and the Chieftaines to trust to their own
tenants. And to remember one strange speech that I heard spoken may be
marueiled at, but it was auowed to me for a truth, that one Gentleman in Kent
had a Band of one hundred and fifty footmen, A strange report of the wealth of
a band of soldiers.
which were worth in goods above one hundred and fifty thousand pounds
sterling, besides their lands* such men would fight stoutely before they would
have lost their goods, and by likelihood at this time, many other Bands were
made of such principal men, both of wealth and strength. Of these things I am
sorry to have cause to write in this sort: because you may see how heretofore
you have been deceived with aduertiseme^ts of many, which had no proof to know
the truth thereof, and so I confess my self in some things to have erred,
namely, in imagining that whensoever any foreign power should be seen ready
to land in any part of this Realm, there would have been found but a small
number resolute to withstand the same, or to defend the Queen, but that the
same would have been very unable for the wars, untrained, raw, and ignorant
in all warlike actions, without sufficient armor and weapons: and that also
the Noble men and Gentlemen that were in this Realm of our Religion, whereof,
you know, we made account when you were here in England of very many, An error
of the Catholic fugitives in the number of their partners in England.
although many of the^ be dead since that time, but at this time there are not
so many tens, as we accounted hundreds, whom we thought would have showed them
selves like men of courage for our common cause, and would have suddenly
surprised the houses, families, and strength of the heretics and adversaries.

But now, such is our calamity, that it has pleased God, as I think for our
sins, or else for confounding of our bold opinions, and presumptions of our
own strength, to put in the hearts of all persons here one like mind, and
courage to withstand the intended Invasion, as well in such as we accounted
Catholics, as also in the Heretics: so as it has appeared manifestly that
for all earnest proceeding for arming, and for contributions of money, and for
all other warlike actions, there was no difference to be seen betwixt the
Catholic, and the heretic. A consent and concurrencie of Papists and
Protestants to withstand the conquest.
But in this case to withstand the threatened conquest, yea to defend the person
of the Queen, there appeared such a sympathy, concourse, and consent of all
sorts of persons, without respect of Religion, as they all appeared to be
ready to fight against all strangers, as it were with one heart and one body.
And though some few principal Gentlemen, of whom heretofore you have had the
names in such Catalogues of Catholics as you have been acquainted withal,
werelately upon the report of the coming out of the Army to the seas, sent to
the Isle of Ely there to remain restrained of their former liberty during the
expectation of this intended Invasion: yet it has appeared, that they were not
so restrained for any doubt that they would with their powers have assisted our
Army, but only thereby to make it known to all our friends and countrymen in
Spain, and Flaunders, yea even to your self (for so I heard it spoken, as
accompting you to have been the most principal Author and perswader of this
action) that there should be no hope to have any of them, or of their friends,
to assist these great Armies. And in very truth, I see now whosoever of our
friends in Spain or in Flaunders, or else where, made any such account of any
aid against the Queen, or against her party here, they should have been
deceived if the Army had offered to have landed. The gentlemen Recusants in
Elie offer to adventure then lives against all invasions whatsoever, without
respect of Pope or other potentate.
For I my self have heard that the best of those that were sent to Elie did
make offers, yea by their letters to the Counsel here, signed with their
hands, that they would adventure their lives in defense of the Queen, whom
they named their undoubted Sovereign Lady and Queen, against all foreign
forces, though the same were sent from the Pope or by his commandment: Yea
diverse of them did offer that in this quarrel of inuading of the Realm with
strangers, they would present their own bodies in the foremost ranks with
their country men against all strangers. Whereupon I heard also by a secret
friend of mine in the Court, that it was once in some towardnes of resolution
amongst the Counselors, that they should have been returned and put to their
former liberty. But the heat of the war being kindled with the knowledge of
the Kings Armada, being at that time come to the Groigne, and the Duke of
Parmas readiness with so great an Army and shipping in Flaunders, daily looked
for to land in England, yea to come to London, and a general murmur of the
people against all such Recusants of reputation, was the cause of the staying
of these Gentlemen at Elie, notwithstanding their offers of their service to
the Queen: and so they do remain in the Bishops palace there, with fruition
of large walks about the same, altogether without any imprisonment, other then
that they are not suffered to depart into the town, or country: and yet for
their religion, The Recusants are not put in danger of their lives for their
religion, but are fined at sums of money.
I think surely they do, and will, remain constant to the obedience of the
Church of Rome: for the which nevertheless they are not impeached to any
danger of their lives, but only charged with a penalty of money, because they
will not come to the Churches: whereby, by the law, a portion of their Revenue
is allotted to the Queen, and the rest left to the maintenance of them, their
wives, and children.

By which kind of proceedings our Adversaries here do pretend, that both these
Gentlemen, and all other of their qualities are favorably used, that they are
not pursued to death for their religion, as they say it was used in Queen
Mary's time, and as it is daily used (as they say) most rigorously and
barbarously in Spain against the Englishmen that come thither, only in trade
of merchandise. And yet I and others sometimes privately speaking with such our
Adversaries, as we think are not maliciously bent to have men prosecuted to
death only for their Religion (for to say the truth, and as the proverb is,
not to belie the Devil, very many of our Contraries are in that point not
uncharitable) we do object to them the executions by cruel torments and
deaths of very many, both here about London, and other parts of the Realm,
whom we account as Martirs, in that they do witness by their death their
obedience to the Pope, and the Catholic Church of Rome.

To which, these our Adversaries prete^ding some small drops The Jesuits are
not executed for religion but for treasons.
of charity do answer us: that no execution has been of any, to their
knowledge, for their religion, or for profession thereof: but for that they
which have been executed, have been found to have wandered in the Realm
secretly, and in a disguised manner, The Seminaries for the most part come
disguised like Ruffians.
which the Adversaries scornfully term as Ruffians, with feathers and all
ornaments of light colored apparel, like to the fashion of Courtiers, and do
use many means to entice all people, with whom they dare adventure to speak,
not only to be reconciled to the Pope, and Church of Rome, but to induce them
by vows and oaths to renounce, their obedience to the Queen: to deny her to
be their sovereign: and themselves to be discharged of their Allegiance: and
to repute all Magistrates under her to be unlawful, and in conscience not to
be obeyed: with many more such matters (which I nevertheless count to be very
vain calumniations) tending to make the facts of all such holy Priests as are
sent with Commission to win men's souls to be direct treasons against the
Queen, and the state of the Realm.

These Defenders of these judgments and executions, contend, and do most
earnestly maintain, that all such Priests, Jesuits, Seminaries and others, so
persuading the people against the Queen, the Laws, the Government, and state
of the Realm, and all others that are so persuaded by them, are manifest
traitors: and so they say that their enditements, and all process of law
extended and pursued against them, do manifestly declare the same. Wherein,
these our Adversaries do sometimes for maintenance of their arguments, show the
very copies of their enditements and iugdements, wherein there is no mention
made of charging them with their religion, but that they have attempted to
persuade the Queens subjects to forsake their Allegiance, and consequently to
be Rebels to their Queen and Sovereign.

In this sort these men for their advantage, do at all times, with these and
many like earnest arguments maintain their proceedings against the holy
Priests and Jesuits, that have suffered death for their conscience, as just and
necessary. And though, where I and others may reply without peril to our
selves (as surely in some small companies we may using modest words) we object
the confession of the Catholic faith by the parties at their death, and that
with great constancy, which our Adversaries cannot deny, Babington suffered
for his treasons voluntarily confessed, not for religion: though at his death
he professed the Roman religion.
so as it may seem they die for their religion: yet is it on the other part
against us alleged, and maintained, that they are neither indicted, condemned,
nor executed for their religion, or for offering of them selves to die for
their religion, but only for their former treasons in conspiring against the
Queen, and state of the Realm: no otherwise then of late time Babington and
all his Accomplices, who were condemned for their attempt to have raised war in
the Realm, and to have murdered the Queen, and to have set up the Queen of
Scots, all which the said Babington and all his accomplices voluntarily
confessed, and were condemned and executed, only for those their great
treasons: and yet diverse of them at the place of their execution, did in like
manner (as these Priests and Jesuits use to do) make confession of their
Catholic faith, with offer to die for the same: and yet (say our Adversaries)
it ought not to be affirmed, that Babington and his accomplices were put to death
for religion, but for their treasons.

And for further maintenance of the colored arguments, wherewith I, and others
my good, faithful, and Catholic brethren are often troubled how to answer
them, it is alleged that the great number of gentlemen, and gentlewomen, yea
some of honorable calling, A multitude of gentlemen suspected to be Papists,
yet never endangered of their lives.
and of other meaner degrees, are known manifestly to be of a contrary
religion to the laws of the Realm, both near the Court and far of, and yet
they are never pursued by any form of law to put their lives in danger, or
questioned, or imprisoned, for their opinions in religion, whereby to bring
them in any danger. Only such as are presented or complained of by the
parishioners where they dwell, for never coming to any Church by the space of
certain months in a whole year, are thereof endited, and afterward being
called to answer thereto, if they can show no such lawful excuse as the law
has provided, they are then condemned to pay a penalty out of their goods and
lands, if they have any, and not otherwise punished, nor yet by inquisition any
of them examined of their faith. But yet say these defenders, if they show them
selves by their open deeds and facts to be reconciled from their Allegiance
and obedience to the Queen, and that they will therein persist, then they are
therewith charged and punished according to the laws therefore provided.

These arguments in their defense I do not repeat as allowing of the^, but
yet surely they do move me, and some others that are wise, to think, that
indeed the rashness of diverse coming secretly into the Realm, and professing
themselves to be Priests, Many of the Priests that are sent into the realm,
are young, rash, and of leude life.
many of them being both very young, unlearned, and of light behavior, has
done great harm to the goodness of our common cause: and if they and such
others could have temperately and secretly instructed the people, and used more
circumspection in their own living and behavior, there would have been a
greater increase of numbers persuaded in conscience to have joined with us in
our profession. Whereof I am the bolder to write to you, my Lord, that you may
confer with our countrymen, that have access unto you, and that they also
may deal with the Fathers of the Jesuits, that more care and choice be had of
such English men as are hereafter to be sent into England, and not to send
every young man that has more boldness, then learning and temperance, for such
a function.

In the former part of this my declaration to you of the universal concurrence
of all men of value, wealth, and strength, in the body of the Realm, to serve
and defend the Queen and the Realm, A great strength of the English Navy, by
the Ships of the port towns that did serve without wages.
I forgot to report unto you the great numbers of Ships of the subjects of the
Realm: as of London and other port towns, and cities, that voluntarily this
year were armed, able to make a full Navy of themselves for an army, and all
at the proper costs of the Burgesses, for certain months, with men, victual,
and munition, which did join with the Queens own Navy all this Summer, a
thing never in any former age heard of, otherwise then that such ships were
always hired, waged, and victualled by the Kings of the Realm, which argued
to the grief of me and some others a most vehement and unaccustomed affection
and devotion in the Cities and port towns, such, as they showed them selves
therein ready to fight, as it had been, pro aris and focis.

Of the number and strength of the Queens own ships of war, I think you
have been sufficiently enfourmed many times heretofore. But yet I will make you
a true report of the state of them this present Summer, what I have credibly
heard thereof: because I have been very sorry to hear how you and others have
been therein abused: and that not only in this matter of the Queens ships,
but in some other things also of late, whereof some part has been here by very
many, maliciously, and in common speeches, imputed to your own invention and
publication: whereof in a few words I will make some digression before I shall
show the estate of the Queens Navy.

In this Summer past there was Printed in Paris, by your direction (as it was
reported) a notable untruth, Two notable lies printed in Paris, and imputed to
Don Bernardin Mendoza.
which I did see, and read: that the King of Scots had besieged Barwicke, and
had won it by assault, and possessed it quietly: whereof no part was true, nor
any cause to imagine the same, though I wish it had so been: but not for any
good will that I now bear to that King, but for the trouble to this Queen.
For in truth there is no good for us to be hoped for from the King of Scots,
howsoever the Scottish Bishops in France have sought to make you believe
otherwise, who is so rooted in the Caluinists Religion, as there is never hope
that he can be recovered to the church of Rome: and so I think you are of late
duly enfourmed, and by his violent actions against diverse Catholics, and
against all that favor the Spaniards, may certainly appear.

And likewise another great untruth was lately Printed (as your enemies say) by
your direction also in Paris, A most manifest lie printed in Paris, of a
Spanish victory when it was altogether an English victory.
that now in July last, when the Spanish Fleet and English had met and fought
betwixt France and England, the Spaniards had then a great victory, wherein
they had sonke the Lord Admiral of England, with sixteen of the Queens great
ships into the bottom of the Seas, and that all the rest were driven to fly
with the Uice admiral Frances Drake. Upon these two so notable untruths,
which the Adversaries spitefully called Don Bernardin Mendozas mendacia,
Mendacia of Mendoza.
many who honor you, were right sorry, that you should give so hasty credit,
to publish the same (as your enemies say) you did: though I have to my power
for clearing of you honor given it out, that these and such like have
proceeded of the lightness of the French, who commonly Print more lies then
truths, in such doubtful times, and not of you, whose honor and wisdom I
thought would not be justly touched with so great untruths and lies:
considering always, a small time will discover things that are in facts
reported untruly, and brings the Authors to discredit and infamy. There has
been a speech also reported here, to have proceeded from you in France, that
has caused a great misliking of you in Scotland: which is, that you should in
open assembly, and in a bravery say, that the young King of Scots (whom you
called in your language a boy) had deceived the King your master: but if the
Kings Navy might prosper against England, the King of Scots should loose his
Crown: and of this the King of Scots has been advertised out of France, and
uses very evil language of you, which I will not report.

But now to leave this digression, and to return to let you know the truth of
the state of the Queens Navy this Summer. The state of the Navy of England
this Summer.
The same was in the beginning of the year, when the brute was brought of the
readiness of the Kings Armada in Lisbone, and of the Army by land upon the Sea
coasts in Flanders with their shipping, divided into three companies: the
greatest under the charge of Charles L. Haward high Admiral of England, L.
Haward, L, Admiral.
whose father, grandfather, uncles, great uncles, and others of his house,
being of the noble house of the Dukes of Norfolk, had also been high Admirals
before him, whereof both France and Scotland have had proof.

An other company were appointed to remain with the L. Henry Seymour second
son to the Duke of Somerset that was Protector in King Edwards time, L. Henry
Seymour.
and brother to the now Earl of Hartfort: and these companies for a time
continued in the Narrow seas betwixt England and Flanders, under the charge of
the said high Admiral, to attend on the Duke of Parmas Actions.

A third company were armed in the West part of England toward Spain, Sir
Francis Drake.
under the conduct of Sir Francis Drake: a man by name and fame known too too
well to all Spain, and to the Kings Indias, and of great reputation in
England: and this was compounded, partly of some of the Queens own ships, and
partly of the ships of the West parts.

But after that it was certainly understood, that the great Navy of Spain was
ready to come out from Lisbone, and that the fame thereof was blown abroad in
Christendom to be invincible, and so published by books in print, the Queen
and all her Counsel I am sure (whatsoever good countenance they made) were not
a little perplexed, as looking certainly for a dangerous fight upon the Seas,
and after that for a landing and Invasion. Whereupon the Lord Admiral was
commanded to sail with the greatest ships, to the West of England toward
Spain to join with Drake, whom he made Viceadmiral, and to continue in the
seas betwixt France and England to stop the landing of the Navy of Spain. And
with the Lord Admiral went in certain of the Queens ships, the Lord Thomas
Haward second son to the last Duke of Norfolk, L. Tho. Haward L. Sheffeld.
and the Lord Sheffeld, son to the Admirals sister, who is wife to the
Queens Ambassador in France, with a great number of Knights of great
liuelode: And at that time the Lord Henry Seymour was left with a good number
of ships in the narrow Seas, upon the coast of Flaunders to attend on the Duke
of Parma.

Whilst these two Nauies were thus divided, I confess to you that I and
others of our part, secretly made full account that none of all these English
ships durst abide the sight of the Armada of Spain: or if they would abide any
fight, yet they should all be sonke at the first encounter. For such constant
opinion we had conceived by the reports of the world, that the greatness and
number of the ships, and the Army of Spain, being the chosen vessels of all
the Kings Dominions, was so eccessiue monstrous, beyond all the Nauies that
ever had been seen in Christendom (not excepting the Armada at Lepanto) that
no power could abide in their way. But how far deceived we were therein, a
very short time, even the first day, did manifestly, to the great dishonor of
Spain, discover. For when the Catholic Army came to the coast of England,
which in deed the English confess did seem far greater then they looked
for, and that they were astonished with the sight of them: The fight of the
English Navy with the Spanish.
yet the Lord Admiral and Drake, having but only fifty of the English ships
out of the Haven of Plimmouth, where the rest remained for a new reuictualling,
without tarying for the rest of the Navy that was in Plimmouth, they did offer
present fight, and furiously pursued the whole Navy of Spain, being above
160. ships: so as the same, with the furious and continual shot of the English
one whole day, fled without any returning. The flying away of the Spanish Navy.
And after, the English Navy being increased to an hundred great and small,
renewed their fight with terrible great shot all the whole day, gaining always
the wind of the Spanish Navy. And as I am sorry to remember the particularities,
which the English have largely written to their own praise: so to speak all
in one word, for nine days together, they still forced them to fly, and
destroyed, sonke, and took in three days fight, diverse of the greatest
ships: out of which, specially out of the principal great ship of Andaluzia,
and out of the Admiranta of Guipusque, and thirdly out of the principal great
Galliasse of Naples great numbers were brought (beside many more killed and
drowned) to London, and to sundry other ports of the Realm, to the great
dishonor of Spain: amongst which prisoners were a great number of Captains
both for land and sea. And besides that, which deeply blemisheth the honor of
Spain, and vexes me at my heart, to consider the inequality of fortune, it
is vaunted by our Adversaries, that in all the time of these fightes so many
days, The Spaniards prisoners say, that Christ showed himself a Lutheran in
this Summer voyage of the Spanish Navy.
the Spaniards did never take, or sink, any English ship or boat, or break
any mast, or took any one man prisoner. A matter that in deed these Spaniards
which are taken do marvel at greatly, and chafe thereat: so as some of them
in their anguish of mind let not to say, that in all these fightes Christ
showed himself a Lutheran.

And though such speeches be unadvised, and not to be regarded: yet surely it
is most manifest, that in all this voyage from the coming of the Navy out of
Lisbon even to this hour, God showed no savor to the Spanishe Navy from the
beginning to the ending.
God did show no favor to ours any one day, as he did continually to these
Lutherans: which, percase, may be done for our good, to correct us as putting
our trust wholly in our worldly strength, and to the confusion hereafter of the
Lutherans, by puffing them up, being his enemies, with prosperity for a time,
to be afterward the cause of their ruin. And amongst other things reported
to the dishonor of the Duke of Medina, who, it is said, was lodged in the
bottom of his ship for his safety, and to a great touch to the Commanders of
the Spanish Navy, that they never would turn their ships, nor stay them, to
defend any of their own ships that were forced to tarry behind, but suffered
diverse to perish, as are good witnesses thereof the three great vessels. Don
Pedro de Valdez, Captain General of the Armada of Andaluzia. Hugo de Moncada,
General of the Galliasses of Naples.
One wherein Don Pedro de Valdez was taken: an other Galleon of Guipusque that
was spoiled with fire: and the noble Galliasse wherein Hugo de Moncada was
slain: of which lack of care by the Duke of Medina, these Spaniards that are
taken give very evil report. The like is said in Zeland by the Spaniards
there, that were saved with Diego de Pimentelli, Diego de Pimentelli Captain
of the Galleon named S. Matthew.
though the Galleon wherein he was, being beaten with the English shot, and not
succored by the Navy of Spain, did there perish in their coming to
Flushing, and so also did another likewise perish for lack of succor before
Ostend.

And now I must needs think that you are stricken with some grief of mind,
or rather with some anger toward me, to hear from me so much of those adverse
things, although they are too true: and therefore I also imagine you may be
disirous, for your better contentation, to understand what opinions we that are
here have, being thus frustrate of our expected delivery, by the defeat of
this enterprise: whether we do comfort our selves with a conceit that this
Action may be, by any probability, once again renewed this next year, for the
recovery of our lost hope this year, famously spoken of by ye number of 88.
and so verified to the loss of al Catholiuqes. A consideration what may be
done the next year to renew this Action.
Wherein surely for our own parts, as by secret conference I find with many
with whom I have secretly of late upon this unfortunate accident conferred, we
can not judge of any likelihood of good success for any long time: and if
there should any be hoped for, surely the Sea-forces of the King Catholic,
must of necessity be more increased, and better also governed then they were
this year. For this we here do consider that this enterprise of Invasion and
Conquest, was always principally grounded upon many probable opinions of the
evil state of the Realm.

First of the weakness of the English Navy: for so you know The 3. hopes
conceived against England, are now all frustrated.
and so also many of us here did conceive the same: wherein we see by all this
years service with these ships, we did all notably err.

Next, of a supposed evil contentment of a number of people

Lastly, and most principally, of a great strong party that

And as these three opinions have all failed this year, so I assure you,
though some of ours on that side ye seas may persist in their former opinions
against the experience lately seen (as it is likely they may be forced to do,
to maintain them selves in credit, for continuing their necessary relief from
the Pope, and the King, having no other means to keep them from steruing or
begging) yet because I would not have you further deceived by them, who have
not been present in the Realm to see such contrary proofs against all their
conceits, as I and others have done: I will show you a great number of manifest
Arguments, though I am sorry at my heart to remember them, whereby you in your
wisdom (if you be not blinded by others) shall see it most certain, that
these former opinions, for comfort to be had from hence, will prove the next
year as strong against us, and in some part more strong then they proved this
year, if any account should be made thereof.

First, for the Navy of England, which has this year to the sight of the world
proved to be of great force and value, for those Seas, and able to ouermatch in
their manner of fight, double to their number, of the great Gallions, Carikes,
Galliasses, or Galleys, it is certain that it will be greatly increased this
next year. For I know, that within these few days, bargains are already
made, and Impressed of money delivered, and certain sent into the Estlands, for
great store of all maritime prouisio^s. And as for the increase of the number
of good ships for the The English Navy will be stronger the next year.
Queens proper use there is already a great quantity of timber ready, and
order given to fell more in November, and December next, in the Countries near
both to the Sea, and to Thames, to build a number of ships of war, equal to
these whose service was seen this year to have ouermatched the great Armadas
and Castles of Spain and Italy. And furthermore, to join with the Navy of
England this year following, not only the Hollanders and Zelanders, but also
ships of Denmark, and other parts of Estland, will certainly be had in
great numbers, whereof there was none at all required this year past to join
with the Navy of England. Only certain Hollanders and Zelanders offered their
service (according as they are bound) in the end of this Summer, Offer of
Hollanders and Zelanders, to join with the English Navy.
since the conflict near Callice, to join with some of the English Navy in
the narrow seas, to defend ye issuing of the Duke of Parma out of the ports of
Fla^ders: and in that service at this time there are above forty and six good
ships of war, Justinian Nassau Admiral of Holland with six and forty ships
of war joined to the English Navy, against the D. of Parma.
with the Uiceadmirall Justinian of Nassau: a man that agrees too well with
the English Nation, and is a sworn enemy to all Spaniardes, and Catholics:
and as it is reported for certain, there are threescore more coming out of
North-Holland to the Seas, for the same purpose: so as it is to be doubted,
that this Realm, this next year, will be double as strong as it was this last
year.

As to the second branch of our hope depending upon opinion of some great
miscontentment of sundry persons against the Queen the proof of the contrary
so appeared this year, Arguments to prove no miscontentment of the people
toward the Queen.
both of her actions to maintain the liking of all her people, and of the
general earnest devotion showed to her by all estates, Noble and mean rich
and poor, as I think no Prince Christened ever had greater cause of comfort
in her people: which I may judge to breed a pride in her. And to recompense
the same she did most notably show her self in this time, even when most
danger was threatened, in all her actions toward her people, as careful for
their weal, and for the safety of her Realm, without any special or
particular provision, or regard to her own person, The providence of the
Queen to make her Realm strong.
as ever any Prince could do. First, to let her people understand what care she
had to make her Realm strong against Invasion, she politikely, yea most
carefully, by her own frequent directions, caused her whole Realm to be put
in arms, she took account thereof her self by monthly Certificat from such
as were made her Lieutenauntes in every Shire of her Realm, she caused
Armor, Powder, Weapon, to be sent to all Countries, and Ordinance to all
Maritime Countries: There were also sundry Armies described, to defend every
coast of the Sea: and as I heard it reported by some that did know the secrets
of the Court, was importunate with her Counsel to leave no day unoccupied, to
bring these services to effect, and yet she did still continue her
Commissioners in the Low Countries to treat of peace, which surely she desired
to have obtained, so that she might have had the same with certain conditions.
So as to content her people, she did both treat and desire peace, and did not
in the mean time neglect to make her Realm strong for defense, if peace could
not be gotten. But in the end, when her demands were wholly refused (whereof we
and all Catholics were most glad) and that she understood very certainly,
that the Army of the Duke of Parma should come first to destroy the City of
London, she revoked her Commissioners, approached London in person, and did lie,
as it were, in the Suburbs of the same: whereby they of the City took great
comfort, having daily in show and muster of their own ten thousand men armed
and trained of very able men of the City, and in readiness thirty thousand
more, able to fight.

She caused also an Army to be brought to incampe near the Sea side, The
Queens being in the Army in Essex, when most danger was threatened by the
enemies landing.
upon the River of Thames, betwixt the Sea and the City, twenty miles beneath
the City: and after the Army was come thither, she would not by any advise be
stayed, but for comfort of her people, and to show her own magnanimity of
heart (as she said, she would so do though she was a woman) she went to that
Army lying betwixt the City and the Sea, under the charge of the Earl of
Leicester, placing her self betwixt the enemy and her City, and there viewed
her Army, and passed through it diverse times, lodged in the borders of it,
returned again, and dined in the Army: And first, saw the people as they
were, by their Countries, lodged and quartered in their several camps, which
she viewed from place to place. Afterward, when they were all reduced into
battles, ready, as it were, to fight with any enemy, she rode round about
them, and did view them curiously, being accompanied only but with the
General, and three or four others attending on her: But yet to show her
state, I well marked it, she had the sword carried before her by she Earl of
Ormond.

There she was generally saluted with cries, with shoutes, with all tokens of
love, of obedience, of readiness and willingness to fight for her, The
notable Applause of the people to the Queen for her presence in the Camp.
as seldom has been seen in a Camp and army, considering she was a Queen:
and all tended to show a marvelous concord, in a mutual love, betwixt a Queen
and her subjects: and of reverence, and obedience of Subjects to a Sovereign:
all which she acquitted with very Princely thanks, and good speeches. I could
enlarge this description with many more particularities of mine own sight, for
thither I went, as many others did: and all that day, wandering from place to
place, I never heard any word spoken of her, but in praising her for her
stately person, and Princely behavior: and in praying for her life and safety,
and cursing of all her enemies, both Traitors, and all Papists, with earnest
desire to venture their lives for her safety.

And besides such particular Acclamations the whole Army in every quarter, The
singing of Psalms by the English Army in the Camp.
did devoutly at certain times sing in her hearing, in very tunable manner,
diverse Psalms put into form of Prayers in praise of almighty God, no ways to
be misliked, which she greatly commended, and with very earnest speech thanked
God with them. This that I write, you may be sure, I do not with any comfort,
but to give you these manifest Arguments, that neither this Queen does
discontent her people, nor her people do show any discontentation in any thing
that they be commanded to do for her service, as heretofore has been
imagined. An Army provided for the Queen, beside the Army, ready to withstand
the landing of the enemy.
She had also an Army of about forty thousand footmen, and of six thousand
horsemen, under the charge of the Lord Hunsdon Lord Cha^berlein, as Lieutenant
of that Army, made ready from the Inland parts of the Realm, to be about her
own person, without disarming the maritime Counties: so as many marched out of
sundry Countries toward her, at the very time that she was in the Camp: some
came to the Suburbs and Towns near London, whom she remaunded to their
Countries, because their Harvest was at hand, and many of them would not be
countermaunded, but still approached onward on their own charges (as they said)
to see her person, and to fight with them that boasted to conquer the Realm.
But though the greatest number of the said soldiers were compelled to
return, yet the Captains, Leaders, and the principal Knights and Gentlemen
came to the Court to offer their service: and those were graciously accepted of
her with many thanks, and are now for the more part returned with a full
determination, and firm promise to continue their Bands in such redines, as
upon a few hours warning they will assuredly return with them in good array.

Beside these foresaid Arguments to disprove the opinion of coffeehouse of
the people, which heretofore has been thought a great furtherance to this
honorable action, I will also remember you some other more notable Actions, to
prove both contentation, and readiness, in all the Nobility of the Realm at
this time, that were not tied to abide in their countries by reason of their
offices, as Lieutenantes and Governors there for Martial services. For
as soon as it was heard that the Queen was come nere London, and that the
Armies were in gathering to come out of the countries, Great power of Horsemen
brought by the Nobility to attend on the Queens person.
for defense of all Invasions, and reports brought from the sea coasts of the
appearance of the Spanish Navy: all the Noble men in the Realm, from East and
West, from North and South, excepting only such great Lords as had special
Gouernementes in Countries, that might not lawfully be absent from their
charge, and some few that were not able to make forces according to their
desire, came to the Queen, bringing with them according to their degrees, and
to the uttermost of their powers, goodly Bands of horsemen, both Lances, light
horsemen, and such other as are termed Carabins or Argeletiers, lodging their
Bands round about London, and maintaining them in pay at their own charges all
the time, until the Navy of Spain was certainly known to be passed beyond
Scotland. And of these Noble men many showed their Bands of their horsemen,
before the Queen even in the fields before her own gate, to the great marucile
of men of good judgment (as I heard reported) for that the number of them was
so great, and so well armed, and horsed, as knowing that they were no parcel
of the numbers of horsemen limited in every Country, and put into Bands with
ye Armies described, it was thought before they were seen, that there had not
been so many spare horses of such valor in the whole realm, excepting the
North part of England toward Scotland, whose forces consist chiefly of
horsemen.

The first that showed his Bands to the Queen, was that Noble, The Viscount
Mountagues show of horsemen was the first.
virtuous, honorable man, the Viscount Mountague, who, howsoever men do judge
of him for opinion in Religion, yet to tell you the truth, he is reported
alwaes to have professed, as now also at this time he did profess and protest
solemnly, both to the Queen, and to all her Court, in open Assemblies, that
he now came, though he was very sickly, and in age, with a full resolution to
live and die in defense of the Queen, and of his country, against all
Inuaders, whether it were Pope, King or Potentate whatsoever, and in that
quarrel he would hazard his life, his children, his lands and goods. And to
show his mind agreeably thereto, he came personally himself before the Queen,
with his Band of horsemen being almost two hundred: the same being led by his
own sons, and with them a young child, very comely seated on horseback, being
the heir of his house, that is, the eldest son to his son and heir: a
matter much noted of many, whom I heard to commend the same: to see a
grandfather, father, and son, at one time on horseback before a Queen for
her service, though in truth I was sorry to see our Adversaries so greatly
pleased therewith. But I cannot conceal it from your Lordships knowledge,
because I think this Noble man is known unto you, having been used as an
Ambassador to the King Catholic many years past by this Queen (as I have
heard) to require confirmation of the treaties of amity, betwixt both their
Fathers. And of this Noble man's conditions, I think there be some others, of
whom there is no account to be made that they will give savor to any attempt
against the Queen or to any Invasion of the Realm.

There were also many at the same time that made shows of great numbers of
serviceable horses, A number of great Lords showed their horsemen.
whereof though it be no comfort to you to hear* yet is it good that you be
not abused for lack of knowledge, how the present state is here: that you may
better judge hereafter what may be done to recover this late loss and
dishonor. Earl of Lincoln.
Lord Windesore.
At this time the Earl of Lincoln, and the Lord Windesore, with some Knights
and Gentlemen with them showed their Bands, as the Lord Montague had done: and
after them, Lord Chancelour.
the Lord Chancelour showed goodly Bands of horsemen and footmen at his own
house, very many and strong. And within one or two days after the Earl of
Warwick, Earl of Warwick.
the Lord Burghley Lord Treasurer, Lord Treasurer
the Lord Compton, L. Compton.
and in the end of the day the Earl of Leycester, Earl of Leycester.
and the Lord Rich, Lord Rich.
besides sundry Knights of the Realm, Sir Walter Mildmay.
showed every of them several strong Bands of horsemen, Sir Henry Cromwell,
to the great liking of the Queen, Sir (...)
and of all the people that were there, Earl of Essex with a great Band of
horsemen and footmen before the Queen at S. James.
being many thousands. And within two days after that, the Earl of Essex
being Master of the Queens horse, with certain principal Gentlemen his
servants friends and followers, showed before the Queen above three hundred
horses of al service, and a great number of Carabins, and a fair Band of
footmen all Musketeers.

This show exceeded in number any other particular Band, and the Earl himself
with a great number of Lances, horsed and armed, did run very many courses,
and specially with the Earl of Cumberland (as they call it) the Course of the
field which I had never seen before: Course of the field.
and did also him self, and his company Tourney on horseback a very long
time, Tourney.
and caused also his Carabines, and his footmen to make many skirmishes there,
to the great liking of the Queen, and of the multitude of people, which were
many thousands. Amongst whom I heard many vehement speeches against all English
Papists, calling them all Traitors, wishing also that the Spaniards, had been
there in that field with treble the number, to make proof of the value of
English men: all which I heard to my great grief, with many curses against all
their countrymen, saying, that they as arrant Traitors to their native
country, had villanously sold, as far as in them did lie, the liberty of
their country to Spaniards, and other Papists. It behooved me not there to have
contraried any of them, for surely if I had, their rancour was so stirred up,
by the comfort of these fair shows of horsemen, as they would there in the
field in their rage have killed me, and cut me in a thousand pieces.

Besides these Lords above named, there were brought to the town, other fair
Bands by the Earl of Worcester, Earl of Worcester.
the Earl of Hertford, Earl of Hertford.
the Lord Audeley, Lord Audeley.
Lord Morley, Lord Morley.
Lord Dacres, L. Dacres.
Lord Lomeley, L. Lomeley.
Lord Mountioy, L. Mountioy.
Lord Sturton, L. Sturton.
Lord Darcy, L. Darcy.
Lord Sands, L. Sands.
Lord Mordant, L. Mordant.
and by every one that were of the privy Counsel: so as by estimation, there
were about London at that time, above five thousand horses ready to serve the
Queen, besides all the horsemen that were raised in all other Countries for
the Armies, and the Sea coasts. And besides these, I heard in a very good
place, where I was silent, that there was by account twice as many in
readiness, with the Noble men that were absent, attending on their charges in
their several Lieutenancies. As the Marquis of Winchester, Marquis of
Winchester.
one counted to be the strongest man of his own furniture for Horse and Armor,
who is Lieutenant of Hampshire, with the Earl of Sussex Earl of Sussex.
Captain of Portemouth, and Lieutenant also of Dorcetshire. Next to him is in
account the Earl of Shrowsbury Earl of Shrowsbury.
Earl Marshal of England Lieutenent of a great number of Countries, and of
great power of his own, both for horsemen and footmen, beside the power of the
Lord Talbot L. Talbot.
his son. The Earl of Darby Earl of Darby
also, though he was in Flaunders, from whence he came lately, yet his son
the Lord Strange, L. Strange.
Lieutenent of Lancashire and Cheshire in his fathers absence, is said to have
raised a great power of horsemen. And to show the populer affection to this
Earl in his Country, I heard it for certain reported, that when the Earl
continued longer in Flanders then they liked, and doubting of his return, for
that they supposed that the Duke of Parma would stay him, and the other
Commissioners there, the people of his Country in a generality did amongst
themselves determine, that the Lord Strange the Earls son, and all the
manhood of Lancashire and Cheshire would go over the Seas and fetch the Earl
home. A matter for no purpose to be spoken of, but to note the force of the
love which the people do bear to the Earl, who with his son is firmly
bent against the Pope.

The Earl of Bath Earl of Bath.
also Lieutenant of Devonshire, had as is said, great forces of his own ready
to have impeached the landing of any strangers in Devonshire. Earl of
Pembrokes noble offer.
The Earl of Pembroke also being Lieutenant of Somersetshire and Wiltshire,
and Lord President of all Wales, was ready to have come to the Queen with
three hundred horsemen, and five hundred footmen all of his own retinue,
leaving all the Countries under his charge fully furnished.

I omit here to speak of the Bands of horsemen, belonging to the Earls of
Northumberland Earl of Northumberland.
and Cumberland, Earl of Cumberland.
which though they were ready to have been showed at the same time: yet the
Earls hearing of the Spanish Army approaching, went voluntarily to the Sea
side in all have, and came to the Queens Navy before the fight before Callice.
Where they being in several ships of the Queens, did with their own persons
valiant services against the Kings Armada. And to show the great readiness in a
generality of sundry others at the same time, to adventure their lives in the
said service, there went to the Seas at the same time diverse Gentlemen of good
reputation, who voluntarily without any charge, and without knowledge of the
Queen, put themselves into the Queens Navy in sundry ships, wherein they
served at the fight before Callice: of which number being very great, I remember
that the names of some of them were these: Master Henry Brook.
Master Henry Brook son and heir to the Lord Cobham, Sir. Tho. Cecil.
Sir Thomas Cecil son and heir to the Lord Treasurer, Sir Will. Hatton
Sir William Hatton heir to the Lord Chancellor Sir Horatio Pallauicino a
Knight of Genua, Sir Horatio Pallauicino.
Master Robert Carry son to the Lord Hunsdon, M. Robert Carry.
Sir Charles Blunt, Sir Charles Blunt.
brother to the Lord Mountioy. M. Thomas Gerard.
But much speech is of two Gentlemen of the Court that went to the Navy at the
same time, M. Will. Heruie.
whose names are Thomas Gerard and William Heruie, to me not known, but now
here about London spoken of with great fame. These two adventured out of ship
boat, to scale the great Galliasse wherein Moncada was, and entered the same
only with their Rapiers: a matter commonly spoken, that never the like was
hazarded before, considering the height of the Galliasse compared to a ship
boat.

And yet to make it more manifest, how earnest all sorts of Noble men, and
Gentlemen, were to adventure their lives in this service, it is reported that
the Earl of Oxford, Earl of Oxford.
who is one of the most ancient Earls of this land, went also to the Sea to
serve in the Queens Army. There went also for the same purpose, a second son
of the Lord Treasurer, called as I can remember, M. Robert Cecil.
Robert Cecil: L. Dudley.
there went also about that time to the Seas, Sir Walter Ralegh.
the Lord Dudley an ancient Baron of the Realm, and Sir Walter Ralegh a
Gentleman of the Queens privy Chamber, and in his company a great number of
young Gentlemen, amongst whom I remember the names of the heir of Sir Thomas
Cecil, M. Will. Cecil.
called William Cecil, M. Edward Darcy.
of Edward Darcy, M. Arthure Gorge.
Arthure Gorge, and such others: with the rehearsal of whom I do not comfort
my self, but only to show you, how far we have been deceived to think that
we should have had a party here for us, when as we see both by land and Sea,
all sorts of men were so ready of their own charges, without either
commandment, or entertainment, to adventure their lives in defense of the
Queen and the Realm.

And for the Earl of Huntingtons forces, Earl of Huntington.
being Lieutenant General in the North, it is reported, that he has put in
readiness for an Army in Yorkshire, and other Countries commonly limited to
serve against Scotland, to the number of forty thousand well armed footmen,
and near hand ten thousand horsemen, to come to him if any occasion of
Invasion should be in the North parts: to whom are joined with their forces
three Lords in the North* the Lord Scroop, L. Scroope.
Lord Darcy, L. Darcy.
and Lord Euers. L. Euers.


There are also diverse other Lords that are Lieutenants of Countries, that
have in readiness of their proper charges good numbers of horsemen. As the
Earl of Kent, Earl of Kent
Lieutenant of Bedfordshire the L. Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, L. Hunsdon.
Lieutenant of Norfolk and Suffolk: the Lord Cobham L. Cobham.
Lieutenant of Kent: L. Grave.
the Lord Gray of Buckinghamshire: the Lord North L. North.
of Cambridgeshire: Lord Chandos L. Chandos.
of Glocestershire: Lord S. John L. Saint John.
of Huntingtonshire: Lord Buckhurst L. Buckhurst.
of Sussex: and so by this particular recital not unmeet for your knowledge, it
is to be noted what disposition the Nobility of the Realm had at this time to
have withstood all Invasion. And if percase you shall peruse your ordinary
Catalogue of the grrat Lords of the Realm, you shall find that these are the
substance of all the great Lords, Earl of Rutland.
saving three young Earls within age, Earl of Southhampton.
Rutland, Earl of Bedford.
Southhampton, and Bedford: all three brought up in perverse religion. And so
remains to be spoken of, the Earl of Arundel, who is in the Tower for
attempting to have fled out of the Realm, by provocation of him that now is
Cardinal Allen: who, howsoever he may be affected to the Catholic religion:
yet I hear most certainly that he offers his life in defense of the Queen
against all the world.

And where account was made to have a party in this Realm, which by these
former relations appear could not be possible, the whole Nobility being
assured to the Queen, and the force of the people not violently bent that way:
In this very time was offered to the Queen as great a party for her, to come
to her service, and defense of the Realm, as out of all Christendom, she
could not have to all respects a stronger. Which was the King of Scots, who
hearing of the intended Invasion of the Realm, Offer of the K. of Scots to the
Queen of England.
sent a Gentleman to the Queen, with his letter, as I credibly heard, to offer
her all the power that he had to defend her and her Realm: and if she so
would, he would come in his own person, and hazard his own life, to defend
this Realm against all Inuaders for Religion, or any other pretense
whatsoever. So by this you may see, what account may be made of any vain
promises, made in the name of this King. And because you shall perceive that I
have good means to have intelligence of any other forces of the Realm for
defense thereof, Bands of horsemen and footme^ erected by the Bishops.
it is most certain as I hear, and I have seen a List or Roll of a great
number both of horsemen and footmen, which the Bishops of the Realm have of
their own charges, with the co^tribution of the Clergy, raised up in Bands of
horsemen and footmen, which are to be led by Noble Gentlemen at the Queens
nomination: and these Bands must be vaynely termed Milites Sacri.

As to the last point of the three foundations of the principal hope conceived,
The third and last hope which the Catholics had of a party in the realm was
all frustrate.
whereupon the Invasion was chiefly grounded and taken in hand, which was most
certainly and generally believed, that there should be found here in the Realm
a strong party of Catholics, against the Queen to join and assist the
Inuaders, upon the appearing of the Spanish Navy: by my former relations of
the general great and fervent love of the people toward the Queen, and of
the great offers of service now made by the whole Nobility of the Realm, this
their foundation may appear to have been wrong laid, only by imaginations,
as it were upon a quick sand or rather as flying in the air. And yet it
appears very truly that no small account was made hereof by the King of
Spain, and by his principal Ministers: for there is nothing at this present
more universally, with one lamentable voice spoken of, by all the multitude of
the Spaniardes, The Spanishe prisoners condemn the K. purpose, as being
abused, by the exiled Catholics, who^ the Spaniards call traitors to their
country.
now here prisoners, yea by the chiefest of them, then that they now evidently
see, that the King their Master was with such informatio^s greatly abused, yea
rather betrayed, For they say there was no man of value in all this Army, but
he heard it constantly affirmed, and so delivered for comfort of all that
served therein, before they were shipped, that they should not be afraid of
any resistance to land in England, for that there was good assurance given to
the King, that they should find a strong Army of Catholics ready in their
favor, as soon as ever their Navy should be seen upon the Sea coast, No
possibility to Invade and conquer a realm, without favor of a party inward.
and so they all here say they were encouraged to come to this journey:
otherwise, many of them swear they would never have come on shipbord: so
unlikely, they say, it was and against all reason, to Invade a Realm, with
opinion to conquer it, without both some title of right, and a party also:
but specially without a good sure party.

And therefore now finding this report very false, many of these prisoners do
by name curse you, The Spanishe prisoners condemn the enterprise and course of
Don Bernardin of Mendoza.
as being the Kings Ambassador: as him, they say, who upon the opinion of the
knowledge which you had gotten in England, was therein more credited then any
other, and had these many years together tempted the King their Master, upon
hope, and other such like persuasions, to attempt such a matter as this was:
being utterly in all wisdom to have been condemned, without some certainty
of this latter part, specially to have had a strong party here. They also
curse all such Englishmen, as have fled out of this Country, whom they spare
not to call arrant Traitors, for offering the sale of their Country to the Pope
and the King of Spain. And these prisoners add also, that they were borne in
hand, that this Country was so open to march in, and so weak to withstand any
force, and the people so miserable, as they thought the Conquest thereof had
been of no more difficulty then the ouercomming of a number of naked Indians
was at the beginning of the Conquest thereof by King Ferdinand.

And now for strength of this country and people: many of these prisoners
having been brought from the Sea coasts hither to London, whereby they have
observed the country and the people, do speak marueilously thereof, counting
the same invincible, otherwise then by treason of some great party within the
Realm. But whether all these speeches which are commonly reported of them
proceed from their hearts, or that they speak thus to please the English,
because they are well used by them, who also are easily deceived with flattery,
I know not: but sure I am they do thus speak daily, with outward show of
great passions against such as have been perswaders to the King for this
journey. Diverse of them also which are of good judgment, and have heard of
such of the English banished men as have been in Spain, and have known some
of them there (as of long time, Sir Francis Englefield.
Sir Francis Englefield, and of late, Lord Paget.
the Lord Paget and his brother) have curiously inquired, of what power they
were and credit here, to have a party. They also inquired of the Earl of
Westmerland: Earl of Westmerland.
although of him they confess he is a man but of small government. But our
Adversaries here have so abased these and all the rest, to have been of no
credit to carry any numbers of men but by the Queens authority, when they were
at their best: as the prisoners wonder how the king could be so deceived to
give them pentions otherwise then for charity, because of their religion. But
they confess they have often heard in Spain, how the King was once notably
deceived, Thomas Stukleyes abusing of the King of Spain and the Pope, newly
remembered by the Spaniardes.
when one Thomas Stukeley a private Englishman, who fled out of Ireland for debt
and other lewd Actions into Spain, not being worth one penny, his debts being
paid, and but the second son of a mean Gentleman, pretended, and was
believed in Spain (by so intitling of him self) to be a Duke, a Marquis, and
an Earl of Ireland, and so was a long time enterteined, as a man that could do
great service against the Queen of England: until at length the King
understood his falsehood, and banished him out of Spain. And after repairing to
Rome, was by the Pope also maintained for a time, until he was discovered even
by some good Catholics, that could not endure the Popes holiness to be so
grossly mocked: of whom some of the prisoners using merry speeches, how both
the Emperor Charles and afterward this King, and the Pope, were so notably
deceived by this Stukeley, do conclude merely, that they think some of these
English that have thus abused the King, have followed Stukeleys steps. And in
very truth, I and many others have been very often ashamed to hear so broad
speeches, of the King, and of the Pope, yea of the Emperor Charles, whom such
a companion as Stukeley was, could so notably deceive: and it was the more to
be marueiled, how he could deceive the King Catholic, considering he was
known to many of his Counsel, at the Kings being in England, to have been but
a vaunting beggar, and a Ruffian, and afterward, a Pirat against the Spaniards.

Now my Lord Ambassador, A conclusion by the writer, to persuade an other
course, not by violence.
by these my large relations of the things evil past, and of the opinions of
such as I have lately dealt withal, with mine own conceit also, which I do
not vainly imagine, your Lordship may see in the first part, our present
calamity, and miserable estate: in the second part, the state of this Queen,
her Realm, her people, their minds, their strength, so far contrary to the
expectation of the Popes holiness, the King Catholic, and specially of you (my
Lord) and all others that have been in hand these many years with this Actio^,
as I know not what course shall, or may be thought meet to take, seeing it is
seen by experience, that by force, our cause cannot be relieved, Neither will
any change amend the matter, when this Queen shall end her days, as all
Princes are mortal. For both the universality of the people through the
Realm, are so firmly and desperately bent against our religion, as nothing
can prevail against their united forces: and whosoever shall by right suceede
to this Crown after the Queen (who is likely to live as long as any King in
Christendom) if the Crown should come to the King of Scots, No hope for
furtherance of the Popes authority by any now living that may succeed the
Queen in the live Royal.
or to any other of the blood Royal, as there are very many within this Realm
descended both of the Royal houses of York, and Lancaster, there is no account
to be made, but every one of them, that now live at this day, are known to be
as vehemently disposed to withstand the authority of the Pope, as any of the
most earnest Protestant or Heretic in the world. So as to conclude, after all
circumstances well considered, for the present I know no other way, A
Conclusion what is best, to maintain the Catholic Religion in England.
but to commit the cause to Almighty God, and to all the Saints in heaven,
without continual prayers: and in earth to the holy Counsels of the Pope, and
his Cardinals, with our supplications to relieve the afflicted number of our
exiled brethren, and to send into the Realm discrete, holy, and learned men,
that may only in secret manner, without intermedling in matters of estate, by
teaching us, confirm us in our faith, and gain with charitable instruction,
others that are not rooted in heresy.

And for relief of such as are forced to pay yearly great sommes of money out
of their revenue, because they forbear to come to the Church, A tolleration
from the Pope for the Recusants in England.
it were to be charitably considered, whether there might not be some
dispensation from the Popes holiness for some few years, to tolerate their
coming to the Church, without changing of their faith: considering a great
number do stand therein, not for any thing (as they say) used in this Church,
that is directly contrary to Gods law, but for that the Rites and prayers
(though they are collected out of the body of the Scripture) are not allowed by
the Catholic Church, and the head thereof, which is the Popes holiness: and
for that cause justly, al true Catholics, account this Church to be
schismatic. By which remedy of tolleration, a great number of such as will
be perpetually Catholics, might enjoy their livings and liberty: and in
process of time, the Catholic religion (by Gods goodness) might with more
surety be increased, to the honor of God, then ever it can be by any force
whatsoever. For so did all Christian religion at the first begin, and spread it
self over the world: not by force, but only by teaching, and example of
holiness in the teachers, against all humane forces. And so I will end my long
Letters, with the sentence which King David used four times in one of his
Psalms. Et clamauerunt ad Dominum in tribulatione eorum and de angustia eorum
liberauit eos: And so must we make that for our foundation to lay our hope
upon, for all other hopes are vain and false.

At London the of August. 1588.

AFter that I had made an end of this my letter, which I found by perusal
thereof to have been at more length, then I looked for, although the matters
therein contained did draw me thereto, and that I had made choice of a friend of
mine who had more knowledge in the French tongue, then I, to turn the same into
French: my mishap was, that when he had done some part thereof, he fell sick
of a burning fever, whereby my letter remained with him upon hope of recovery
for ten or twelve days: and seeing no hope thereof, I entreated another very
trusty and a sound Catholic having perfect knowledge in the French tongue, who
took upon him to put it into French, wherein was also longer time spent: so as
my letter being written in the midst of August, I am forced to end it in
September. And thereupon I thought good, whiles my former letter was in
translating, to add some things happened in the meanetime meet for your
knowledge.

About the seventh of August, the Lord Admiral returned with the Navy, having
followed the Spanish Navy (as they reported) as far as the 55. degree
Northwards: the Spanish Navy taking a course either to the furthest parts of
Norwey, or to the Orcades beyond Scotland: which if they did, then it was here
judged that they would go about Scotland and Ireland: but if they should go to
Norwey, then it might be, that if they could recover provisions of mastes,
whereof the English Navy had made great spoil, they might return. But I for
my part wished them a prosperous wind to pass home about Ireland, considering
I despaired of their return for many respects, both of their wants, which
could not be furnished in Norwey, and of the lack of the Duke of Parmas
ability to bring his Army on the Sea, for want of Mariners. Nevertheless, upon
knowledge from Scotland that they were beyond the Orcades, Order taken by the
K. of Scots in favor of the English.
and that the King of Scots had given strict commandment upon all the sea
coasts that the Spaniardes should not be suffered to land in any part, but
that the English might land and be relieved of any wants: order was given to
discharge all the Navy, saving twenty ships that were under the Lord Henry
Seymours charge, to attend Spaniardes. Upon these shows great rejoicing
followed: And as in June and July past, Daily prayers.
all Churches were filled daily with people exercised with prayers, and shows
of repentance, and petitions to God for defense against their enemies: and in
many Churches continually thrice in the week exercises of prayers, Sermons,
and fastings all the day long from morning to evening, with great admiration to
see such general devotion (which I and others did judge to proceed more of
fear then of devotion) so now since the English Navy is returned, and the
Spanish Navy defeated, and intelligence brought of the disorders in Flaunders:
of the discentions betwixt the Spaniards, and the other soldiers: of the
contempt of the Duke of Parma by the Spaniards, being thereto maintained by a
Duke called the Duke of Pastraw, the King Catholics bastard: and of the
departure and running away of the Dukes Mariners, here is a like co^course of
the people to Sermons in all Churches: wherein is remembered the great goodness
of God toward England, Public prayers and giving of thanks.
by the delivery thereof from the threatened Conquest, and prayers also publicly
to give thanks to God for the same.

At London this of September. 1588.

The Printer to the Reader.
ALthough it be well known, that neither the first writer of these Letters now
by me printed, nor yet the Spaniard Don Bernardin to whom they are directed,
had any desire to hear of any good success to the state of England: as may
appear in the writer, by showing himself grieved, to make any good report of
England, other then of mere necessity he was urged: and in Don Bernardin, who
was so impudent, or at the least, so blindly rash, as to disperse in print,
both in French, Italian, and Spanish, most false reports of a victory had by
the Spaniards, even when the victory was notable on the part of England, and
the Spanish vanquished: yet whilst I was occupied in the printing hereof, a
good time after the letters were sent into France, there came to this City
certain knowledge, to all our great comfort, of sundry happy Accidents, to
the diminution of our mortal enemies in their famous Fleet, that was driven
out of our seas about the stla of July, toward the farthermost North parts of
Scotland. Wherefore I have thought it not amiss to join the same to this
Lettre of Don Bernardin, that he may beware, not to be so hasty of himself,
nor yet to permit one Capella, who is his common sower of reports, to write
these false things for truths.

The particularities whereof are these. The Fleet was by tempest driven beyond
the Isles of Orknay, about the first of August, which is now more then six
weeks past, the place being above three score degrees from the North Pole: an
unaccustomed place for the young Gallants of Spain, that never had felt storms
on the sea, or cold weather in August. And about those North Islands their
mariners and soldiers died daily by multiutdes: as by their bodies cast on
land, did appear. And after twenty days or more, having spent their time in
miseries, they being desirous to return home to Spain, sailed very far
Southwestward into the Ocean to recover Spain. But the Almighty God, who
always auengeth the cause of his afflicted people which put their confidence
in him, and brings down his enemies that exalt themselves with pride to the
heavens, ordered the winds, to be so violently contrarious to this proud Navy,
as it was with force disseuered, on the high seas West upon Ireland: and so a
great number of them, driven into sundry dangerous bays, and upon rocks, all
along the West, and North parts of Ireland, in sundry places distant above an
hundred miles asunder, and there cast away: some sonke, some broken, some run
on sands, some burned by the Spaniards themselves.

As in the North part of Ireland toward Scotland, betwixt the two rivers of
Loughfoile and Lough Svvilley, nine were driven to land, and many of them
broken, and the Spaniardes forced to come to land for succor amongst the wild
Irish.

In another place, twenty miles Southwest from thence, in a Bay called
Calbeggy, three other ships driven also upon rocks. In another place
Southward, being a Bay, called the Borreys, twenty miles North from Gallowey,
belonging to the Earl of Ormond, one special great ship of a thousand tonne,
with fifty brass pieces, and four Canons was sonke, and all the people
drowned saving sixteen: who by their apparel, as it is advertised out of
Ireland, seem to be persons of great estimation.

Then to come more to the Sowthward, thirty miles upon the coasts of Thomond,
North from the river of Shennan, two or three mo perished, whereof one was
burned by the Spaniards them selves, and so driven to the shore: an other was
of S. Sebastians, wherein were three hundred men, who were also all drowned*
saving three score. A third ship with all her lading was cast away at a place
called Breckan.

In another place before Sir Tirlogh Obrynes house, there was also another great
ship lost, supposed to be a Galliasse. These losses above mentioned, were
betwixt the fifth and tenth of September, as was advertised from sundry places
out of Ireland: so as by account, from the one and twentieth of July, when this
Navy was first beaten with the Navy of England, until the tenth of
September, being the space of seven weeks, and more, it is most likely that
the said Navy had never good day, nor night.

Of the rest of the Navy, report is also made that many of them have been
seen, lying of and on, upon the coast of Ireland, tossed with the winds, in
such sort as it is also doubted, that many of them shall hardly recover Spain,
if they be so weakened with lack of victuals and mariners, as part of their
companies that are left on land do lamentably report. These accidents I thought
good to add to the printed Copies of the letters of Don Bernardin: that he may
see, how God does favor the just cause of our gracious Queen, in showing his
anger toward these proud boasting enemies of Christian peace: as the whole
world, from Rome to the uttermost parts of Christendom may see, that she and
her Realm, professing the Gospel of his son Christ, are kept and defended,
as the words of the Psalm are, Under the shadovve of his vvings from the face
of the wicked, that sought to afflict her, and compass her round about to
take away her soul: which, I doubt not, by thankfulness yielded by her
Majesty and her whole Realm, will always continewe.

The 9. of October. 1588.

CERTAIN ADVERTISEMENTS OVT OF IRELAND, CONCERNING THE LOSSES HAPPEned to the
Spanish army upon the West costs of Irelande, in their voyage intended from
the Northern Isles beyond Scotland, toward Spain.
Upon Saturday the vii. of September, The seventh of September.
the bark which was in peril of wrack in the bay of Trayly, of between forty
and fifty tonne, did render them selves, in which there were xxiiii. men,
whereof two were the Dukes own servant and two little boys.

On Tuesday the tenth of this September, there was a Frigate cast of as it
seems by this Navy, which, as Sir William Herbert says, wrecked upon the
coast of Desmond.

On the same Tuesday there wrecked in the sound of the Bleskeys, A place near
to Smerwike where the Spaniards were defeated by the Lord Gray.
a ship called our Lady of Rosary, of one thousand tonne. In this ship was
drowned the Prince of Ascule, the Kings base son, one Don Pedro, Don Diego,
and Don Francisco with seven other Gentlemen of account, that accompanied the
Prince. Michael Oque^do was general of the squadro^ of xiiii. ships of
Guipusque.
There was drowned in her also Michael Oquendo a principal sea man chief
governor of the ship: Villa Franca of S. Sebastians, Captain of the same ship:
Matuta, Captain of the Infanterie of that ship: Captain Suwares a Portingall,
Garrionerie, Lopecho de la Vega, Montenese, and one Francisco Castillia^,
Captains, one John Rise an Irish Captain, Francis Roch an Irish man and about
five hundred persons, Five hundred drowned, whereof were a hundred gentlemen, and
one only saved of the whole number.
whereof one hundred were Gentlemen, but not of that reckoning as the former
were, and only one John Anthonio de Monona a Genuan being the Pilotes son of
that ship, saved.

The same Tuesday it wad advertised to the Uicepresident of Mounster, that
there were lost upon the coast of Thomond two great ships out of which there
were drowned about seven hundred persons, Seven hundred drowned, and one
hundred taken prisoners.
and taken prisoners about one hundred and fifty.

About that Tuesday also, as appears by a letter written to Stephan White of
Limmerik the twelfth of this September, there was cast upon the sands of
Ballicrahihy a ship of nine hundred tonnes, Ballicrahihy. Thirteen gentlemen
taken.
thirteen of the Gentlemen of that ship, as he writes are taken, and so
writes that he heard the rest of that ship being above four hundred have
sought for their defense, Four hundred have sought to entrench themselves.
being much distressed, to entrench themselves.

He writes also of another ship which was cast away at the Isle of Clear in
Irrise, Seue^ty and eight were drowned and slain. Threescore taken.
and lxxviij. of the men of that ship are drowned and slain.

He writes also that there was about the same time another great ship cast
away in Tireawley, and that there are three Noble men, a Bishop, and a Friar,
and lxix. other men taken by William Brook of Ardnerie, and all the residue of
that ship are slain and drowned, in so much as he writes that one Melaghlin
Mac Cab, a Galloglasse killed fourscore of them with his Galloglasse axe.
Melaghlin Mac Cab slew four score of them.
Wednesday the xi. of September, seven of those ships that then remained within
the Shenan departed out of that Rode with an Easterly wind, A Spanish ship of
a thousand tuns burnt by the Spaniards.
and before their going forth they set on fire one other very great ship of
their company, which was one thousand tonnes at least.

It was informed from the Uicepresident at Cork, upon this seventeenth of
September last, Two other ships lost.
that two other great ships of that Fleet should be lost upon the coasts of
Connaught.

The Admiral called John Martin de Ricalde came into the sound of Bleskeys
Ricaldes the Admiral in the sound of Bleskey.
with one other great ship and a bark about the vi. day of this September, and
remains there with one other ship of four hundred tonnes, and a bark which
came in since that time, if they be not dispersed or lost by the great tempest
that was the xvii. and xviii. of this month: for the state of the Admiral at
his coming in was thus, the ship had been shot thorough xiiii. or xv. times,
her maine mast was so beaten with shot as she durst not bear her full sail,
and now not lx. mariners left in her, and many of them so sick that they lie
down, and the residue so weak, that they were not able to do any good
service, and there is daily cast over the board out of that ship five or six
of the company.

After this was printed thus far, as every day brings more certainty in
particulars of the loss of the Spaniardes in Irelande, these reports which
follow came from Ireland, being the examinations of sever all persons there
taken and saved.

JOHN ANTHONIO DE MONONA AN Italian, son to Francisco de Monona Pilot of the
ship called Sancta Marie de la Rose, of a thousand tonnes cast away in the
sound of Bleskey. 11. September. 1588.
EXamined the xi. of September says, that he and the rest parted from the
English Fleet, as he thinks, about the coast of Scotland, and at that time
they wanted of their whole Fleet four Galleys, seven ships, and one Galliasse
which was the Captain Galliasse, and there were then dead by fight and by
sickness viii. Eight thousand Spaniards lost by fight and sickness.
thousand men at the least. Where he left ye Duke he knows not, but it was in
the North Seas about eighteen days sithence, he saw then no land, and
therefore can name no place, but they severed by tempest, the Duke kept his
course to the sea: we drew toward land to find Cape Clear, so did diverse
other ships, which he thinks to amount to the number of forty ships: with the
Duke there went five and twenty ships.

Hither he came round about Scotland, he thinks the Duke is by this time nere
Spain, the Dukes desire was, after his stay before Callice, to go to Flanders,
but by reason of the contrariety of the winds, the shallowness of the water
(his ships being great) he could not arrive there.

Besides the ships before mentioned, he remembers that two ships were sonke
upon the coast of Scotland, Two ships sonke.
by reason of shottes received from the English ships, the one called S.
Matthew of five hundred tonnes, wherein were drowned four hundred and fifty
men, the other ship a Biskey of S. Sebastian of four hundred tonnes, wherein
were drowned three hundred and fifty men, and the ship wherein he was called
S. Marie Rose, of one thousand tonnes, wherein of five hundred there escaped
but himself, in which ship of principal men there were drowned, these
principal men following. The Prince of Ascule base son to the King of
Spain, Captain Matuta, A ship of 1000. tonne sonke and of 500. persons but
one saved.
Captain Conualle a Portingall, Rupecho de la Vego of Castill, Suryuero of
Castill, Montanese of Castill, Villa Franca of S. Sebastian Captain of the
said ship. The General of all the Fleet of Guipusque called Don Michael
d'Oquendo, twenty other Knights and Adventurers upon their own charges.

He says, The Kings base son drowned with other principal perions.
that the Fleet was in great want of fresh water, and being examined what
ordinance, wines or other matters of moment were in the ship here cast away,
says, there were fifty great brass pieces* all Canons for the field, five
and twenty pieces of brass and cast iron belonging to the ship, there is also
in her fifty tonnes of Secke. In silver there are in her fifteen thousand
Ducats, Fifty Canons, twenty five pieces of ordinance, fifty tonnes of secke
and thirty thousand Ducats in gold and silver sonke.
in gold as much more, much rich apparel and plate and cups of gold.

He says also, that the Duke of Medina appointed all the Fleet to resort and
meet at the Groyne, and none of them upon pain of death not to depart there
hence before they should know his farther pleasure.

The examination of Emanuell Fremosa a Portingall 12. September 1588.
HE says, he was in the ship called S. John of the port of Portingall of one
thousand one hundred tonne. In which Don John Martines de Ricalde is, who is
Admiral of the whole Fleet, and is next under the Duke who is General, in
which ship at their coming forth there were eight hundred soldiers, and for
mariners threescore Portingales and forty Biskeyns, this is the greatest ship
of the whole Navy.

He says, they were in all at their coming forth a hundred thirty and five
sail, whereof four were Galliasses, four Galleys, and nine of them were
victuallers.

They came from the Groyne on the fifteenth day next arter Midsommer last past,
by their account.

He says they were directed to the Duke of Parma and by him to be employed for
England at such time as Parma should appoint.

He says after their departure from the Groine about eight days the Fleet
came to the Lysardes.

He says about that place, the General struck sail whereupon they all stroke
sail all night, and the next morning they saw the English Fleet, whereupon
they hoised their sails.

He says they were before informed that the English Fleet was in Plimmouth and
Dartmouth.

He says on the Northeast of the Lysards the first fight began between the
Fleets, Fifteen men lost in fight upon the Disards.
and in that fight their ship lost fifteen men.

He says that there were other fights within a four or five days after along
the coasts, Five and twenty more lost in the same ship.
in which the ship that this examinat was in, lost five and twenty men, what
were lost in these fights out of the other ships he can not tell, and in these
fights they lost two ships, Two ships lost.
in the one of which Don Pedro was, and one other that was burned.

They ankered at Callice expecting the Duke of Parma, where through the fiering
of the English ships they were driven to leave their ankers and to depart, so
as each of the ships lost two ankers at that place, the next morning, the fight
began about eight of the clock in the morning, and continued eight hours
along the channel to the North, all which time the English Fleet, pressed the
Spanish Fleet in such sort as if they had offered to board the Spanish Fleet,
they saw their Admiral so fearful, that he thinks they had all yielded.

He says that in the said fight the Spanish Fleet lost one Galliasse, One
Galliasse cast on shore.
which ran a shore about Callice, two Gallions of Lisbone which were sonke
being the kings, Two Gallions and one Byskeine sonke.
and one Biskeine ship sonke, of between four and five hundred tonnes, and
one other ship sonke also, after which fight, the General took account of the
whole Navy, and found that they were left about a hundred and twenty sails of
the whole Fleet, as was delivered by those that came from the top, but of his
own sight he saw not passing fourscore and five sail or there about, but
what was become of the rest he cannot tell.

He says that there were also in that fight three great Venetian ships, Three
Venetian ships sort beaten with shot.
which were in danger of sinking, being sore beaten and shot through in many
places, but were for that time helped by the Carpenters, and as he has heard,
for that they were not able to keep the Seas, took them selves toward the
coast of Flanders, but what is become of them he cannot tell.

He says they were pursued by some of the English Fleet about five days after
this fight Northward out of the sight of any land, and as he thinks of the
North part of Scotland.

He says that about four days after the English Fleet left them, the whole
Fleet remaining being toward one hundred and twenty sail, as it was said,
came to an Island as he thinks of the North part of Scotland, where they
stayed not, nor had relief, but at this place the General called all the ships
together giving them in charge that they should with the best they could have
them to the first place they could get to of the coast of Spain or Portingal:
for that they were in such great distress, through their great wants of
victuals and otherwise. He says they came forth the worse furnished thereof,
for that they expected to be relieved of those things more amply by the Duke of
Parma: he says that out of this ship there died four or five every day of
hunger and thirst, and yet this ship was one that was best furnished for
victuals, which he knows, for out of some of the other ships some people were
sent to be relieved in this ship.

After this for a ten days the whole Fleet remaining, held together, holding
their course the best they could toward Spain.

He says that at the same time, which is now about twenty days or more past,
they were severed by a great storm which held from four of the clock in the
after noone of one day, to ten of the clock in ye morning the next day, in
which storm the Admiral came away with seven and twenty sail which this
examinat did tell, and that one of them was a Galliasse of eight and twenty
owers on a side, what is become of the rest of the Navy he can not tell.

He says also that about ten days past, they had one other great storm with
a mist, by which storm they were again severed, so as of those seven and
twenty sail there came into the coast by Dingle Cushe, but the Admiral, one
other ship of four hundred tonnes and a bark of about forty tonnes, and what
is become of the rest of the seven and twenty sail he can not tell, but of one
great Hulke of four hundred tonnes which was so spoiled as she cast toward
the shore about twenty leagues from Dingle Cushe, he knows not who was
Captain of this Hulke, he says that of all sorts there be now remaining in
the Admiral near about five hundred, of which there be five and twenty
Biskers and forty Portingals which are mariners, the Master being very sick
and one of the Pilots.

He says, there be four score soldiers and twenty of the mariners in the
Admiral very sick, and do lie down and die daily, and the rest he says be
all very weak, and the Captain very sad and weak, he says this Admiral
has in her fifty four brass pieces, and about four score kintals of powder.

He says they were so near the coast before they found it, that by means of
the strong Westerly wind they were not able to double out from it.

There is in the Admiral left but five and twenty Pipes of wine, and very
little bread, and no water, but what they brought out of Spain, which stinketh
maruellously, and their flesh meat they can not eat their drought is so great.

He says no part of the Navy to his knowledge ever touched upon any land until
such time as they came to this coast at Dingle Cushe, nor has had any water,
victual, or other relief from any coast or place sithence the English Fleet
left them.

He says, that when they lay before Callice there came a Pinnace to their
fleet from the Duke of Parma who told them the Duke could not be ready for
them until the Friday following, but by reason of this fight of the English
Fleet with them, they were not able to tarry there so long.

He says, that the Admirals purpose is upon the first wind that serves, to
pass away for Spain.

He says also, that it is a common brute amongst the soldiers, if they may
once get home again, they will not meddle again with the English.

He says, there be of principal men in the Admirals ship, Don John de Lina a
Spaniard, who is chief Captain of the soldiers of that ship, Don Gomes a
Spaniard, an other Captain: Don Sebastian a Portingall gentleman an
Aduenturer: and a Marquess an Italian, who is also an Aduenturer, and one
other Portingall Gentleman whom he knows not, but that they are principal men
that have crosses on their garments: other mean Gentlemen there be also in the
same ship: He says, all the soldiers in this ship were Spaniards, he says
there are in the small Bark that is with them about five and twenty persons,
how many are in the Hulke that is there, he knows not.

He says, he thinks that the Duke is past toward Spain, for that he was
some twelve leagues more Westerly, then the Admiral was in the first storm.

He says, that the great Gallion which came from the Duke of Florence, was
never seen sithence they were in the sight at Callice: He says, the people of
the Galliasses were most spoiled by the English Fleet.

The examination of Emanuell Francisco a Portingall. 12. September. 1588.
EManuell Francisco a Portingall, says in all things as the former examinat,
till the fight at Callice, in which fight he says he knows there was lost a
Galliasse that ran ashoare at Callice, two Gallions of the Kings, the one
called S. Philip of the burden of seven hundred, and the other called S.
Matthew of eight hundred, a Biskeine ship of about five hundred, and a
Castillian ship about four hundred tonne all sunk. This he knows for that
some of the men of those ships were divided into the Admirals ship, in which
this examinat was.

He says, after this fight ended, it was delivered by him at the top, that
there was one hundred and twenty sail left of the Spanish Fleet, and says
that those were very sore beaten, and the Admiral was many times shot through,
and one shot in their mast, and their deck at the prow spoiled, and does
confess that they were in great fear of the English Fleet, and doubted much
of bording.

He says, the Admirals mast is so weak by reason of the shot in it, as they
dare not abide any storm, nor bear such sail as otherwise he might do, and
for the rest he agrees in every thing with the former examinat, saving that he
saw not, or understood of any Pinnace that came from the Duke of Parma, nor
does remember that he saw above twenty sail with the Admiral after the first
storm: and says, that those in the ship that he is in, do say that they
will rather go into the ground themselves, then come in such a journey again
for England: and says, the best that be in the Admirals ship, are scarce able
to stand, and that if they tarry where they are any time, they will all perish
as he thinks, and for himself he would not pass into Portingall again, if
he might choose: for that he would not be constrained to such an other journey.

John de le Conido of Lekit in Biskey mariner 12. September. 1588.
John de le Conido of Lekit in Biskey mariner, says he was in the ship that
the Admiral is in, and that he told the Navy after the fight ended at
Callice, and that there were then remaining not passing a hundred and ten or a
hundred and twelve of the whole Spanish Navy: and says that a leake fell upon
one of the Galliasses about fiteene days past, which he takes to be fallen
upon the North coast of this land: he says, he does not remember that there
were above twenty sail left in the company of the Admiral after the first
great storm, which fell on them about thirty days sithence: he says the
Duke did give them express commandment that they should not go on land in
any place without his order: he confesses that the Navy that remained after
the last fight, were maruelously beaten and shot through, The Spanishe Navy
sore beated with shot by the English* and their tackling much spoiled.
and their tackle much cut and spoiled with the shot, and for the rest of the
matter agrees with the former examinat in every point in effect, and says
there was an English Pilot with the Duke. He says that the Scot that is taken
was taken in the North part, after the English fleet parted from them in a
ship of fifty tonnes in which were about seven men, which the fleet has
carried with them, both the ship and people, six of which Scotts were aboard
the Admiral, whereof one is he that is taken.

He says, The Spaniard cast their horses and mules over board.
after the English Fleet parted from them the Spanish Fleet cast out all the
horses and mules into the sea to save their water, which were carried in
certain Hulks provided for that purpose.

The reexamination of John Anthonio of Genua mariner. 15. September. 1588.
HE says his father and him self with others came into Lisbone in a ship of
Genua, about a year sithence where they were embarked by the King of Spain,
that ship was of about four hundred tonne.

He says his father after this was appointed Pilote in the ship called our
Lady of the Rosarie, of the burden of a thousand tonne being the Kings: he
says the Prince of Ascule ye Kings base son came in the company of the
Duke in the Dukes ship called the Gallion of S. Martine of a thousand tonne,
but at Callice when ye English Navy came near the^, this Prince went to the
shore, and before his return the Duke was driven to cut his Ankers, and to
depart: whereby the Prince could not recover that ship, but came into the said
ship called our Lady of the Rosarie, and with him there came in also one Don
Pedro, Don Francisco, and seven other Gentlemen of account that accompanied the
Prince. He says the Captain of this ship was Villa Franca of S. Sebastians,
and Matuta was Captains of the Infanterie of that ship. There was also in her
Captain Suwares a Portingall, and one Garrionero a Castillian Captain,
Lopicho de la Vega, a Castillian Captain, Captain Montanese, a Castillian:
and one Captain Francisco a Castillian: and Michael d'Oquendo who was General
of this ship. There was also in her one Irish Captain called John Rise, of
about thirty years of age, and one other Irish man, called Francis Roche. The
Prince was of about eight and twenty years of age. He says there were other
Gentlemen Adventurers in the ship, but not of that reckoning as the former
were. He says there were in all seven hundredth men in this ship at their
coming forth: he says, there were about five hundred in this ship at such
time as she sonke: the rest perished by fight and by sickness. He says, this
ship was shot thorough four times, and one of the shot was between the wind
and the water, whereof they thought she would have sonke, and the most of her
tackle was spoiled with shot, this ship stroke against the rocks in the
sound of the Bleskyes, a league and a half from the land upon Tuesday last at
noone, and all in the ship perished saving this examinat, who saved himself
upon two or three plankes that were loose, the Gentlemen thinking to save
themselves by the boat, it was so fast tied as they could not get her lose,
whereby they perished: he says as soon, as the ship stroke against the rock,
one of the Captains slew this examinates father, saying he did it by treason.
He says, there came in their company a Portingall ship of about four
hundredth, who coming into the same sound, cast anchor near where they found
the Admiral of the Fleet at Anchor, called S. John* in which Don Martine de
Ricalde the Admiral was, he says that about two and twenty days past the
Duke departed from them, and about five and twenty ships in his company, and
about forty ships were with the Admiral, but this ship was not able to follow
the Admiral, by reason her sails were broken: and for the rest of the Navy
that remained, they were so dispersed, as he cannot tell what is become of them*
He says the Duke being better watered then the others were, held more Westerly
into the seas, and willed the Admiral with his company being in worse estate
for water to see if he could touch with any coast to get fresh water, sithence
which they have been severed by the nights and by tempest: he says, this ship
nor any other of the ships touched upon any land, nor had any relief of
water or victual at any place sithence they parted, but from two Scotts,
which they took upon the coast of Scotland, whose fish and victual the Duke
took, but paid them for it.

He says, their ships were so beaten, and the wind so contrary, and the
sholles upon the coast of Flanders, so dangerous, as the Pilot that was in the
Dukes ship, directed them this course Northward as their safest way. He says,
that in one of the days in which the fight was between both the Nauies, the
Duke seeing the English Fleet so hardly to pursue them willed his Fleet,
seeing no other remedy, to address the^ selves to fight. In the fight at
Callice were slain the Master of the Cauallary of the Tercij of Naples and
Sicile.
He says, that in that day of the fight at Callice they lost four thousand
men in fight, one thousand were drowned in two ships, he says ye master of the
Cauallary of the Tercij of Naples and Sicile was slain in this fight by a
great piece that brake his thigh, his name he remembers not: at which time
also the Master of the Camp of the horsemen, The Master of the Camp of the
horsemen.
and the Master of the Camp of the footmen were both slain, The Master of
the Camp of footmen. And four thousand others, besides a thousand drowned.
but their names he remembers not: He says the four Galliasses were of
Naples: He says the four Galleys left ye Fleet, before they came to ye
English by well near xl. leagues: He says, the Florentine ship is gone with
the Duke: He says, there were xiiii. Venetian ships in this Fleet, two of
them he says are drowned, what is become of the rest he knows not, they
served the king but by arrest: he says there be three English men Pilotes in
the Dukes ship.

He says, this ship that is drowned has in her three chests full of money: he
does not know what moved the Duke to command that ye whole Navy that remained
should repair to ye Groine and not to depart without his direction upon pain
of death.

The examination of John Antonio de Moneke xxx. miles from Ganna. 17.
September. 1588.
HE says, the Prince of Ascule was a slender made man, and of a reasonable
stature, of xxviii. years of age, his hair of an aborne color stroked
upward, of a high forehead, a very little beard marquesotted, whitely faced
with some little red on the cheeks, he was drowned in apparel of white satin
for his doublet and breeches after the Spanish fashion cut, with russet silk
stockings. When this Prince came into their ship at Callice, he was apparelled
in black rased velvet laid on with broad gold lace. He says, that this
Princes men, for the most part were in the ship that this examinat was in,
from their coming out of Spain: and when they were at Callice the Prince
passed in a litte Phelocke with six others from ship to ship to give order to
them, and some said he went to the shore at that time.

He says, it was thought to be about lx. leagues West from the Northwest part
of Ireland, that the Duke departed from the rest of the company. He says,
they parted by a tempest growing in the night, and that about six days after,
a Portingall Gallion ouertaking this ship told unto those of this ship, that
there were xxv. ships of the whole Navy passed away with the Duke, and that
the rest then remaining of the whole Navy were dispersed by this tempest, some
eight in one company, and four in another: and thus dispearsedly passed on the
seas. But how many ships remained after their departure from the coast of
Scotland, of the whole Navy, this examinat can not tell. He says that after
this first tempest which was about xxv. days now past, growing of a Southwest
wind, they had sundry te^pests before they were lost with variable winds,
sometime one way, and sometimes an other.

The reexamination of Emanuell Fremosa. 17. September. 1588.
EManuel Fremosa mariner examined the same day, says that the day next before
the great tempest, in which the Duke was severed from them, being a very calm
day, him self counted the Navy then remaining, which then were about lxxviij.
sail in all: when they were farthest of in the North, they were at lxii.
degrees Northward, and were then about four score leagues and somewhat more
from any land, and at the Northwest part of Scotland, Cape Clear being then
from them South and by West, and this was about four or five days, before the
said great tempest, and from that time until the same tempest, they had the
wind most West, and West Southwest, and sometimes West Northwest, but that not
very long, he says that it was known to very few of the Navy that the Prince
the Kings base son was in this Navy until they came to Callice, where this
Prince about the time of the fight, was said to take him self into a little
boat upon the coast of Callice, but before that, he kept him self as private
in the Dukes own ship, as it was said, and not noted or spoken of in the Navy
until then. But he says there was a great Prince an Italian, that was a
chief man in a great Argosie very well furnished, who before their coming to
the English coast did very often banquet the Duke and the other great men of the
Navy. This Argosie was called the Ratte: he says he did not perceive if this
ship were in this Fleet the day before the said tempest or not, but he says
this being a famous ship, it was often demanded, if she were in their company,
and it was answered that she was: he says, the chiefest of the treasure that
served for the pay, was as he heard in the Galliasse that arrived on the shore
at Callice, and in a ship of Siuil made in Galisia called the Gallega of
about vij. hundred tonnes, in which Don Pedro de Valdez was, which was taken on
the South coast.

The examination of Pierre Carrea Flemming.
HE says that in the ship that he came hither in called Saint John a Gallio^
of nine hundred tonnes, besides John Martin de Ricalde, there are five
Captains, Don John de Lune, Don Gomes de Galanezar, Don Pedro de Madri, the
Count of Parades, Don Felice, and there is also an Italian Marquess of Piemont
called the Marquess of Faruara.

He says also, that the Admiral after such time as the fight was at Callice
came not out of his bed, until this day seven nights in the morning that they
ran upon the shore. The Admiral after the sight at Callice came not out of
his bed in seven weeks and more.
He says his Admiral is of Biskeye either of Bilbo or Allerede, and of lxii.
years of age, and a man of service. He says, that there were in this navy of
the old soldiers of Naples under the conduct of Don Alonso de Sono and of the
old soldiers of Sicile under the conduct of Don Diego de Piementell^ whose
ship was lost near Callice. There was also Don Alonso de Leua master of the
ca^p of the Cauallery of Millan: he says, there is a bastard son of King
Phillips of xxviii. years of age in this Fleet in the ship with the Duke,
called the Prince of Ascule in Italy, who passed from the^ in a Pinnace about
Callice as he took it.

By other Aduertisements of the fourteenth of September, it is certified to the
Lord Deputy of Ireland, from the Earl of Tyron being at his Castle of
Dongannon that upon intelligence brought to him of the landing of certain
Spaniards in the North of Ireland, he sent two English Captains with their
bands toward them, to the number of an hundred and fifty, who found them at
Sir John Odogherties town called Illagh, Six hundred Spaniards assaulted by
one hundred and fifty English, vanquished and taken prisoners.
and there discovering their number to be above six hundred, did that night
encamp within a musket shot of them, and about midnight did skirmish with them
for the space of two hours, in which skirmish the Spanish Lieutenant of the
field and twenty more of the Spaniardes were slain, besides many that were
hurt.

The next day following they did offer skirmish again to the Spaniardes,
whereupon they all yielded, and so as prisoniers were carried to Dongannon to the
Earl, who meant to send them to the Lord Deputy, being judged to be men of
good value and one thought to be a man that has had some great charge and
conduct of men for many years, whereof the Lord Deputy will give knowledge as
soon as they shall be brought to Dublin.

There may be some errors in the writing of the Spanish names in English,
because the same are written by way of interpretation, but there is no error
in the nombring of the persons that are either dead or alive.

26. September. 1588.
SHIPS AND MEN SONKE, DROWned, killed, and taken upon the coast of Ireland in
the month of September 1588.
In Tyreconnell In Loughfoyle. 1. ship 1100 men Of that ship and others that
escaped. In Connaught In Sligo haven. 3. great ships 1500 In Tireawley. 1. ship
400 In Clear Island 1. ship 300 In Finglasse 1. ship 400 In Oflartie 1. ship 200
In Irrise 2. ships The men fled into other vessels. In Galway bay. 1. ship 70
In Munster In the Shennan 2. ships 600 In Traylie 1. ship 24 In Dingle 1. ship
500 In Desmond 1. ship 300 In the Shennan 1. ship burnt The me^ embarked in
another ship. Total 17. ship of men 5394.

BEFORE THE LOSS OF THE Foresaid seventeen ships in Ireland, there perished
in July and August fifteen other great ships in the fight betwixt the English
and Spanish Nauies in the narrow seas of England, where no one English Vessel
or person of any reputation, perished or was taken.
Ships Men First Galleys. 4 1622. Near Ediston by Plymouth at the first
conflict. 1 0000. Don Piedro de Valdes taken.
The same time was distressed and taken Don Pedro de Valdes ship 1 422. These
two remain in England. At the same time by fire a great Biscaine ship. 1 289.
These two remain in England.
In this vessel Don Hugo de Moncada was slain.
Before Callis spoiled the principal Galeasse of Naples. 1 686. In the conflict
was sonke a great Biscaine. 1 000. The Gallion S. Philip. 1 532. These two
forced into Flushing being sore beaten by the English great shot. Don Diego
Piementel taken in this.
The Gallion S. Matthew. 1 397. A Biscaine wrecked before Oste^d. 1. 000. The
day after the fight there sank two Venetians. 2 843. A great Biscaine forced by
two of the Queens ships to perish at Newhauen. 1 000. Ships Men Total of these
ships 15 4791. Total of both these losses. 32 10185. Whereof there are
prisoners in England and Zeland at the least 1000. besides a great multitude of
men not here accounted, that were slain in the fight, and that have died of
famine, as by the examinations aforesaid appears. Beside many ships not yet
heard of, thought to be lost.


