A Brief Discourse, Concerning the force and effect of all manual weapons of
fire, and the disability of the Long Bow or Archery, in respect of others of
greater force now in use.

With sundry probable reasons for the verrifying thereof: the which I have
done of duty toward my Sovereign and Country, and for the better
satisfaction of all such as are doubtful of the same.

Written by Humfrey Barwick, Gentleman, Soldier, Captain, Et Encor plus
oultre.



AT LONDON. Printed for Richard Oliffe, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Crane.

To the right Honorable my very good Lord, Henry Carey, Baron of Hunsdon,
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Lord Chamberlain of her
Majesty's household, Lord governor of Barwick, Lord warden of the marches for
and anenst Scotland, Lord Leifetenant of Suffolk and Norfolk, Captain of her
Majesty's Gentlemen Pencioners, and one of her highness most honorable privy
Counsel, Humfrey Barwick wishes long continuance in health and honor.
RIght Honorable, having read over two little Books, set forth by two
several Knights, the one dedicated to the maiestrates of England by Sir John
Smith Knight, the other by Sir Roger Williams Knight also, dedicated to the
right honorable the Earl of Essex: the which two Books either does or ought
to tend both to one purpose, and yet nevertheless in some special points
therein, are such great diversity of opinions, that it would make men not
perceiving the intent and what things are: even to waver and doubt of the
truth of those causes, and considering that they are men both of good account
and quality, loyal and faithful to one Sovereign, and also well traveled,
whereby they ought to have the better knowledge in warlike weapons and Marshall
Discipline: the varietye whereof seems to many very strange. Whereupon I
have at sundry times had conference with diverse persons of sundry callings,
touching some part of the several discourses of the said two Knights, wherein
I have found so very many addicted to the opinion of Sir John Smith, as
touching the commending of the Archerye of England with so many reasons and
arguments by him alleged in that behalf, that many are thereby persuaded,
that the long Bow is the only weapon of the World for the obtaining of
Battles and victories in these days, with so many allegations against
Muskets, Harquebuzies and other weapons of fire, as in the same Book appears.

Sir Roger Williams upon the contrary does seem to except of the Muskets
specially, with the rest of the weapons of fire, and partly seeming to prove
the long Bow to be the woorst shot that are used in these days, as by diverse
arguments are set down in the 46. and 47. leaf of his discourse.

Wherefore may it please your good Lordship to accept of my intent, being one of
the meanest of a great number that are and has been under your Lordships
government: to explain the matter according to my simple knowledge and
experience in this cause, and that it may under your Lordships protection be
published in the behalf of your Honors duetifull and obedient Soldier, so
shall I think my travel in doing but my duetye toward her Majesty's
Country and your Lordship, most happilye harbored, and in the mean time
remain ready to serve and obey at your good Lordships commandment.

H. Barwick.

To all skillful Captains and Soldiers, who has had the use and do know
the force and effect of weapons of war, and to all such as are willing to know
or understand the true effect thereof. Of whom H. B. craves equal Judgment.
There are three principal causes that does give unto Conquestes great and
happy success. viz.

Loyalty in Subjects. Exercises in Arms. And perfect intelligence

I Do not a little marvel what the cause should be that men are so slow in
things to so good effect: is there any in doubt to do good in causes most
requisite? does not every Captain repine and think much that does know the
force and effect of all weapons of war, to hear such arguments and so many
reasons and devices to fortefie a matter against all true knowledge and
experience? what, shall we refuse the Cannon and fall to the Ram again, or to
known weapons more meeter for Sauadge people then for puissaunt Princes, that
are able to maintain those of the greatest force: or shall we be carried away
with affection, threatenings, or eloquent and sweet words? it is not our
parts, we must abide the greatest blows, or else what will be the issue of the
matter? shall the blind lead himself? or shall we run into a mischief
headlong that we both see and know? considering how far the same does
differ from the matter alleged, even so far that every private Soldier
that knows himself, may judge it were more then beastly: and so stands the
case with us, if we do wilfully or ignorantly forsake that which we have so
long time made just trial to be of the greatest force, and do return to that
again the which we have so often forsaken, for the disabilitie that by trial
we have found therein: then are we well worthy to abide the smart thereof to
our own reproach. And yet were it but the loss of the thing it self, the
matter were the less. There are none that in person has made just trial of
the Archers that ever will if he may choose be partaker with them again: it is
but the love that many do bear unto the same weapons, for that in times past
they were the best shot that were: and yet were they the cause of more
bloodshed then in these days is used: and my reason is this, that when
battles and great encounters chanced to fall out, by reason that the shot
were no more offenciue, then by the use of the long Bows and Crossebowes: the
enemies did then commonly join both with long and short weapons, as by the
dints of two handed Swoordes, Battle Axes and Bills, with Lead malles,
whereby the fight continued unto the last end of the one party, but in these
days where the weapons of fire has been rightlye used, it has been
scarselye seen that either Pike or Halberd has come to join at any time
before the one party did turn their faces, by reason of the terrible force of
the great and small shot the which by skillful conductors of the same, have
been placed upon their enemies by vauntage of grounds or otherwise, as time and
place has served.

And for that I have heard so many several opinions as is aforesaid: I
thought it my part and duty to set down my opinion and knowledge the which I
have learned by using of diverse several weapons, in times of service as well
on horseback as on foot, and the rather for the better satisfaction of those
not understanding how requisite it is to be resolved in those points, not
thinking in all my life to have done any such matter, but upon this occasion
the which I am driven unto for diverse causes, not altogether for want of
experience in the thing it self, but for want of knowledge how to parfect the
same in the setting down, being unlearned, save only to write a very simple
style: it may be thought in me a presumption, yet for that the thing is
laudable and tends to no other end then for the trial of so good a cause as
this is, the which all good Subjects are bound to favor: wherein I do with a
clear conscience protest not willinglye to offend any party or parties under
the Sun, of what quality or calling soever he or they be. I am not to treat
of any matter of ancient times, but as some occasion may cause me for proof,
but only within my own knowledge or at the least recorded, or to be proved:
And for that I entered to be a Soldier at the age of 18. years, which was the
second year of tht good and godly King Edward the 6. at which time our English
Archers were in force and greatly used, and Harquebuziers not as then common.
For the first that ever had any whole band in England, was Sir Peeter Mewtas
Knight, who had as I do remember the charge of 500. half Hakes, the which
were but mean stuff in comparison of those that are now in use, and at that
time there were not in most bands of 100. men, above 10. or 15. and in many
none at all: saving Captain Hugh Smith, who had in Guymes 100. Harquebuziers,
saving 10. or 12. of other weapons, insomuch that the perfection of them were
not as then in England known to any purpose, nor yet unto this day but with
few, in respect that the sa(...) is in other countries near unto us, which I
would wish might be as well in England as elsewhere, for those weapons of fire
are not to be used without exercising of the same to any good purpose for
service upon the sudden: but being once throughlye practiced, it is an
excellent weapon and next unto the Musket, as in place hereafter shall be shown.

It may be thought by some Captains of late experience, for that I have not
entered into these troublesome toils in the Low Cuntries, or the civil wars
in France, that I cannot have that experience and knowledge as others have:
whereunto I answer that when I was young I did seek to serve, both in England,
France, and Scotland, to that end I might the better do my Prince and
Country service, and also to sustain myself, who otherways was not able to
live as I did desire to do: whereas I learned to know the use of most weapons
of war both for Horsemen and footmen, that are or have been used in this
age, with as good Schoolemaisters as any Italian, Spaniard or Wallon
whatsoever, has been or now is.

And further I hope I may without offense set down the several paies that in
my own Princes service I have received for my own person. The first pay that I
had was 6. pence per diem, for 3 months: after that 8. pence per diem, 16.
pence per diem, 20. pence per diem, 2. shillings per diem, 4. shillings per
diem, charge after 4. shillings per diem, charge after 6. shillings per diem,
charge after 8. shillings per diem, charge after 14. shillings per diem. In all
which advancement of pays and credit I did never make suit nor require any of
the same paies: saving my first pay of 6. pence per diem: but they were all
bestowed upon me either by the Prince, or by those who had the next place:
without suit either of myself or of any other in my behalf: my entertainment
in the French Kings service was such, as none of our nation for a footman ever
had, only captain Lampton excepted: who after he was discharged from his band
of footmen, became a private Soldier in the foot bands of France, and had
great allowance for his own person and servants. I have been offered in
France better pay and greater advancement then ever I had or desired.

I was promised by the King of Spain to have a pencion of 200. Crowns by
year to be paid unto me in England for my service done unto him at St.
Quintins, but before I could come from whence I was prisoner, his Queen was
dead, and he again married to the French Kings Daughter, and at my return
from my troubles in France, I was answered that the King was gone who did
promise the said pencion, and the Queen was dead, wherefore the promise was
not to be performed, I required letters into Spain to the King, I was
answered that it was no time as then, but when time served I should have
letters of Sertificate, and so the cause grue worse then before, and so as yet
I had nothing. This have I set down to the end, that those who do not know me
may the better understand, that I do not write or speak by reading or
hearsay but by experience only.

Wherefore I do heartily wish that we may grow all to one perfect knowledge
without contending in any point, so far differing from all true knowledge and
experience: and let the times past, rest, with such weapons and engines, as in
those days were the best, and yet but trifles in respect of things now in use:
As for example, was not our old Castles and Towers, sufficient to defend
against all Rams and engines in those days used: whereas in these times there is
hardly any device of fortification will serve against the force of the Cannons?
Was not that famous King, Edward the third, constrained to lie before* Callice
13. or 14. months, for that he wanted the use of the Cannon, the which in
four or five days was lost with the force of the same, and other fiery
weapons? some may say it was lost by treason, but those that do know any
thing, do perceive how that was done. And again, was not Jack and Sallet
within our remembrance thought to be sufficient for arming of Soldiers? and
further, concerning our simple arming in times past, notwithstanding that Sir
John Smith does affirm that men were as well armed in times past, as now
present: which for example, look into the Histories the 11. year of Edward
the fourth: where it appears, that Robert Basset Alderman of London, and the
Recorder there, was thought to be well armed, being both armed with Iacks to
defend the City, against that Rebel Bastard Neuell: a man would think, that
being an Alderman, if Armours had been as then in such store as now they are,
that the Alderman would have had one for himself, and another for the
Recorder. Again, did not the Duke of Bedford arm the most part of his
Soldiers with tanned leather for the chief parts of their bodies, at such
time as he was commanded by that prudent Prince Henry the 7. the 2. year of
his reign, to encounter with that Rebel the L. Louell: whereas now by reason
of the force of weapons, neither horse nor man is able to bear armours
sufficient to defend their bodies from death, whereas in the former times before
mentioned, wounds was the worst to have been doubted, touching the force of
all their Archers, as by that manner of arming it seems most certain.

I wish without offense, that all the Spanish shot were archers, as good as
ever were in England, to that end, our nation might once join with them, for
any harm that the arrows could do, they would soon return to gather grapes
in Spain.

Why should not Spaniards being owners of that pleasant wood the Yewe, become
Bowmen and Archers? they are artificiallye sufficient, and they have and do
seek by all means possible, that their ambition may be made complete. There
is no doubt, but mighty Princes would have them, either of their own Subjects
or of hierlings: if they were but half so good as in the opinion of sir John
Smith they are thought to be.

And thus by these simple reasons, the which cannot iustlye be denied, it may
appear how things in times past, and now in these our times do differ, which
may and will I hope in time be better considered off.

My intent is to no other effect, but only to explane the matter so far
differing, by the discourses of the said two Knights, in declaring my opinion
touching the same: I might the rather be blamed heerin, as no doubt I shall be,
of some half Latinists, for want of congruitie in my doings: but
nevertheless, I will not let for all those to proceed with this, seeing that
in all this time none does frame to set down something touching the matter
before rehearsed. I hope I may as a labourer, take upon me to dig forth the
stones from the Rocks, and to leave the same in more readiness for the woorkmen
to hew and pullish to a greater perfection.

It does cause me to remember one Cornelius a Gentleman and a Soldier in the
French Kings service, who could have plaide of a Lute or a Gitterne excellent
well: but his conditions was such, that if the best Lord or Lady in France had
requested him to have played, he would not have done it, the reason was that
he doubted, that he should have been taken for some foolish Musition, and yet
was he to be brought to have played without intreatye, as thus: if any of his
acquaintance had taken the Lute or Gittern in hand, the worse that he or they
had played, the sooner would Cornelius have taken the same forth of his
friends hands, and thereon would have plaide right pleasantly. And so now I
doubt not but even at the first blush we shall have a Cornelius to set these
instruments in better tune, in all their wants and imperfections by me for
want of learning and knowledge committed and left unperformed: so shall I be
glad to have given an occasion to so good effect.

H. Barwick.

Certain discourses written by Humfry Barwicke Gentleman, with his opinion
concerning the several discourses, written by S. John Smith and S. Roger
Williams Knights, and of their contrary opinions, touching Muskets and other
fiery we apons, and the long-bowe: with diverse other points of war by some
others before time mistaken.
FFirst I will begin in this my said discourse, to remember one of the examples
that S. John Smith does set down in his discourse, for proof of Archers to
be weapons of force: And thus he says at the time of King Henry the eight of
famous memory, lying in Camp before Turwin, there was a Conuoy to go from
Guynes to the said Camp, of Munition and Uictualles: and all the French
Captains of Picardie and Varmendois, having intelligence thereof, did assemble
all their men at Arms and Lances of those Provinces, with some number of
shot, also of Harquebuzers and Cros-bowers, and attended the English Conuoy in
an ambush, more then a league beyond the town of Ard toward Turwin, where
encountering with the english light horsemen, y^ vantcarreres then did
overthrow them: which being perceived by the Captains of the Conuoy, then
presentlye indused their carriages into a conueniente form, and placing
convenient numbers of Archers unto two open places before and behind, and
forcing all other places betwixt carriage and cariages where the French Lances
might have any entrance, after a long fight and many charges by the men at
arms of France, and their shot given: the terrible effect of the volley of
Arrows was such, that a great number of their horses were wounded or slain:
and one of their chief Captains called Monsieur de Please lifting up his
sword to strike, was shot in at the arme-hole through his Gosset of Maile, and
there slain, with many other french gentlemen and others of good accounte, in
such sort that the French did far exceed the English in number, were
that day repulsed and overthrown by the excellency of archers, etc.

If Sir John Smith do give credit unto old master Candwell, and thereupon
set down as abouesaid: he may in that point be deceived, as for example: do
but read Hollinsheades Cronicle the fifth year of H. 8. folio. 817. upon B.
how the same fell out contrary. Again at solemn mass, where the power of
Scotland to the number of 15000. minding to iuade the West borders of England,
and so being in the English ground in a mistie morning about twelve miles
distaunce from the Scottishe power: there was upon the warning of the Beaken
coming from the Baronrie of Kendall, about two hundredth Archers, and
notwithstanding the Scots nor Archers did not meet by ten miles: yet was it
reported and yet is said, that the Archers was the cause that ye Scots were
that day overthrown: whereas there was no such matter touching the said
Archers: but true it is that the Scots was there overthrown, their whole power
in effect as Iedeon overthrew Gods enemies, y^ Scots were 44. to one English
man, I could rehearse more, but this may suffice, being done in H. 8. his
days.

And whereas Sir John Smith does rehearse many and sundry exsamples of
victories and overthrows, given by the force and effect of Archers, some above
2000. years since, and some 200 years since, and the most betwixt these
times: but what has been done since the perfect knowledge of fire weapons
has been in use? and whereas Manuell the Emperor of Constantinople, had in his
armor or Target the number of 30. arrows sticking: one Harquebuze or Musket
shot would have dispatched the matter, whereby men may see that it is but our
own opinions and grounded affection, that our countrymen do bear unto the
same weapon, in respect that the same was the best shot in ancient time,
when others of greater force were unknown: we have the like estmation of the
Long Bow, as the Irish have of their Darts, the Dansker of their Hatchets, and
as the Scotch men have had of their Spears: all which are more meeter for
Sauadge people or poor Potentates, who are not able to maintain others of
greater force, then for puissant Princes. The Scots and Irish for the defense
of their Countries do use their Bows, and so do the Burgonians and Wallons
in the time of the wars, guard their Caves, Churches and small Pyles: the
Cuntrymen for the safety of their goods, but the Soldiers in pay do never use
them, neither in hold no rfield, who would not forbear to use the^, if they
knew no better or other of greater force.

Notwithstanding, that Sir John Smith does say that the arrows of Archers will
kill the enemies farther distance off then any Harquebuze can do, I leave that
to the judgment of all such Captains and Soldiers as have seen the true
trial of both the weapons.

It is not possible that noble men should understand or know the force and
effect of weapons and abilliments of war, as other meaner persons do, who
are brought up with the use thereof: some with one, and some with other, and
selve with all: neither is it the place for a noble man or worthy personage, to
become a Musketter, Harquebuzere, Cannonere, miner, trench master or
fortefier, all which are for meaner persons and young men to begin their service
withal, and to proceed from one to another, as the body and the mind is
addicted, and without these the wars cannot be conuaid to any good purpose:
and as for footmen, a Pike, a Halberd, or a leading staff: and for horsemen,
a Lance, a punching staff, Pistol or mace, it is seemly for a personage of
good account, either on foot or on horseback to use them as in their kinds
they ought to be: all which weapons are soon learned saving the Pistol the
which must come by exercise. And now to veryfie my words, I will here set
down and name such as by wrong instructions of them that have informed some
noble men in marshall causes not so near the matter as the cause required to
have been done, all things considered: and also of some that have been
accounted wise and expert Soldiers in England, and yet in their doings have
not so well performed the same: I would be loath to offend any in this point,
for I do rather set it down for example of those that do live, then in any
sort to blemish those departed:

I will begin with the noble Earl of Penbrooke, The worthy Earl of Pembrook.
whose valor and wisdom is not forgotten: and yet was he not greatly trained
in the knowledge of Martial Discipline, as by these reasons shall appear.

After that I had been in the French Kings service from the 6. year of Edward
the 6. unto ye siege of Saint-quintans in France, at which time I did come to
the said Camp, where the said Earl was Lieftenant of the English army unto
the King: it pleased his Lordship to call me to him and to talk with me of
diverse French matters: and after many discourses what preparatio^s were made in
France, it pleased his Lo. to ask me who was chief in the Town of
Saint-quintins, I told his Lo. the Admiral and his brother Andelot, he asked
mine opinion Admiral Satylyon.
of the Admirals courage and knowledge: I told his Lo. that he was both wise
and valiant, as any that ever I had served under. No, no, said the Earl, you
are deceived, he is wise but not valiant: I did not replye any further in that
point, thinking that the Earl by his great wisdom, knew more then my self,
being then but young, but the Admiral did prove my opinion sufficiently: then
the Earl did ask me what I thought of that army, and if that I had ever seen
the like: I said it was a goodly army, and that I had seen the like at diverse
times. Yea said the Earl, but did you ever see ye like expedition that is
made in battering the walls of the Town? I demanded of his Lo. how long the
same had been placed, his Lo. answered 14. days, I said that I had seen as
much done in three days, the which was of greater strength then that was off:
he asked me where, I told him, and after some other speeches, his Lo.
departed for that time. Now his Lo. had never seen the like before: wherefore it
seemed to him a new thing: this is not any reproach to that noble and worthy
Earl, for how can any man whatsoever he be, know that he did never see?

And shortly after it happened that the Castle of The Castle of Guynes besieged.
Guines was besieged by ye French: and having drawn their Trenches near unto
the walls of the said Castle, even at the point of the day, a volley of
cannons went off at the Castle walls, and a gentleman of good account hearing
the same, said to his man, me thinks said he, I do hear the battery go
off, go see at what place the same is placed. The man went, and brought his M.
word that the battery was placed against the Marie Bulwark, that is well
said the Gentleman, God hold them there this month, supposing that the same
would have holden forth the like time, but the same was made assaultable,
before two of the clock the same day. Thus in mistaking of things, men may see
the want of experience: for that many other fortifications was supposed to be
of strength sufficient to defend the cannon, and thereby have been deceived.

There was in those days great difference betwixt the French and the Spaniards
in battering, for I have seen both, and have considered of the strength of
both, the forciue and the defenciue: and in troth the Spaniards are or were,
far inferior unto the French: For examples sake, first at Turwin, where the
Emperors camp lay at the least 3. months before it was won, being in
effect dry round about, without any water in y^ ditches, which is a great
strength to any hold. Saint-quintins was the weakest Town in all Pickardy,
Taresse, or in Uarmendois, and yet it cost y^ King 20. days woork, whereas the
French King did win in one season Towns won in one summer by the french. K.
H. 2.
these towns, viz: the Town of Seem in one day, the Town of Marianbrugh in
one day, the town and castle of Ieuoye in one day, the Town of Bouaigne in
one day the castle of Denant 3. days, the town of Binks in one day, whereof
the most part were stronger then either Turwin or Saint-quintins.

Now to return where I left touching wrong informations or want of
experience: It fell out The french Nation expelled forth of Scotland.
within two years, that the Queens Majesty that now is, sent her army into
Scotland for the expelling of the French Nation from thence, at which time the
French did then retire themselves, with some few Scots, into the town of
Lies, for their most safety upon the approaching of her Majesty's army: the
L. W. Gray of Wilton then General of The L. W. Gray.
the said army, it pleased his L. to send the horsemen to the number of 500.
to view the grounds, where the Camp might best be placed the next day, and
Sir William Pelham, being then Captain of the Pyoners, and trench master,
went also to see, where he might best begin to entrench: I seeing him going
about the same, and notwithstanding I had no acquaintance of him: and yet
knowing that he had neither served in France, nor with the Emperor, M.
Pelham intrencheth and is offended without cause.
of good will that I bare unto the service, I went unto him in courteous
manner and said, master Pelham, it were very good for you to begin at the
foot of this hill, and run straight to yonder hillocke, whereat he seemed to
be offended and said that I stood not charged with these matters* it was his
charge and not mine: I was sorry of that I had spoken, considering how
vncourteouslie he did accept of my good will. But how did the matter fall out?
before ten days, by leauinge his trenche open: the French perceiving that
they might without any let come both on horseback and foot, and so did:
whereas it cost the lives of 200. soldiers, and Captain Bartlet taken
prisoner, with diverse others, and at the reskew whereof the L. Gray of Wilton
that now The L. Arthur Gray sore wounded.
is, having not time to arm him self, was shot through the body with a
Bullet, so that many thousands have dyed of lesser wounds then that was.

And again at the time, that the good Earl Francis of Bedford, was L.
Governor of Barwicke, and Francis E. of Bedford.
L. Warden of y^ East Marches: it chanced amongst other warlike talk
proceeding from his L. at dinner time, he demanded of the Captains there
present, how many shot a harquebuzier might discharge in one hour: one
Captain Broad even suddenly did answer and said ten, the rest of the
Captains Captain Broad his answer unadvisedly made.
did not reprove his answer, although that they did know, he was far short
of the matter: and I sitting at the table, though not to cross the said
Captain Broad but rather to tell him thereof after dinner, the which I did and
withal told him, that it was not so well done, as of right he ought to have
done, as all the Captains there present did confess. But the said Captain
Broad, to maintain his said answer, said that he had said truly, and
thereupon did offer to wager, whereto I did offer there, to shoot 40. Single
Bullets to be shot forth of a Caliuer in one hour.
forty in the like time, single Bullettes forth of one piece, but the
Captain would abide no trial, the which I did offer to make.

And thus may we see, that Noble men by wrong information, of such as they do
suppose should know, may be abused.

The second discourse.
ANd for further example, the two Tresmains, they The two Tre^smaynes.
were very proper Gentlemen, and had been in France four or five years,
during the wars betwixt the Emperor Charles, and the French King: and it was
supposed at their return into England that they had been trained in that
service, during their abode there: but it was not so, they never did command
in the feelde, neither were they of any other commanded, in any Marticall
cause: nevertheless at their home coming, they were appointed to take
charge, but what was the end of them both? even death, without doing their
Prince or country any good, to their friends or themselves any praise or
reputation.

Wherefore I wish all young Gentlemen, and others mindinge to do their Prince
and country To learn first to obey, the better shall you konwe how to
command.
good service, to learn first to obaye, and the use of warlike weapons, and
not to think, by reading only to attain to knowledge, without some further
experience: and that done, they may the better proceed, according to their
callinges, to command and lead others the better, with more commendation for
their service and for the security of them selves, and followers.

There is no greater grief can be offered to a Captain, Knowledge and
ignorance.
that does rightly, and truly understand what service is: then to be commanded
by his Chieftaine, to do and execute to the contrary, wherein there may be no
denial. It is even so with the skilful soldier, unto his unskillful Captain,
these things I do perfectly know to be true of mine knowledge.

I will set down a little further, touching a A reported matter.
matter reported unto me, by men of skill and knowledge concerning a Gentleman,
who was accounted to be one of the most skilfullest Soldiers in England: and
in troth he was a marvelous honest Gentleman, and offaire conditions: but a
soldier is never justly tried, unto such time as cause and action has made
due proof thereof. I did once here S. Richard It is better to have the name
in the court, then to perform in the field.
Lee the fortifier, say unto a counselor in England, that it is better for a
man to be counted a good soldier in the Court, then to be the best soldier in
the feelde, and not known in Court.

And now to the reported matter* It pleased her Majesty and counsel, to
send M. Edward Randall Esquire, into Ireland about the tenth year of her
Majesty's reign, with diverse bands of footmen, for the better garding of
some part of her highness countries and subjects there, against such
rebellious persons as then pretended to iniure the same, and so beeinge placed
in Ireland, it fell out that either upon some false report, or the ignorant
advertisement of such as was put in trust, for the discovering of the enemies
numbers: but how so ever it was, the Collonell commanded that Captain
Cornwall, Captain Gorlay, Captain Skreuen, and Captain Ward, should be
ready with their several bands, to march forward as they should be directed:
and about two hours before day they did march forth toward the enemies. At
the point of the day before the soune was up: the few English horsemen did
discover of the enemies to the number of 3000. horsemen and footmen, being
very near unto our foot men, who were in number about 400. with 50. horsemen,
lead by Captain Haruy, whereupon our Captains, perceiving that there was no
hope to retire with any safety, by reason the enemies were so many horsemen:
took their grounds for their best advantage, and aranged their men in good
order, and encouraging their soldiers, to try their vallures, in that parcel
of ground of some advantage, and to show themselves to be the men, that they
professed to be: whereupon they made ready their weapons to receive the
enemies Uiolence. Collonell Randall having not perfect sight.
Now master Randall the Collonell, having not perfect sight, demanded how far
the enemies were off, and what number they were: It was told him they were in
horsemen and footmen to y^ number of 3000. even hard at hand, ready to charge
the footmen: where withal, he without either taking time to encourage and
accompanye his men, or to suffer the footmen to give their volley of shot as
reason did require, but even presently put the spurs to his horse, Edward
Randall wilfully slain through his own oversight.
and ran into the thickst of the enemies, even at the instant that the
Harquebuziers did give their volley of shot at the enemies: insomuch, that he
was slain with his own men and friends most wilfullye: to the great
discouragement of the rest, had there not been men both of courage and
knowledge in their doings, who in that action did right well try themselves
to be Soldiers, for the enemies were there by Gods help and their good
service, ouerthrown and put to slaughter and flight, to their great The valiant
Captains not remem bred in the Cronicles.
praise. Now if this be true as it is supposed, I do think that it is against
reason, that the same should be accounted a matter worthy of the praise that
by the Cronicles is set down, and to leave unremembered the valiant Captains
that was the just cause of the deed and victory obtained.

I do not set this down for any malice that ever I did bear unto M.
Randall, for I did ever for his courtesy, both love him, and thought well of
all his good speech and doings, until this fact was committed: and for that I
have heard some of good acount say that his dooinges in the same was valourous:
I am not of that mind, but it is for the most part holden for valor with
such as do not understand what true valor is: when in troth it is but True
prow es, and foolish hardines.
very foolish hardines, without any discretion at all.

And thus much have I said as touching ignorance as well in the greatest who
have received their Touching ignorance.
knowledge by wrong informations: as the meaner who does not regard what they
do take in hand, through the like offense. A man might make a long role, but
this is some part to show, that it is necessary To have regard to whom great
charges are given.
to look, unto whom such great charges are committed: to be men well able to
discharge the same, not in words but in action: so shall it the better fall
out for our Princes service, and defense of the Realm.

The third Discourse.
AS for the disorders in the Low Cuntries, it is sufficientlye spoken off in
the discourse of Sir John Smith, and as concerning the battle at Tilburye The
Battle at Tilbury.
in Anno. 1588. I have heard diverse reports thereof, the which if they be true,
there was some cause to find fault. But as touching the Archers they were
placed in my opinion, in the place most fit for them: for the best was to be
placed in the front, and the woorst in the rereward.

And as concerning great or small Bands of footmen: my opinion is this, that
it is necessary for foote-bands or bands of horsemen, to be of diverse numbers,
for sundry causes: First, for that there are Captains, who are better able to
govern five hundred, then some othoers are to guern two hundred. Again, if
there happen some piece of service It is good that Bands of footmen and horse
men be of diverse number bers for diverse causes.
to be done, which one hundred may do, it is more then needs to send two
or three hundreds to do the same, or peradventure there cannot be spared so
many: If therefore there should be sent one hundredth from another hundredth, if
in both the places service should come in hand: the two hundredth so parted,
shall be the weaker in both the parts, by dividing the Officers. As for
example.

I have the charge of 200. footmen, my commander commands me to set forth of
my band of 200. Dividing of bands does wea ken the same.
one hundred, to keep a straight or passage, or such like: it is reason that
either my Lieftenaunt or my self do go with them: if in the mean time
occasion of service be offered, both my two hundreds are by this means weakened.

And so does the matter fall out, if a parcel of service should be done,
where 500. should be employed thereunto: it were better that one sufficient
Captain took in hand to do the same with his only band, then to send two
Captains: for two may be of diverse opinions, and so may differ, whereby the
service is oftentimes hindered. So is it in my opinion, not amiss, that there
be in a great Army, 100. 200. 300. 400. 500. or 600.

The Frenchmen do use when a noble man has 600. footmen in charge, to have
two Ensigns, and two Lieftenants, four Sargeants, and 8. Corporalles, for
commonly, they do use 300. to one Ensign in Camp time: but the County of
Creance had in the service against Charles the 5. the charge of 600. footmen.

And for the numbers to be admitted under Colonels, it stands in the same
state, as does the Captains before mentioned: for a worthy personage that is
able to govern aright, would I wish to have under his charge 3000. men, a mener
2000. and the least 1000: so should they the more properly serve upon several
occasions, as the Captains may in their estates do. But one thing I do
wish, that the Collonelles should take such order with their Captains, that
every several band be armed and weaponed alike, according to their proportion:
so shall it be a great furtheraunce at the time that the Army shall be reduced
into battle, and put in order to fight, without any confusion or trouble to
the Corporalles of the field, or to the Sargeants majors: but with great ease
may embattaile them upon the sudden, if they were in number 20000. footmen.
Thus much after my mean skill and understanding have I set down, as concerning
Colonels and Captains, referring the same to my betters, and Captains of
greater experience and knowledge, to allow or disalow at their pleasure.

And further concerning the proportion of weapons The proper shows of weapons
for foot bands.
before mentioned: I wish to every hundred 35. armed Pikes, 30. Muskets, 20,
Calyuers, and 15. Bills, Halberds or Partesants: my reason is this, that I
would have so much to offend, as to defend: for as by common experience, that
those Swissers and Almaines, whose hierlings soever they be, the chief cause
wherefore they are retained, are but to fortefie the bodies of their battles
as defendants, and therefore are most sure and strong. But as for the offenciue,
which be the shot next unto the Horsemen: they must be of other nations, and
men of more agillitie of body, then either Swisser or Launce-Knight. And now
to the declaration of our weapons.

IT is supposed by many, that the weapon called commonly a Caliuer, is another
thing then a The Duke of Guise was the first that did invent them
Harquebuze, whereas in troath it is not, but only a Harquebuze, saving that
it is of a greater circuit or Bullet, then the other is of: wherefore the
French man does call it a piece de Calibre, which is as much as to say, a piece
of bigger circute.

The fourth discourse.
ANd now for that the Harquebuze, was the first weapon that I did use, I will
therefore say some thing touching the same: it is a weapon most offenciue,
that as yet ever was invented, for all manner of service, as well on horseback
as one foot, and in the hands of a skillful soldier, well practiced and
trained with the use thereof, a most terrible and Harquebuze in the hands of
ignorant men are rather hurtful then commodious
deadly weapon. But this I must needs confess, that in the hands of an
ignorant person, neither apt nor willing to use the same, as of right it
ought to be, it is rather hurtful then commodious: For whosoever shall take in
hand to use the same weapon, must take (as it were) a delighte in the well
using thereof. First to keep the same clean and clear as well within as
without, and to have his molde, to cast his Bullets, as round as is possible,
and the same well pared, to that end it may fall close to the powder, without
staying by the way, then his match well made and dry, his steel and flinte to
strike fire, his scrues and worms to serve all for his skowring stick, and
for every ten soldiers to have a casting pan. For flasks, it were better
that the use of them were left, and in liewe thereof the Spanishe use, which
is now had with us for our muskets, for it is the best, the surest and the
readiest, that yet has been used for diverse causes, which I omit least I
should be tedious. This Harquebuzier must yet have a tuch box, a purse for
his Bullets, steel and flint, and a priminge Iron for the clearinge of the
tuch hole, when need* shall require, a good Morion, with not to high a creast,
a good short sword of a yard in blade, and dagger of twelve inches in blade,
with a good girdle and strong. This soldier thus furnished, being apt and
willing, and does understand A Harquebuzer need not being perfect to
encounter a man at arms.
what him self is in force: needs not to care who he does encounter withal
being but one, although he were a man at arms: and in grounds of advantage
to be the death of many, the which advantage of grounds, is the greatest help
to all defendantes, the which I take to be our parts at this day in England,
to think upon.

For these Harquebuziers, is the only weapon, that has been the greatest
cause of the deaths of such numbers, as have been of late days overthrown,
in great incounters, yea and in small skirmishes, and by the terrible shot of
Pistoliers or Reisters, and specially at Saint-quintins: and at Graueling the
English ships, were a great cause of that overthrow.

But read the book of the Commentary of the sciuile wars of France, and
the incounters in the Low countries: and at the same time, that the French
King Henry the second incountered with the Emperor Charles at Rentie, what
was the shot of Harquebuzers there? the very morning before the sun was one
hour high, there 400. Harquebuzers slain in one mor ning.
was 400 Harquebuziers slain of the French party, and drawn out of the shrubs
or bushes by the heels: the which the French and Spaniardes did strive to
obtain, for the better advantage of a greater matter which was done there that
same day: And it was well known that of the Spanish party, there was slain
in the same skirmishe, almost double the number. And after the obtaining of the
same bushes or shrubs, by the french, the Emperor came forward toward the
Kings army, being a Fawcon shot the one off the other: at which time the Duke
of Sauoy having the leading of the Uant-garde, did descend toward the said
bushes possessed by the French footmen: and the encounter began with such
terrible shot of the Spanish Uant-garde and the French The shot of Harquebuzers
are most deadly weapons if they be in the hands of skillful men.
footmen, that who so ever did see the same; may well say, that the shot of the
Harquebuziers, are most deadly weapons, being in the hands of skillful men:
For what with the terror of the French shot, and the brave charge of the
French light horsemen, the Uantgarde of the Emperor was there ouerthrown, and
cheefely by the terror of the French shot, laid in the bushes as before is said.

Again before Cambraye, the armies aforesaid being near together, where the
King had staid four days according to his promise for the Emperor: It fell
out the last day, the King removed his Camp, at which instant there
approached near unto the French Camp 2000. horsemen of the best in the
Emperors army, accompanied or backed with two thousand Harquebuziers one
foot: the French being 5000* men at arms, and archers, within Pystol shot of
their enemies for the space of four hours, still beholding one another, who
durst first break: for if the French, being the greater number, had charged
the Sapniards, then would the two thousand shot, have galled and destroyed the
most part of them, to their great detriment and loss: wherefore it may be
thought that the French would not have over shot themselves so far, as to
have omitted such a days work: but only for the doubt that they had, of the
same Harquebuzers so couched in a hollow way, behind the horsemen, as
aforesaid.

Again at the siege of Bouaigne, where the French King being in person, y^
Emperor at Namure, within eight miles, the Kings pleasure was to have five
hundred horse, to go as near to the Emperors Camp as they could, to
discover the enemies: but it fell so forth, that there were 2000. horsemen
enemies abroad, at the same time: and meeting the one with the other, they both
pawsed to charge: for the most part of the way lay, betwixt the river of Moose
and a great bank: so that the French supposed, that the whole Camp of the
Emperor had been coming, they retired a soft trote: their enemies pursued,
and made after with more speed, and the French having but only forty shot,
horsemen, they caused them to light and to defend the straighte at the best
advantage: and by means of those forty shot, the 500 horse were saved, and
came to their Camp without loss. Also the very first day, that Bouaigne was
besieged, the French shot so freshlye followed the Spaniardes, that were
sallyed forth for the mainetenance of their skirmishe: that in conclusion,
they A battery plased with out trenche or gabyon.
came close to the walls of the town, and there stayed: and so without either
trench, basket, or gabyons, continued there, from eight of the clock in the
morning, unto four in the afternoon: in which time, there was not any,
either soldier or townsman, that durst look over the walls: in so much, that
the Cannoniers and Pyoners, did place their ordinance, without any more
defenses for their safety, then before is said: so that before five of the
clock, the french foote-men entered, and slew man, woman and child, or
threw them into Man woman and child slain or drowned.
Moose, which does run close by the wall upon the one side: so were these
people all slain or drowned saving nine Spaniards, that fled into a little
tower, the which they defended about two hours, to the loss of five or six
french shot: But the next day they were all hanged upon one pair of Gallous,
that were set up, right against the castle of Denant, being little more then
half a mile, distant from Bouaigne: wherein was at that time, Julian Romero
with 200. of his country men, who by his and their valor, and force of
their shot, withstoode the Kings power three days, to the death of a great
number of the french, which were lost at two assaults, and then yielded by
composition.

The fifth discourse.
ANd touching the rest of our fierye weapons, I will set down partly my
opinion, and when I do speak of Harquebuzies, it is meant by all Calliuers
and Curriers: and although the musket be a weapon of greater force then the
Harquebuze is of, yet generally both on horseback and on foot, a Harquebuze
does serve for both. But were the musket to be dealt withal on horseback, as
one foot: I would then think it the best of all manual weapons, that yet
have been devised and invented: and not only in defendinge of holds and
trenches, but also in the plain feelde for Battles and great incounters: yea
and to back the smaller shot in skirmishe, to Pieces of more force to defend
holds then Muskets.
great purpose. For within holds or trenches, there may be used, as the manner
is, pieces of better force, and more to offend the enemies then muskets: as
Fauconits, Robinets, and Organpipes, all these be but light pieces, and are
mounted upon carriages, and the greatest may be removed with two or three men
(which is the Fauconit) al along the rampires: and ever new and new, small
lowpes made, that the enemies shall not discern the same, before the shooting
thereof, which may not be done, but upon good occasion: and also there be other
pieces, to be set upon Blocks, and to be removed in like manner: as Bases of
diverse sorts, and Harquebuze with crooks, otherwise called Hagbuts a crook,
the name come of the hook of the same, which is to be holden fast to a stock
or stone, for recoyling.

But to the musket again: The musketes are No armors can defend against the
Musket being near hand.
weapons of great force, and at this day, both with leaders and followers,
much feared: for few or no Armours, will or can defend the force thereof,
being neerehand, which is as well a terror to the best armed, as to the
meanest: it will kill the armed of proof at ten skore yardes, the common
armours at twenty score, and the unarmed at thirty skore, being well used in
bullet and tried powder.

And where as it is alleged in S. John Smithes book, of many and sundry
imperfections, incidente unto the same weapons of muskets, and Haquebuzies, as
in dankishnes of powder or match, the smalnes of their bullets being not equal
for the bore of the same pieces, with diverse other impediments, as there is to
be seen, who so listes to look: which No impedimentes where as skilful
soldiers are.
are no impedimentes, where skillful soldiers has the using of the same
pieces. And for the cause of raynie weather (by him aleadged) if it be such a
great wet, that all things are wet: then is it as bad for y^ one party as for
the other: Let the service rest, or fall to it with hand strokes. An other
objection is made in the same book, against all knowledge and experience, and
that is touching the taking level at their mark or marks, whereat they shoot,
as being so far inferior unto the Long-bow in that respect, as though there
were no comparison to be made therein. To the which I answer, both of my own
knowledge and by common experience, for that I my self did use my bow, unto
my ag of 17. years, and could have shot therewith right well, and so from my
bow to my Harquebuze, and after that I had used the same, but 4. or 5. months,
I would have shot at any mark, at buts short or long, or bank: with the best
bow-man in England, for all that I had, and so shall I as yet do, for a good
wager, or at the least some scholar of mine.

And as it is there termed point and blancke, I never heard but that it is
termed point blancke, Point bla^ke and not point and blancke.
but I will not stand upon terms, for either have I and many more such plain
fellows, misued our terms in that point, or else I am in the ^ight. But as
touching the certainty of shooting at marks or enemies, let it be with
Harquebuze or musket, considered but with the archer himself: Whether a
Cros-bowe, or a Long-bowe in a Tyller, shoot more certainly, either at mark
or prick, then does the Long-bowe that from the hand of the bow-man is
delivered: and then I think it will be allowed, that when the Harquebuze or
Musket, do take the leuel from the button of his sight, unto the pin in the
fore end of his piece, that he may shoot with more and surer level, then can
either loose Long-bowe, Tiller-bowe, or Cros-bowe: and specially the Musket,
who has his rest to stay his piece upon, right steadfastly.

And whereas it is set down, also by S. John Smith that it is not meet, that
any Harquebuziers should discharge or shoot, but within 8. 10. or 12. yards at
the most. I wonder what manner of soldier that should be, that within point
blancke of his weapon, be it musket or Harquebuze, that should miss the breadth
of a trencher: and these are my reasons which consists in two points. First
as touching a good and skillful Cannonier, notwithstanding that his Touching
a good and skillful Canonere.
Cannon does recoyle, six or eight foot: he will not fail the compass of
a yard of his mark, beeinge within point blancke: Secondly the fowler, who
does shoot without a rest many times, and has his piece charged with small
hail shot, if he be perfect, will not fail to kill a Mallard, (yea sometimes
half a dozen if they sit near together, or right upon his level) within
fifty yardes. Then much less will the skillful Harquebuzier or Muskettier
miss the hitting of a man: And again, there is not so simple a soldier, that
cannot make an estimation how far his mark is without his level, that is
without point blanck, and so give his weapon that vantage, as the distaunce
doothe require. And so I omit to answer unto the rest alleged, for the
slendernes of them: thinking this sufficient, to prove my arguments manifest
enough unto all that does know the use of weapons of war: and for such as are
ignorant, let them learn of them that does truly know them.

The sixth discourse, proving the Long-bowe to be far inferior unto the fiery
weapons.
ANd now to y^ Long-bow so highly commended by S. John Smith, by so many and
sundry recited arguments and proofs, by him alleged in his said book, as
therein is declared and set forth in so It is not needful to answer un to so
many recited reasons.
many several places, that I think it is not needful or requisite to answer
unto the most part thereof. But as the old proverb is, that good things need
no praising: therefore as near as God will give me leave, I shall set down my
opinion and knowledge, without either affection or hatred to ye same.

The time that I first entered into the wars, was at Boleigne, where there
were a thousand five hundredth, or thereabouts in the same Town, and Fortes
there near adjoining: and although I served there some five or six months,
yet did I not at any time during my abode there, see them altogether at any one
instant, unto such time as the same was delivered unto the French king: al
which numbers came from thence to Callice in good order of march: and I serving
in Guines under sir John Wallop Knight went to see them, and beholding them
well in diverse respects, I thought that in all England, there were not so many
in any one shire to be found, of the like comelines and shape of body: and
notwithstanding that the most part of them were archers, I did never see or
heard, of any thing by them done with their Long bows, to any great effect.
Nothing done by the archers, but many have been seen lie dead with Harqubuze
and Pistol.
But many have I seen lie dead in diverse skirmishes and incounters, between
the English in those Fortes, and the French in Garrison, in the Fort called
Mon pleasure and mon gardenet, right over against our Fortes and holds there.
And where as I served in Guynes as before is said, in a band that were all
Harquebuzieres saving fourteen persons, there was also another Band of*
Soldiers, under one Captain Basset, who had no Harquebuzeres in his Band, he
was an Essex man toward the Earl of Oxford, and the two bands served
oftentimes together, in diverse skirmishes and overthrows, betwixt y^ Garrison
of Guines and Arde, and amongst many other, both before ye town of Arde and at
other times, near unto the Castle of Guines, where trial was to have been
made, twice or thrice in a week of all manner of warlike weapons, and the
sufficiency thereof to have been justly proved, and amongst many other of
greater force, in numbers I will hear set down the manner of one encounter
done by the Garrison of Guynes.

The 7. Discourse.
IT fell out that Sir John Wallop Knight of the order of the Garter, who had
gotten intelligence by his espialles that the Frenchmen would come into the
English grounds upon a night: whereupon as soon as the gates was shut, he sent
forth his Gentleman Porter, to command the Captains to put in readiness their
Bands, all saving one that should continue within the town, for watching and
warding, until their return back, which was done accordingly: and according
to the time appointed, they did march forth of the Town 400. footmen, and
25. horsemen: and being not half a mile from the Town, there fell such a huge
rain and tempest, that the Captains consented together to return home to the
Town again, and so did. Sir John Wallop was a lame man, and could neither
ride nor go, but in a litter as he was carried, and yet in his directions most
perfect.

The Frenchmen being abroad, and had lain in covert all the same morning:
about ten of the clock in the foorenoone, the Cattle of the English inhabitants
being all abroad, and suspecting no enemies, the French horsemen brake upon the
villages, from Mewnam Bridge, close by the marrishe side, and drove away great
numbers of Cattle and Sheep, not coming near unto Guines by two miles: and
when they had gotten that they could, they returned toward Hambletewe, and so
after that they were forth of the sight, of the day watch of Hams and Guynes,
the Garrison of Hambletewe and them of Arde* there parted their booty, and so
returned toward their Garrisons. In the mean time Sir John Wallop had
understanding that the Captains went not forth according to his direction
wherefore he sent to command them to come before him to answer their cause: but
before the Captains did come, the Larum was throughout the Country, and the
day watch struck the Larum, and off went a Cannon, to give the rest of the
Country warning, and forth with the Captains and Soldiers issued forth and
with their weapons only without any armor at all, the Bell continued striking
the Larum so hotlye that every man thought the enemy had been at the Town
gates, insomuch that the governor him self came forth, and there meeting
with some of the Captains, so be called them for not perfourming his
directions, that he swear by Gods mother (which was his common oath) that they
were all cowardly knaves, and durst not look a Frenchman in the face, wherewith
the Captains were sore grieved: but in this mean space there came a Horseman
from Sindercase Church, who had seen all the demeanor of the French, and
declared that one part were going toward Hambletewe, and the other toward
Arde: the Captains and the Soldiers hearing this, never staide, but made
toward a place called Buckhole or Buckhold, they ran by 20. and 10. and more
and less, until they came near to the open where the French were newlye come
through the the woods, with the Cattle and booty, and took their grounds of
advantage, and put their footmen in their best order, and their horsemen upon
their left hand: and by that time the French were well set in their orders, the
English were about 280. footmen that were come together, and 9. horsemen: but
before that the English could come into the ground, where those French had
imbatled themselves, there was a hedge wherein was a gappe, that 3. in a rank
could not pass through the same, whereof we stood in doubt that the horsemen
would have charged us, before we had past the said straight: but they suffered
us quietly to come through the same: there needed no Sargeant, for every man as
fast as he could pace fell into his rank, which was seven, and then we had
to ascend toward the enemy, who stood upon a Linch of a banck 2. yards high:
ye horsemen stood at ye end of the same Linch, upon whom we straight directed
our shot: the French shot off their pieces, in effect upon our flank, and
ouershot us in manner, but we let fly amongst their horsemen, so full in their
faces, that they to go, it was no need to bid them spur, and so many as were
not slain went clear away: the footmen stayed until we came to join Pyke to
Pyke, and at the last they began to shrink, and thought to have saved
themselves, being so near the wood: but we pursued them so fast, that few did
escape by flight, and so they thrue away their Pikes, and fled toward the
wood, but we killed 117. of the footmen, and five horses, and took Mounsier de
Outings Liefetenant to the Governor of Arde, and one other Horseman, and 69.
Prisoners, with the armor and weapon of the rest that were slain: the booty
went clear away, for before we had done and put our selves in good order
again to march home, the booty was near Arde gates: and Sir John advertised
by some that were in the day watch, that the French and our men were
together, for the smoke of the shot might well be seen, he wished that we
had been at home, for all his land said he: But when news was brought him by
one Muse, one of the nine horsemen, that he should cause his cook to provide
his supper, for Monsieur de Outings would sup with him and a great sort more
of his partakers: then the governor was right glad, and was sorry that he had
so be called the Captains. This was done about November in the 3. year of
Edward the sixth, by my Captain Hugh Smith and Captain Thomas Sibell, Captain
Matson and Captain Basset with 268. footmen, and 9. horsemen. The french were
87. horsemen led by Captain Pelowes, and 340 footmen led by the L. of
Outings: in this encounter we lost but five men, yet diverse hurt but recovered
all well again, amongst these there was 35. Bow-men* whereof there was one
slain, but not one slain by the archers, nor to my knowledge, I never saw
any slain out right with an arrowe, and but with Quarrels few, but with
Harquebuze and Pistol shot, I have been at several times, where 20000. has
been slaiue outright, besides many wounded and maimed.

I have made a long rehearsal of this overthrow at Buckhole, and the rather for
that I find it not set down in any other place, by any of these our late
Chroniclers, but many matters of smaller effect then that.

I have been at many greater matters, but never at any, done with more good
will, or better courage either of Captain or soldier. For albeit that we were
clearly unarmed and the enemy well armed, yet we might have chosen to have set
upon them, or to have left them where they were.

And now where I left touching archers with their Long-bowes.

The 8. discourse.
LEt us consider justly of sir John Smithes words, although he does give the
Long-bowe, many great and excellent commendations: yet when he comes to
account of the full force thereof, he says, that it does most wonderfully
with the noise thereof terrefie the enemy, and so forth: and also does
confess that it does but sometime kill. I refer that point to all good
soldiers judgment, there is none worthy to be a soldier, that does not
think to be a Captain in time, by his valor, knowledge, and good behavior:
And what is he that is of that mind, or that does fear any wounds, so that
life Archers are rather an encouragement, then hurtful unto a resolute soldier.
may be in little or no danger? I do firmly believe, that it is rather an
encouragement to a resolute soldier, rather to approach toward them, then any
way to shun them: For in troth when I was in the french Kings service amongst
the old bands of footmen, I did greatly commend the force of the Long-bowe,
but how was I answered: to be short even thus, Non non Anglois, vostre cause
est bien salle car dieu nous a donnes moyen de vous encountrer apres, vnautre
sort que en temps pass. No, no, English man says he, your case is become
foul, for God has given us means to encounter with you after an other sort
then in times past, for now says he the weakest of us are able to give
greater wounds, then the greatest and strongest archer you have: and when I
replied, as sir John Smith often does that the number of arrows does come so
thick, that it was like unto hail: well says he but it is not to be feared,
as that weapon that does kill where it lights: for says he, when I do
march directlye upon them and seeing them coming, I do stoop a little with
my head, to that end my Burgonet shall save my face, and seeing the same
arrows lighting upon my head piece or upon my breast, pouldrons, or vambraces,
and so seeing the same, to be of no more force nor hurtful: then do I with
less fear then before, boldelye advance forwards to encounter with them.
But these are but arguments of small effect, and rather to show the opinion of
the french soldiers then for any just proof of the matter, it is requesit
that by our own knowledge, it be truly considered of, for as I have said
before touching the English service at Bolloigne and Guisnes, with all the
great Garrisons there of long time kept, which was to our Princes an infinite
charge, and specially Bolloigne with the members and fortifications. And not
withstanding there were, as many strong and able archers, in the same
Garrisons, as in all Christendom there were none better, for that number: Let
it be considered, what was by them done, at any time of service, within those
five years that it was English: or at Guisnes or Callice during the same time.

And now to a latter time, as in the second year of the Queens Majesty's
most happy reign that now is, at the siedge of Lies, where there was very
many archers, as of Yorkshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, Nottingham-shire, and
Darbishire: There was many archers at Leeth and good place to have tried them.
there was as good place to have tried them, as was in any place of late
days, but I know that there was no good proof made to the commendations of
archerie or of the Long-bowe. And I may the more certainly speak it for this
cause.

It was my chance at the conclusion of the peace, and the yielding up of the
town of Lies, to meet with diverse of my acquaintance beeinge Frenchmen:
amongst the rest, I met with a Gentleman and an old soldier, who served in
the same company that I was off, amongst the footmen in France, whose name
was Mounsieur de Sentan, whose valor and honest conditions, I did perfectly
know, so much the better, for that we were both under one Corporal, and
lodged together, and frequented at meat and tablinge long together: in so
much that in respect of the great courtesy, that I found at his hands in
France: I partly considered of at Lies, and after diverse speeches past
betwixt him and me, I demanded two questions of him.

The first was to know how many of our soldiers were slain, at the Skale or
Saltie by us given: he answered that there were slain 448. I demanded 448.
Slain at Lies at one assault
how he did know the same, he answered that the Governor of Lies did
command, that all the uppermost garments of the slain men of the English
party, should be brought into the market place, and there to be counted,
which was done as he affirmed, and there were found said he so many as
aforesaid.

Secondly remembering the words of the frenchmen before rehearsed, at the time
of my being in France touching archers, I demanded of this Sentan, how
many were slain with Arrows, from the beginning of the siedge unto that
day, he answered not one, saving said he, that one who was shot betwixt the
shoulder and the body, and that Not one slain at Lecth with archers, but one
hurt.
with the heat of his body when the arrow was pulled forth, the head stuck
behind, and came not forth together, wherefore the Surgion was constrained to
cut the man to recover the head of the arrow, and so the man still lay upon ye
amendment of his wound. It does appear that feaw or none has been slain
with arrows, but great numbers by the fiery shot.
Now by this and other before rehearsed, and hereafter to be rehearsed, it
does and may appear, that by Harquebuzes great numbers have come to their
deaths, and either few or none with arrows, or archery.

And now touching the service done at that time that New-hauen was kept, the 5.
year of her Majesty, by the Earl of Warwick: let the Cronicle, or those y^
yet do live, make account who were there slain, with the force or dent of
arrows. And albeit that it was so, that in the skirmish before the town It is
to be thought that the French would have retired, if the Archers had not come
at al.
of Newhauen, that Sir John Smith speaks of in the 37. leaf of his
discourse: it may be supposed, that the French having continued long in
Skirmishe, whereby their powder and bullets were spent: and besides being near
unto the Town, and in danger of the great Ordinance, were of themselves
willing to retire, if the fourscore Archers had not come at all. I see no
report in the histories made, touching The longer the archers be continued,
the worse.
the same, or any to any purpose of late time, and spe cially since ye
Harquebuze has been rightly known, and the longer that the archers be
continued, the worse they will be esteemed.

The 9. Discourse.
ANd now to answer unto the first part of Sir John Smithes arguments, which
is in the 20* Page, the 15. line. I will now says he proceed, to To answer
unto Si^ 10. S. his 3. questions.
the consideration and examination of three most important things, in the which
all the effects of Musketeers, Harquebuziers, and Archers and their wepons
do consist.

And that is whether Musketeers and Harquebuziers be most readiest to give
vollies, etc.

The second is, whether the weapons of fire, or the bow do fail, in
discharging and shooting, etc.

The third is, whether by reason and common experience, the Bullets or the
arrows do annoy the enemies most, be they horsemen or footmen.

To the first I answer thus, I will not follow sir Sir I. S. his answer not
followed but the true observation.
John Smith, in his answer unto the same, but rather the true observation,
which by all good Soldiers is not forgotten to be performed upon any occasion
of service. The Harquebuzier does first charge his piece in good order, as to
a Soldier it needs no rehearsal, and to other not knowing how to do it, it
is but folly without exercise: But thus, having charged his piece, he goes
toward his enemies, as does the Archer with his Bow bent, and one arrow in
his hand: the Harquebuzier has also for his first shot, all things in more
readiness then any Archer can have: for whereas the Harquebuzier against the time
that his officer shall command him to shoot, his match of a yard in length
is fired at both the ends, and ready set in his serpentine: that done, he has
nothing to do, but lay his piece close to his shoulder, and mark his enemy
just. The Bowman though he have his arrowe ready nocked, yet must he draw the
same to the head, the which I The archer does require more time then does the
fiery weapon to shoot the first shoot.
have seen oftentimes very slenderly performed: and the drawing of that to the
head, does require more time then the fiery weapon does, being in the readiness
as is aforesaid.

But this is the effect of the matter. If it must be as Sir John Smith does
say, that a Harquebuze may not discharge but within 8. 10. or 12. yardes: I
think that if that be allowed, that the Harquebuzier may discharge the first,
before the Archer, being ready as before is said. And if it be at horsemen and
the horsemen be so near as within 10. or 12. yards: then is it too late to
charge again, or to shoot, for the horsemen being so near as aforsaid, will
either enter or else immediately retire, with y^ they have already received: for
it is a thing most certain, that horsemen in their charge if they be Soldiers,
when they are within danger of the shot, will either not charge at all, or else
being near, will with all possible speed perform their charge: for
otherways, they should One of the Tresmaines slain in houering in his charging
of footmen.
be counted but simple Soldiers, for even so was one of the Tresmains (in
houering in the charging of footmen) slain at Newhauen: and as for shooting 4.
for one, there is no Archer that can shoot 2. for one, if the Harquebuzier be
perfect and well trained.

The Harquebuzier that does perfectlye know A perfect Harquebuzere will dis
charge more Bull lets, be the time short or long, then any Bowman can do
arrows.
how to use himself and his weapon: will discharge more Bullets, then any
Archer can do Arrows: and by this way and mean. If it be a Musket, so much
the better for my purpose, and this is to be done in great incounters, whereas
armies cannot march but easilye, for that the numbers are great, and being a
Musket, I would first deliver a single Bullet, at 24. score off or there
abouts, by that time they had marched fourscore nearer, I would deliver All
this while the Bow does stand without doing any hurt.
another Bullet, and at 12* score two, and at eight score three, at forescore
6. Pistol Bullets, with less powder the^ at the first by the third part, for
always the more lead the less powder, and yet shall the force be never the
less.

Now consider, that betwixt eight score and the joining of the battle, how
many arrows can a bow well deliver? for within that distance, both the
battles does come on with great speed, or else not at No man can tell how to
fight be fore he see his ground and numbers.
all. But no man can tell how to fight, but as the time, the ground, and the
number shall either give leave or suffer.

Now even as I have declared for the Musket, so does it stand with the
Harquebuze, but not to begin so far off with the Harquebuze, as with the
Musket: and take this for most certain, that a Musketiere or a good
Harquebuzier, will deliver more bullets, and of greater force the^ any archer
can do arrows, be it in short time or long time: for as before A Musket shoots
more Bullets then a Long bow does ar rows.
is declared, if the enemy be so near that the Archer can shoot but one, then
may the Harquebuzier let fall another Bullet into his piece, and shoot two for
the archers one. And if the enemy be far of, then may it be performed as before
is said.

And touching the second point, that is, whether the Archers with their
weapons, or the other Soldiers with their weapons of fire, do fail least, to
shoot, discharge and give their vollies.

As touching this second point and question, I answer thus, that touching the
certainty of near shooting, or failing to hit the enemies, the Bow cannot be
able to come near the Harquebuze or the musket, for the fiery weapons does
shoot with a certain Level, as it were by rule, and the Bow but by guess, The
bow cannot come near the fiery weapon in near shooting for the fiery weapon
shootes by rule and the bow but by guess
as I have said before sufficiently touching that point. And for failing, as
in respect of dankishnes of powder or match: with a good soldier it is never
to be found but that he will be as careful thereof as of his life, and for
the rest that may happen in failing, it is nothing to be compared to the
fainte drawing that the archer does use, in not drawinge his arrowe to the
head, when he is near his enemies, as by many yet living, that can witness
the same, as well as my self, and how lewdlie they will at the half Arrowe
flirte them into the air and withal stoop, as though every shoot of
Harquebuze that went off, were shot at them.

And where as it is set down in the same place, that there can nothing hinder
the archer, but ye breaking of his Bow or bow-string, yet I take it that there
are diverse other lettes, the which I have seen diverse archers complain of.

First, for that he could get no warm meat, nor his three meals every day,
as his custom was to have at home, neither his body to lie warm at night,
whereby his joints were not in temper, so that being suddenly called upon, as
the service does often fall out: he is like a man that has the Palsy, and so
benommed, that before he get either to the fire, or to a warm bed, he can
draw no bow at all.

And it is further set down in the said book, that neither Rain, Hayle nor
Snow, can hinder the Archers from shootinge, but I am not of that mind, for
that the archer lyinge in Camp, where as he may not lie forth of his
appointed place, and having not to cover his Bow nor scantly his head, then,
I think his bow to be in danger to dissolve the Glewe in the horns of the
bow, and something hinder his stringe and sheffe of arrows, Rain does hinder
the bow and string.
whereof he does make his pillowe: but to conclude in this point, how shall
a man make a strong argument or answer, unto a matter of no substance? except
he have help by Logike the which for my part, these few lines may witness,
that it is not my profession.

Now to answer the third question, which is whether the Bullets of weapons
of fire, or the arrows of archers, do annoy the enemy most, which question
is frivolous, for by the propounding of the question, and answered by the
author him self, it does carry a show in words, to be taken as a thing
most certain, with such especallye, as does not understand to the contrary.

But with all soldiers, Captains and skillful Conductors of the wars, it is
evidently and manifestly known, that where as there has been one slain
with arrows, there has been a hundred slain with manual wepons of fire,
since the use of the same A 100. for one slain with fiery weapons. So that if
death be any anoiance let that suffice.
has been practiced and rightly known. Wherefore if death be annoyaunce to
either Horseman or foote-man, let this suffice: for it is not wounds or small
hurtes, that daunteth the soldiers where as death is not greatly to be feared,
as before is declared.

And where as Sir John Smith does say himself, that the archers do hurt
and wound, as in the face and places unarmed* yet does he confess, that the
same does but sometimes kill, whereby it Bows do but (...) (...).
may well be understood to be a thing of small force, in respect of the
weapons of fire.

Again, whereas it is set down in the same place, that the arrowe heads
beeinge rustie, is the cause that wounds given by the same will not heal,
whereby some will imagine, that it is for the beif to have their arrow heads
rustie.

But truly I never did see any archer in the wars, that had any other then
such rustie arrowe heads: and besides I did not at any time see, any of those
archers go about to mende them, and to make them clean and smooth, that
thereby the same might the better enter through the doubletes, or garments of
their enemies: for by common reason and daily proof, any thing that is
rustie, be it Rust ye things will not enter in to any mean thing with great
force.
Bodkin or Dagger, or arrowe head, it will not with great force enter through
any mean thing if it were but a meanly bumbasted doblet.

And I am of that opinion, that the doubletes used in these days, are as good
a defense against a rustie arrowe, as a Target of the best proof: and as
touching the heads of the archers arrows being barbed, and broad before, by
reason whereof, it can not enter as a smooth sharp head would do therefore
it must of necessity be that the same heads, was devised for galling of
naked horses. And doubtless the same being of so small force, and entering so
little way into the horse, should immediately fall forth again, whereas by
reason of the barbe it was supposed to stay, and trouble the horses the more.
All the announces that arrows can give is but mean stu^e to wards the defense
of a kingdom.
All which annoyaunces are but mean stuff toward the defense or inuadinge
of a kingdom, as by some other arguments hereafter shall by Gods help be
showed and proved.

But first to conclude with these our archers and of their disabillitie, in
respect of the service of these days: true it is, that before the weapons of
fire, were invented, and unknown, as also untried, to be weapons of great
force and effect, in all service on horseback as one foot, as before is
declared: and yet but of late days that the same have been This nation is
brought up with the long bow as a parcel of our cheifest pastime
made public in arms, and not as yet thoroughly and generally known unto
this our Nation, as unto some of the greater calling, and to the most of the
meaner sort, as the Long-bowe or archer is, by reason that we are brought up
therewith, even as a parcel of our chief pleasure. And yet good hope that the
fiery weapons shall be better practiced in time, for without practice they are not
commodious but hurtful.


But yet there is good hope, that by reason of such good provisions as are
made, within this realm, that in some convenient time the same may be more
used and practiced then it is, and specially the Musket, the Harquebuze and
the Pistol: the which without exercise can not be commodious or profitable in
any good sort to be answerable against the usurping enemies the Spaniards, who
are wholly and fully practiced therewith, and specially with y^ Musket and
Harquebuze: And would it pleased God The Spaniards are fully practiced in the
fiery weapons.
our Prince and Maiestrates, to have our able men in England, to be used and
trained in the same weapons of fire: it would not only encourage them, but
also be a great delight to their Captains and leaders, the rather to encounter
with those wicked enemies or any other.

And also it would be a terror to al our enemies, that should chance to offer
any injury to this realm of England or Ireland: for we may assure our selves
that it is our want of skill, that makes these foreign enemies the more bold
to invade upon us.

For if we were practysed in our weapons as The Spaniards are but peeuishe
weeds in respect of this nation, if we were trained as they be.
they are, they would never seek us in England nor else where: For in respect
of this nation, the Spanyardes in deed are but peeuishe weeds. For by
experience I do know, that in all the time of the wars, continued betwixt the
Emperor Charles and Henry the 2. French king: the Spaniards were the least
accounted off in the field, of any other nation whatsoever: they will do well
in skirmishes with their shot, or in defending of a hold, or assaulting of any
breach: but for any other great incounters, you shall hear little of their
doings to any great purpose. For the overthrows that were at Saint-quintins
and at Graueling, was not done by them (though King Phillip bare the name) but
by the Duke of Sauoy and the County Egmond, with his Wallons, and by the Duke
of Brunswick and those Almaigns, We are not able to encounter with them without
exercising of our weapons, but to our loss.
all which was done with horsemen, insomuch that without exercise of our
weapons, we shall be a great deal worse able to encounter with them, but to our
great grief and loss.

The 10. Discourse.
THus having spoken of the fierye weapons, and the Long bow, in which I have
partly showed mine opinion: yet for the better proof of my allegations heerin
declared, for that the contrary is so fixed and rooted in the minds of many
of these our friends in England, that unless it be tried, and with action in
their sight proved, they will in no wise yet be persuaded from their former
opinions in ye matter. Wherefore I have thought it my part, in respect thereof to
set down some course, whereby the same may by action be made manifest unto
all that are doubtful in that behalf.

And thus, if it may please our Prince and state to allow some Gentleman who
shall have the best opinion in archerie, as in the Long bow for the better
satisfying of all parties, to call by commission forth of any one hundred or
weapon take in all England, To make a h^rse as Sir 10. S. allow eth.
so many Archers as shall suffice to make a hearse, according as Sir John Smith
has said that archers should be, let them be twenty ranks or more, and every
rank to contain in flank seven or eight, as by him is set down to be the
best ordering of them, and let them be placed in the plain field to the best
advantage, so that there be no impediment to let horsemen to come close to
them but themselves, their Bows and sheafes of arrows, and so being set in
their best order, I will be one if it may be permitted that shall take in hand
to charge them, and to run through them, having no let but their Bows and One
horse man will charge 7. archers, and take no harm, nor do none to them but
run through their ranks.
arrows, and we will be but for every rank one horseman: for 20. ranks of
7. in a rank, twentye horsemen: and we shall arm our selves and our Horses*
with no armours of Proof, further then the Pistol proof.

And whereas it is further set down in the same Book, that Harquebuziers may
not give their vollyes of shot, but within 8. 10. or 12. yardes, and not 8. 10.
or 12. skores: and that archers will hurt, wound, Harquebuziers may not give
any volley of shot* says si^ I. S. but within 8. 10. or 12, yardes.
gall and sometimes kill, at 9. 10. and 11. skore, as well as the fiery weapons
can do.

To this I say, that for trial thereof, I will stand at six score yardes
distant from the best of these Archers aforesaid, and let him shoot 10. arrows
one after another at me, and if I do stir from the place, let me be punished,
and I will be armed as before is said of the Pistol proof, and if I be
therewith wounded, I am contented to take my mends in my own hands: and again,
let me be set in the same place where this lusty Archer stood to shoot his ten
arrows, and let there be a whole complete armor set right up where I did
stand, and let me have but two shootes with a Musket or Harquebuze, and let it
then appear, what the one and the other is in force or cunning, this in my
opinion were no harm: and it were Trials to be made touching Hatquebuziers and
ar chers, without harm to any.
not amiss that trial were made, for it is supposed by many that have read
Sir John Smiths book, that there needs no Pikes to guard the Archers, for
says he, they are Pykes good enough of themselves.

And again it seems, that Sir John Smith does commend the Long bows and the
Crosbowes, to serve on horseback, to be better wepons then either the
Petronelliers or the Pistolliers, as in the same book is set down, where also
he affirms, that the same weapons do far exceed and excel, all weapons of
fire, on horseback. It does appear in the same place, the manner how that he
would have them armed for the field, the which arming and weaponing in my
slender opinion are very mean. For y^ Crosbowes he allows to be of ^. pounds
and a half, and the Longbowes all men know them: And for armours, he wishes
the Crosbower to have a murrian of the Spanish fashion, collers, light and
short wasted cuirasses and backs, with sleeves of maile or cheined sleeves, or
with Brigandines and broad Swoords, etc. And the Archers on horseback says he
would be armed with a deep steel Scull, with a narrow brimbde hat, well
stuffed for the easines of his head, and either Iacks of maile according to
ancient But mean arming to defend the fiery shot.
manner, when they were called Loricati Sagittarii, or else light and easy
Brigandines, or at the least I let holed dublets very easy, and so forth.

The 11. Discourse.
NOw as concerning these Soldiers thus armed and weaponed as before is said, I
think with men of experience and judgment, both are but mean. As for both
the weapons, every man that has seen a Dear killed or shot, does understand
the full force of them.

And for the long bow, it stands in the like estimation that other Archers on
foot does: as for the armours, the best is the Brigandine, the which M. Ewry
does run against the Lord of Grange with a sharp Spear.
is but equal with a coat of plate of the best making, which M. Euers or Ewry
was armed with, when as the Lord of Grange called Kirkaudie a Scot, and the
said M. Ewry did run the one at the other, in a challenge by them made with
sharp Spears: but how fell out the same? even like to M. Ewry is run through
the body for want of good ar mour.
have been the death of that good and valiant Gentleman M. Ewrye, for Kirkaudy
ran him clean through the armor, as in at the breast and forth at the back,
through both: the^ to what purpose is that arming in that manner? For shot, all
men does know 3. Several noble men slain at one encounter with Pistol shot at
Saint quin tins in France.
that the like armours will not defend y^ force thereof, no not the Pistol
being the least of all the rest. For example, was not the Duke of Anieu, the
^icount of Tourain, the Lord of Chandeuoir, slain with Pistol shot, upon S.
Laurence day, near unto Saint quintins in Varmendoe, with many thousands of
mener persons? and likewise the Constable of France The Cun stable of France
slain with a Pistol before Paris.
Memorancie, was slain with a Pistol before Paris, who were better armed then
any Brigandine can be of, as by the Duke Anieu his armor, yet ready to be
showed in England, it may be witnessed. Why then should such mean armors be
allowed, with men* of understanding and knowledge? it were most fit that our
enemies were so armed: for if it would defend against any thing, it would serve
best against archers, whose force is like unto that manner of arming.

And now will I by Gods help show my simple Here is the authors manner of arming
opinion touching the arming of light horsemen, as Hargolets, Petronels, and
Pistolliers: the Hargolets or as they term them Hargoletters: which when I
served in France against Charles the 5. Hargolets and not Hargolettiers.
were called Hargolets, or being but one, Hargolet. These were taken into pay
in the time of the wars, for to be guides, for they were al those countrymen
whereas they were in Garrison, and notwithstanding that the other bands had
removed, yet these Hargolets remained for that they knew the passages and
streights, through all near adioining to them, and yet good lusty soldiers,
and would serve well. And in my opinion these soldiers last spoken of may be
armed all after one sort: as a good strong burganet, a collar with a pair of
good Cuirasses of the Pistol proof, and a pair of well arming Poldrands, one
Gantlet for the Bridle hand and no Uambraces: and the horse with a good strong
saddle, with strong furniture, with two rains to his Bridle whereof one should
be with a pretty strong chain of wier, and the head part also of the Bridle, for
being not cut in sunder with the blow of a sword: Then a good sword and a
dagger: for weapons, either 3. Sorts of horsemen armed all after one sort.
a Harquebuze with a snaphance, or a Spear and one Pistol, or else three
Pistols two in cases and one at his girdle, or at the hinder part of his
saddle: I do account the Harquebuze and the Petronels all as one, and these
should be for these kinds of Light horsemen.

And if that I were well and strongly mounted, and thought that I should at any
service encounter with footmen: I would have a placket to clap A Placket.
upon my breast of the like proof as aforesaid.

And as touching men at arms and Lances, The lance being broken the pistol
will give a deadly blow.
their manner of arming is common, except the Lance would have as some will a
Pistol of a mean length, that when as the Lance is broken and he entered
amongst his enemies, may yet therewith give a deadly blow: or having broken his
Lance, and shall yet be put to retire, it is good to defend himself from
being taken: as for example, the Reister who in retiring, wounded the late Duke
of Guise in the face, in the chase, or else he had been slain or taken: or if
a man should be in chase either following or retiring, for the better speed of
both, the Lance is a great hinderance to The lance a trouble in flying or
following, the pistol is not so.
the speed of the horse, where the Pistol is none: but either to the
defendant a preserver, or to the followers to move his adversary to yield,
and so stands the case in this respect.

The 12. discourse.
ANd now to the arming of footmen, I would wish within her Majesty's store, in
Corselets for footmen, over and besides all those common and private armors
placed in shires, to be 5000. of such good proof and shape, as no nation
should have better, with good and strong Burgonets, to arm close to a man's
head, not over high crested, a good collar and an easy, wide enough with
Cuirasse well brested, and not too flat, with good Taises broad above and
narrow downward, according to the shape of a Armors fit for men's bodies and not
for great hose as of late has been used.
man's body, and not for great hose as of late days have been used, fair
Poldrands with the turning joint, and Uambrases with Gantlets: for all these
5000. a good strong sword of a yard in blade, and no hilts but cross only, a
dagger of ten or twelve inches in blade and the like cross hilt: for weapons a
fair Pike well armed with cheeks a yard deep, of eighteen foot in length
and a Pistolet at his girdle.

All these armed pikes should be allowed twelve Armed pikes to have 12. pence
by day.
pence the day, who should be for the most part gentlemen, and those should
never be called upon, but upon some great occasion. For Halbards or Bills For
short weapons, meaner arming will serve.
meaner arming will serve, as burgonets, cuirats with Taises and Poldrands, and
no Uambrases, he shall the better have his arms at liberty to lay about him:
and to have swords and daggers as the armed pykes. I wish no Halbards into the
hands Halbards are not to be put in the hands of an ignorant person.
of any that has no skill to use the same, for it is a weapon that can abide
no blows, as the Bill will do, but yet in the hands of officers, and such as
has skill how to use the same, it is a very good weapon, but the same must be
handled delicately with the push only, and quickly drawn back: the cause
that the French officers do use them with such long staves and pykes, is to
encounter with the Lance-knights, who do use being Sargiants of foote-bandes,
to carry very good long swords or Slaugh swords.

But for our common country men, not used to Strong black bills for our plain
fellows to be well made.
handle a halbard as aforesaid: I would wish him to have a good strong black
Bill wide in the socket, to receive a strong Staff, the head thick in the
back, with a strong pyke in the back and point sharp edged: and thus much
touching these kinds of armed men, I think them in my opinion to be
sufficiently armed and weaponed for the service if occasion be offered. And not
withstanding that I have spoken some thing touching the Harquebuziers, how that
I wish them to be furnished: yet for that I am in hand with the same, I will
set down my opinion touching the fiery weapons.

The 13. Discourse.
THe Muskets are weapons of great force and effect, in all service on foot
whatsoever: they will help to great purpose. And whatsoever numbers be
furnished into the shires in England, I To have in her Majesty's store 5000.
Muskets.
would wish her Majesty's store to remain still furnished with 5000. of the
best Muskets that could be made, and rather of a little bigger bore then these
common Muskets that be sold in the country: and so being well proved and
tried to be sure, and not over churlish in recoyling, the which consists much
in making the vice in the breech, for when that is short, whereby any of the
powder does lie behind the tuch hole, then will they recoyle very much, but
being well made and also furnished, they will not.

I would wish that from among all the Captains To have the best trained for
their muskets.
in England, that there should be chosen forth of their numbers, the most apt
and able, both in strength and knowledge 5000. men, that by the said captains
could be chosen, and those being well chosen should be trained five days in
every month For training 54. days in one year.
in the year, saving December, January and February, to that end they
should be perfect in that weapon: and those should also be in the same pay, and
to the same effect, that the 5000. pykes should serve for.

And for Harquebuziers, I would wish 3000. of 3000. Harquebuziers to be trained
as the muskets.
those to be as well chosen, trained and furnished, as the Muskets are in their
kind. Now do we yet want 1500. Pistolliers, to be well mounted and furnished,
and as perfectly trained as the Harquebuziers or Musketeers, both how to use
their horses, as also their weapons. For as there be many Few can use both
Pistol and the horse well at one instant.
that can ride and use a horse well, so is there many that can shoot a
Pistol, and yet but few that can rightly use both together: for he that will
be a Pistollier, must use his horse to know it, whereby he do not fear
neither the crack nor the fire: and that done, he must learn to occupy his
bridle hand, his Pistol, and his spurs in due time and form, all at one
instant.

All these numbers do not yet amount unto These are but bulwarks, flanks, and
curteins to a battle.
15000. for these are but as it were Bulwarks, flanks, and curtains to an
army, and yet would these be to a better purpose than forty thousand not
trained, and the matter through this Realm Pikes, Halberds, Lances, and
Spears are made perfect in six days, better than fiery weapons are in 60.
days.
were no great charge. And as for the armed pikes and halberds, lances and
spears, are better to be made perfect in six days, than the fiery weapons
are in 60. days.

The 14. Discourse.
ANd now having spoken of such things as have come to my memory, the most part
whereof I have had the use off: I will by Gods help and the Touching devices
against such an army as Sir John Smith does speak of.
favor of authority, proceed a little further touching devices, and give my
opinion, as concerning the defense of the landing of such an army as sir John
Smith does speak off in the 10. 11. 12. and 13. leaf of his said discourse,
where he does say in this manner. viz.

NOw says he for answer unto some of these vnsoldierlike opinions, I say
that if any such as do hold that wonderful opinion of the effects of
Musketeers, how good Soldiers soever they think themselves, were at any
haven in England with five or six thousand of the best musketeers that they
ever saw of our English nation, without an army of horsemen and footmen of
other weapons to back them, I think they would work very small effect
against the enemies landing, although they had insconced themselves, etc.

I will omit to rehearse the whole set down by sir John Smith, but the
principal effects as thus, If they should see an army of thirty or forty
thousand men besides sea men, and such as should be left for the garding of the
ships, under some notable and sufficient General, enter into any capable haven
in England, with wind and weather fit for the purpose, with intention to
invade as God forbid: they should find themselves, etc.

For upon the discharging of the third Cannon (says he) all the longboates and
vessels of oars for the landing of men, do row with all fury toward the
land, A woonderful terrible noise of Drums and Trumpers.
with a wonderful terrible noise of trumpets and drums: Now if our such men
of war with their Musketeers, would give their vollies of Musket shot upon
these shipboates full of men, with intent to destroy great numbers of them,
being so thick and so many: they shall find, that discharging their musket
shot from the higher grounds down into the sea, which by the Italians are
called Botti di ficco, accounted of all other the most uncertain, etc. That
insomuch that in despite of this insconcing and musketeers, the enemies will
land and approach their indented Sconce, not with any cross trench gabyons nor
mounts, according to the order of approaching and battering of places, in form
fortified: but with other inventions gardable against musket shot, that
peradventure our such men of war are ignorant of, as also with musket shot,
etc. Insomuch that our such men of war (as he says) would not scarcely abide
the landing of the first boat full of soldiers, without abandoning both sconce
and shore unto the enemies.

Whereunto I say, that if any such foreign enemies The authors answer to the
objection.
should pretend to land here in England, as of late the Spaniards would have
done as it was thought, the which by Gods providence, and the endeavor of our
valiant Seamen were prevented, and dispersed to their loss and reproach.
Wherefore I am fully persuaded that if the like occasion should be offered,
although that they were more in number than is spoken of, with the most
sufficient General being but a man: that by the same grace and help
aforesaid, and with the supply of the five thousand Musketeers and
Harquebuziers, with 500. Pyoners, and twelve Fawcons and Fawconets, Pyoners.
to assist our Seamen, with such Gentlemen as would accompany the same, there
is no doubt but it would suffice to be such a bar against those enemies, that
they should not be able to touch our A mean to bar the landing of the
Spaniards.
shoares in England, and chiefly if it should so come to pass, as sir John
Smith does allege, that the banks were high above the Sea, it were so much the
worse for the enemies to assail the same five to one: as for example, the
banks being high as aforesaid, ye enemies must either have ladders to climb
forth of their tottering boats, or else some of their own friends or
fellows, to draw them up with pykes, the which I would think by all reason,
that our musketeers, harquebuziers and laborers with the black bill, should
right well serve their turn in that behalf, to their destruction and repulse.
For whereas the enemies must of necessity stand upright in their vessels of
oars at the full show, to their great annoiance, and also shall not be able
to give their vollies of shot, with any such certainty as shall our
musketeers, who shall lie close upon the shoares, with a small trench before
them, and shall need to show nothing but their heads and weapons above the
same, which trench may be made in half an hour, with the pioners aforesaid.

And again, if the haven be full, that the banks and water be in manner
equal, then may our field pieces with musketeers cleanse the haven, at the
very first vollie, being discreetly delivered, and in due time: that is first
the field pieces at 12. score yards, and the muskets at eight score, the
harquebuziers at four score, and so by these doings, every piece both great
and small, should have time to recharge before the enemies could touch the
shores: and to be ready again to give them their welcome to their faces.

But I do not believe, that the enemies would abide the second welcome being
thus used. And besides all this I doubt nothing less, but that her Majesty's
army by sea, will be as ready to attend upon them as aforetime they have done,
and with a greater desire to deal with them than at the first they had, by
reason of some wants, etc. And so being still beating at the buttocks of the
enemies, with the like advantage as before they did. So that our Seamen
keeping them occupied in their reregard, I doubt not but this number aforesaid
may with small loss stay their landing.

Now I fear nothing of this to be performed, Nothing to be feared in all this
but the uncertainty of the enemies landing.
but for the uncertainty of the place of their pretended landing: for otherwise
I had rather be one of the defendants upon the land, of the 5000. shot with the
assistance aforesaid, than to be one of 50000. to approach the shores: for some
must stay to defend their ships against our Navy, again some are so
Sea-sicke, that they are for a space Some are sea sick unfit to fight.
unfit to fight: and for the uncertain taking their level to shoot either
their Base or Musket, being upon the swelling water, and our defendants upon
the firm land, where they may shoot with the best advantage. There is great
difference in diverse respects, etc.

And again, whereas Sir John Smith does further allege, besides all which
before is alleged, saying, That if a puisante and mighty Enemy, that in the
time of Summer, intends the invasion of foreign Dominions by Sea, to the
intent to give battle and subdue, does not always bend himself to land his
army in a haven, but sometime upon an open coast and shore, if the Sea
without hidden rocks and flattes be deep, and the wind and weather fair,
having commodity by the deep of the sea to approach his Navy, and to cast
anchor in open rode near unto a commodious shore, to land and march upon, etc.
The which army says he, cannot be repulsed neither with insconsing of
sconces, nor yet with any well ordered fortification, but only with a great
and extraordinary wisdom, and with the valiant hands of a puisant army and a
camp formed.

Whereunto I say as before, if the certainty of their landing might be
known, it were no matter: for in my opinion they should be as well let upon
the open coast as in the haven. And let it fall out that the same should be at
a dead low water, and a mile distant from the shore, I would wish then that
the defendants should be advertised where the most meetest place for their
vessels were, for the landing of their men, and so soon as the first boats
should direct their course toward the land, I would put forth of my number
two hundred shot close to the low water mark, and there attend the approach
as near to offend them as could be, all as loose shot abroad upon the sands,
who with a little retiring in good 200. Shot put forth to skirmish whiles the
laborers do make the trench for the rest.
order should keep the enemies occupied, until such time as from the same
200. shot I would in one half hour, cast a trench in the Sands toward the
land, into which the rest of the shot should descend to back the two hundred
first, and with some of the laborers aforesaid, draw down the said
feelde-peeces, as by this figure may be seen.

Thus before the enemies could land two thousand All this would be don before
that the enemies could land 2000. men.
men, I would not doubt but all this would be performed, so that if I thought
good to break forth, before the Boats should return for more men: I would do
so, if not, I would plie the skirmish with some more fresh shot, and lie close
with the whole regiment, if the enemies were not above four thousand, unto
that they were 6000. or 8000. and then would I take the vantage of Time to
discharge the field pieces.
the wind from before the feelde pieces, so that so soon as the defendants
were so near, that their vollie of shot were delivered: even forthwith would
I discharge the feeld pieces right upon the enemies, and thereupon would I run
upon them with Halberds and Swords, and dispatch those against the rest should
come, or at the least put them to swimming. And thus using the matter, it
should move our Seamen to buckle the better with them, upon their great
Bulworks the Galliasses, the which may not start from their course, and this
being performed in this sort, I would not let if the enemies should land at
the first If the enemies should land ten thousand, this would serve.
ten thousand of their best men, (the which I think is as many as can well
land at one vault, for as I said before they will have some impediment by
sickness or other ways:) There is no doubt but these aforesaid defendants
cannot be without the company of some Gentelmen well mounted, who would not
forbear to put forewarde themselves and the rest, seeing so great A cart lode
of bills for the laborers. The enemies shall be terrified after an other manner
than with drums or trumpets.
opportunity as that would be: and the laborers having performed their
works would serve with a Carte load of Bills to some effect: in so much that
we should within two hours terrify them after an other manner then they
should do unto us with their Drums and Trumpets or their two Bases afore-ship
in their vessels of Oars.

The 15. Discourse.
ANd now to the insconcing, as it is termed of late by the Lowe-countrie men,
with many other such like, it is a very bad Sconce, that cannot The sconces
would not be kept above one day.
hold forth a piece of a day, for longer I would not wish the same to be
maintained, in this respect, but for the day of landing, and in the night to
leave the same, and to draw all to one force there to abide them upon grounds
of the best advantage, if our first attempt should not prevail, by not knowing
the place of the enemies landing, or other ways, for those Sconces are but to
defend Sconces are but for a time to be kept against the Cannon.
some straightes, or passages, where enemies might other ways come upon the
sudden, to do some exploite and so retire again: but against the Cannon or
such a force as is able to abide the feelde they are to small purpose: there
were the like betwixt us and the French Pale, near unto Arde in France, when
Callis was English, as Anderne bulwarcke, Jones bulwarcke, Boyts bulwarcke,
Harrowe bulwarcke, and Henowayes bulwarcke, apperteining to the Flemings near
Anderwike and Graueling.

But as concerning Fortifications to be rightly Fortification.
made, upon such situations as are by nature strong: is a thing most necessary
for the safety or defense of any kingdom, that can be possible, as by proof
sufficient it may be seen in the Low country or France. Some may allege
that it is dangerous for sundry causes: yet were it better to put it upon that
hazard than into the hands of a stranger.

And again, this Realm is so little a thing A rebel can not stand against
the prince in a little kingdom.
that a rebel can not stand against the Prince: as by examples a great many
it may be proved.

And for good Scituations, we have diverse in England, upon the coast most in
danger, that are very strong by nature, whereof I will name those the which I
do know. The first is Hartlepoole, Skarborough, Kingston upon Hull, Boston,
Linne, Portsmouth, and the Isle of Dogs near unto Greenwich, there is not
within my knowledge, any such parcel of ground in this Realm all things
considered, being well fortified, it were sufficient to snub the greedy desire
of the ambitious Spaniards, To snub the greedy desire of the Spaniard, and to
make them fight like sheep.
and to make them fight like sheep, whereas at Antwerpe they fought like
Lions: for no doubt a poor soldiers manner is to venture ten lives if it might
be, for gold and jewels before all other things whatsoever.

Now having roughly run over some part of the discourse of Sir John Smith
Knight, as concerning my opinion touching armor and weapons specially, and
with some other small matters, as the form of the said discourse has given me
occasion: and for the rest I have omitted, thinking this to be sufficient as
concerning the use of weapons, the which is the greatest and chief cause that
has moved me heereunto, seeing such great difference of opinions in the
beginning of this treatise is something touched, but not so The cause of
sickness has hindered his discourse.
largely as willingly I would have done, if my health would have permitted:
wherefore again I do right heartily wish, that al true English hearts and
minds, may with perfect love and courtesy join together and confer of these
causes of so great importance, friendly and as dutiful and natural subjects
best can devise, and rather to instruct each other, than any way to contend,
considering how much the same does concern the safety of our dear
Sovereign, Country, Commonwealth and our own estates: and let the end try
the troth of all parties, for howsoever we do flatter our selves or be
supported by friends, the end will justly try what the behavior has been,
either in virtue and valor, or in vice and vanities, etc.

The 16. discourse.
ANd now to remember some things touching Touching the discourse of sir Roger
Williams Knight, who does declare the manners of the Spanish wars.
the discourse of Sir Roger Williams Knight, who does for the most part of his
said discourse, make relation of the manner and use of the Spanish wars, as
touching the long continuance of their armies, and how they do divide the same,
and how they do divide their horsemen and footmen, the order of their marching
and besieging of holds, the manner of their assaulting of breaches, and his
opinion in the goodness of diverse sorts of horsemen and footmen, and their
armours and weapons: and the difference between the goodness of the one and the
other, wherein I find no new devise, either in government, or orders, but in
times past and before that ever these troubles did begin in the Low Countries,
the like has been used: saving the great numbers of Muskets, and one other
point of service, which is also set down by Sir Roger Williams Knight, and
that is whereas he says in the 38. page of his book in this manner.

That the captain or captains, says he, that charge either with troop or
troops, do not care whether the soldiers do break their lances or not, but to
enter resolutely and keep together, and that half of them should carry their
swoords and Pistols in their bridle hands, and rather than fail to quit their
lances, and use their swords and Pistols.

I am fully persuaded, that there is no furtherance in acquiting of any weapon,
but as I have declared in my 11. discourse fol. 22. of this Treatise, but that
every weapon may be in as great readiness in their accustomed places, as in both
their hands at once being of convenient length, for long swords are not to be
used with horsemen and footmen.

But as touching the good orders of incamping, marching, or battering, with
most excellent justice both in Town and Feeld: the Spaniards were never
comparable unto the French, at such time as the wars was continued betwixt
Charles the fifth, and Henry the second French king, the which did continue
from Anno 1551. unto the first year There were greater matters accomplished in
the wars between the Emperor Charles the 5. and Henry the 2. French king, than
in the wars between subjects and subjects, can be.
of the Queens Majesty's most happy reign that now is. In which time there
were greater armies, greater matters accomplished than these broiles betwixt
Subjects and Subjects, could be by any ways or means: for as common reason
may allow, Charles the 5. had as many friends as king Phillip ever had: again,
the French King had his whole Realm of France in such quietness and
replenished with such abundance of wealth, as the like was not in any one
kingdom in Christendom: besides, he had all Pidemount, and Sauoy, with the
Duchy of Lorayne and the Isle of Corceca, with so many Almaynes and Swissers,
as he would require: I have seen in one army 35000. Strangers in the French
Kings service, besides Frenchmen. And as touching Justice, I will here for
proof remember a matter committed by a Spaniard under the charge of Julian
Romero, done in the Town of Macklin, as Sir Roger Williams has set the same
down in his discourse in the 26. page, and thus he says,

That the Alfere of the said Julian Romero, being An evil example.
in love with a Gentlewoman, could not obtain her love: on a May day he and
his company armed, came unto her Fathers house: under the color of Maying,
took her away by force, her friends and kinsemen doing what they could to
save her: with the disorder of the Alfere and soldiers diverse were slain:
complaint being made, Justice could not be had, but persuasions to the friends
of the Gentlewoman, showing them what an offense it was to stir against a
flying Ensign of the king their lord, etc.

And now to show the like offense committed A good example.
and yet in my opinion not so hainons as that was, it fell out that at the time
that Callis was yielded to the Duke of Guize: one of the chief captains would
have taken away a merchants Daughter of the Town, but the Maiden being
unwilling, he sought means to force her: whereupon, the Maiden did cry with a
loud voice, insomuch that one of her friends told the Duke of the matter,
upon which advertisement, the duke straightwaies caused the said Captain to
be hanged for the example of others. This was Justice. At many other times I
have known the like Justice done, touching many other matters: and again,
there is used as Sir Roger Williams does set down in his discourse, in the 16.
page, as touching a Secretary of greater trust then either Duke or Prince, who
has diverse Blankes signed with the Kings hand, it would make some Governors
think much, having his large commission from the King, to be over awed with a
Secretary, etc. These two points are differing from my erperience, or else
nothing that I find set down by Sir Roger Williams but as before is set down,
though it be supposed by Sir Roger otherways: for whereas he speaks of some
Fortifications, and to prove a wette ditch stronger then a dry: it appears
also in the 49. page, that the counter scarffe of a hold, should be made of
Lyme and Stone, which I do think not to be the best course to fortify: for
all men that have seen the experience of the Cannon, will never fortify with
stone where the Cannon may batter. And again, he wishes mines to be made in
the same, for thus he says: It were not amiss although it has been never
seen before (says he) to have mines like vauts overthwart to the midst of the
counterscarffe, etc.

It is a common thing in the frontyre Towns These things are common in the
front towns in France.
in France, both in their Rampires and counter scarffes to have the like, the
which are casemats, and not the Flankers, for as there be Flankers, so be there
Casemats: and a Flanker is not a Casemat, nor a Casemat is not a Flanker, for a
Casemat may be made of timber, as of Plankes: this I speak of experience for
that I have been, and did serve in the most part of the Frontier Towns
betwixt Callis and the Duchy of Lorain. And did see diverse of the same
amended, in fortifieng against the force of the Cannon and mines. And also
after the conclusion of peace, betwixt King Phillip and Henry the second of
France, I by extraordinary cause was prisoner in France, and being newly
delivered forth of prison, and my horses and armor lost, of necessity I went
with one Captain Sturton, Captain of fifty myners to raze Towns fortified,
the which by composition of the peace was to be rased and laid open, wherein
I did see the secrets of diverse things, Strange matters not to be written but
first to be performed*
which I had, nor could never have known, but for the same rasing, the which
were very strange, whereof I will omit to write for two causes, etc.

Notwithstanding that Nicholas Machiauel have set forth his whole knowledge,
as touching fortification, and other sundry policies, the which if he had been
a soldier he would never have done. As in his book called the Art of war is to
be seen.

It is a sport to hear how he does by himself, fight a battle in words, and
says, that if he had been a soldier in his youth, he would either have won
the field with valor, or at the least have lost it without shame. Who did let
him to become a soldier in his youth?

And thus by alteration of times and the sundry opinions of men, diverse
matters do come in question, and especially with such as do least understand
the just trial of the thing it self, whereof Reasoning without knowledge.
they do reason: for as I have heard at many and sundry times, that such
Gentlemen and soldiers, the which have gotten their knowledge and experience of
service in the Low Countries and other places where civil wars have been, do
hold that opinion that the like discipline has not been seen neither in this
age, no nor at any time before, and thereupon do seem to disgrace some of good
calling, and more ancient than themselves and of greater experience in service,
than any that has been: but in these Low Countries service, or civil The
knowledge gotten in the wars between kings and emperors are more worthy than
civil wars, and more to be learned.
wars in France, can or may have as before is said by reason of greater armies,
of Princes whose subjects were both rich and loyal, upon both the parties, as
by many other examples I could prove but for breuities sake. And for any new
matters or inventions there is not any worthy of remembrance but the muskets
only, the which every good harquebuzier may use as well as his harquebuze,
presently. And therefore the third time, I wish that contentions and
comparisons to any evil end, may be left, and that love and unity may be
embraced. And with laudable and sound arguments, matters may be decided to the
best effect, that by age or youth can be devised. And so I cease touching the
discourse of Sir Roger Williams knight.

And now having set down my opinion as concerning Armours and weapons, and
partly the use thereof, so far as I think is requisite, considering that the
perfect knowledge thereof cannot be had but by exercising the same. And for the
better proof of my said opinions, I have made rehearsal of diverse parcels of
service, the which have come to my memory at this time, and yet for that I
would not seem tedious, I have left diverse things untouched both of my own
knowledge and of others, the which I do know to be true and to good effect.
Neither have I taken occasion herein to show wholly that I could in action
perform, if opportunity served: neither do I ever intend to publish the same
but by action.

And whereas some may peradventure imagine that I have written rather to set
forth my own vain glory, than for any other just cause herein contained:
for answer whereof I do herein protest, that the only cause which moved me
to write, is as before in the proheme of this Treatise I have declared, to give
my opinion as concerning the force and effect, difference and disabilitie of
weapons, as well the one as other, and the use thereof, whereof I could not
show my full intent, except I should make rehearsal partly of such matters as
I have in times of service had the experience of.

And notwithstanding that I have not set down things done in France or
Burgondie as they were performed one after another, wherein I have rather
regarded the effect of the matter, than observing of the time: yet can it not
be denied, but all the same is most true.

The 17. Discourse.
ANd for that I have read over the most part of the discourses of war lately
written by that famous Gentleman and worthy soldier Mounsier de la Now.
Notwithstanding that I am not worthy to carry his Halbard: yet I will show my
opinion touching his rare discourse, and of the setting his two Battelyons, To
march three French leagues over plain grounds with four thousand footmen,
maugre de 2000. Lances, it is of him excellently handled and especially in the
garding of the flanks of the said two battelyons, it is both new and good, the
like I did never see nor hear of before. And although a man may live in wars
threescore years, and not see any such thing come to pass, yet the device is
very good, nevertheless my opinion is that in two points he has not set
down the best course. The one is in the setting of his two Le Now does
mistake two points in his discourse.
Battelyons, and the other is in holding the soldiers pykes: but it is better
and easier to amend then to make.

Now as touching the form of his said Battelyons, I am of that mind, that
there is yet a better way, to form the said Battelyons with the same numbers
by him set down, and for example I have here set down the manner of his: and
how I would do the same, as by these figures may be seen.

The first is his, the second is mine, and let it be considered, which of our
flanks shall be more noisome unto these Launcers, when that they shall charge
the footmen, considering upon which side of the Horse the Lance does give his
blow, and withal remember the placing of his shot under the armed pykes and
within them also, now to Mounsier de la Now, his battalyons.

THE LORD DE LA NOW his Battalyons.
Behold if the front, B. may not be charged without the danger of any flank or
not, and to come forth at C. and so make room for the next troop to enter.

And so stands it with the front 1. and to come forth at the figure of 4. in
every point.

Some may say that being once entered, they may go through, but that is not the
way: for if the first troop can take away the corner betwixt 1. and 4. they
have done their full part, and the greatest, the next may enter without any
great danger.



And now ouerlooke the two Battles for some effect set down by the Author, who
is not to be adjudged by Scots, or our northern Spearmen, for then I should be
condemned, but by men at arms, or Launcers such as the Lord la Now does mean.
MArk if the front B. can any way be charged, and come forth at C. but to be
in danger of the front marked 2. Some will allege that the flank marked D. may
be charged and to come forth at B. whereunto I answer, that the flank marked
4. does succor the same, and so does the second battle in every point for the
first, and the first for the second.



COnsider that in charging, men must come in by right line, whereas at their
coming forth they are to wheel about for their best advantage, having
performed their part.

The 18. Discourse.
ANd now to the second point, as concerning the Soldiers in holding their
Pykes, the Lord de la Now does with that Soldiers should set their Pykes in
the ground, and to hold the same about the middle thereof, to receive the
brunt of the charge of Launcers: whereunto I answer, that it is very
dangerous for the armed Pykes to give the horseman that advantage, for as the
horsmans intent is to strike the footeman upon the breast or faces, so is it for
the footeman to direct his Pyke point, right upon the breast of the horse: now
if the Lance be longer before the breast of the horse then half the footmans
Pyke, then does the Pyke no service at all: for so soon as the Lance does hit
the footeman upon the breast or face, and the footmans Pyke not entered into the
horse, it must of necessity come to pass, that the Soldier giving back,
with the violence of the blow of the lance, must either let fall his Pyke, or
other ways be constrained to pull it up: so that the point of his Pyke shall
be above the horse, and thereby work no effect, but become unprofitable: I
would wish that such armed Pykes should be taught to hold their pykes rather
two parts of three before their hands, and to set them in the ground under his
right foot, and to hold them low right against the breast of the horse, and not
against the head of the horse, nor the breast of the man, for the horse having a
chieffront, and also the man well armed, the pyke can do no harm at all.

Some may allege and say, that if the horse be armed upon the front, he is
also armed upon the breast, but I say that there is ten to one armed more upon
the head, then upon the petron, and if it be that the horse were armed upon the
breast, it is nothing so strong as the chieffront is by half.

And notwithstanding that I have spoken of diverse incounters and overthrows,
given between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Henry the second French King:
yet have I left unremembered the most brave battle offered by the French King
unto the Emperor near unto Valentian, where the said King did cause all his
footmen to be divided into three battles, and so being aranged and reduced
into the form of battails, the Uauntgarde being led by the Duke of Vandosme
accompanied with the Count of Ringraue with his Almaines for the body of his
battle.

The King himself in the maine, being all French, the Front whereof was a
hundredth and fifty, ninety in flank besides shot, the form and manner
whereof was in other sort, then in Machiauell or Stuard, or any other Printed
battles as yet has been set forth and published.

Then was there in the Rearegard ten thousand Swisers, conducted by the
constable Memorance: the footmen were in number 35000. in horsemen 12000. in
pyoners 6000. with 30. pieces of great Ordinance: al which numbers being most
perfectly imbattailed in a plain field of three miles at the least in the
narrowest place without either hedge or ditch, wood or bushes.

And being thus placed with the caualrie upon their left hand, and upon the
right hand a strait or gill, and between both the armies a fair plain
ground: and thus being placed in the face of the enemies, the Canons
enterchangeably did go and come through both the armies, and yet no great
matters performed, by reason that the Emperors camp was entrenched with huge
and high trenches.

And the King seeing that the Emperor would not come forth of his enclosed
camp, caused his numbers to turn their faces, and to march toward his camp
again, after diverse skirmishes done by the light Horsemen, and after that the
Kings battles had marched a mile homewards, the Harquebuziers discharged
their pieces, one battle after another, in such sort, that with the gallant
soundes of the Trumpets and Drums being such, and the voice of the army
calling Battailie, Battailie, that if I should here make report what I heard
and did see, it would not with the most seem credible, therefore I will omit.

Some will imagine that the plot that I have herein made, wherein there is
placed the figure of twelve feelde pieces, that it is some skonce or forte, but
my meaning is, that the same might be as a trench cast with pioners for the
safety of the five thousand shot, the better to defend them from the danger of
the enemies artillery, the which might otherwise annoy them from their great
ships: and also to be near their enemies if any should land, as I trust never
any shall do to offend us.

I have good will to set down the manner of the kings battle above spoken of
in form as it was, the which I will omit for this time for some cause: it was
the only and most brave thing that ever I did see, although at diverse times I
have seen as many together and more, and whosoever did not see the same, I
dare avouch, that in this age within Europe, the like has not been seen of
any.

Diverse and sondrie opinions have been delivered about the burning of this
Treatise, whereby the Author has bidden the bitter censures of others only, to
his private friends, the truth thereof has been manifest, but now that it may
generally appear that there was no such matter contained in the same as was
supposed, nor other then by him set down of duty and love to his Country and
Sovereign, to confirm the which, he has at his own charges, caused the same
to be newly Reprinted, before which time, it pleased some of the best calling
to carry a more better opinion of the same, then by others is deemed, so that
now in conclusion he prays of the Marshallest, equal judgment, and of the
Learned, pardon.

Faults escaped.
Folio 2. line 6. read 40. fol. 5. line 32. read mine own knowledge. in diverse
places lieftenants, read leutenants. fol. 16. page 2. line 9. read
Harbebuziers or archers be most readiest.

FINIS.

