(...) Deaths proclamation
Lord gave a prescript precept and law to man, through the pronouncyng
whereof, our majesty was first ordained, even at that present moment, when he
spoke to Adam these words: Eating, thou shall eat of every free in the
garden, but as touching the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not
eat of it: else in what day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye the
death. etc. And thus being conceived, our majesty remained, not long unborn,
and brought forth, for the serpent our mother (having once deceued the woman,
and the woman her husband was forthwith delivered to us, leaving to us, as
of inheritance, a perpetual styng, to exanimate and devour the natural life
of all earthly things, and so we continued, but as yet imperfect the space of
two hundredth and twenty years, until wicked Kaym, compelled us to exercise
and ratify our first force, and virtue upon his just and innocente brother,
Abell, who through the violence of our deadely stroke, eftsoons, returned to
a clodde of earth, from which he descended not long before. And thus have we
declared brefly the sum of our highness petegrie.

Now concerning our inevitable might, and indignation, exercysed sythens,
upon each body living, it would require hundrethes of years, to be by us
particularly recited. But that you mortal men our subjects, might the
better know, how feeble your predecessors have been to resist our strength we
think it good, for our more honor, to remember a few examples, in the stead
of a number. And least, ye might auaunt your selves to be so much the nobler,
because your first parent, Adam, was created before us, we beginning at him
let you to wit, that even he also felt the intolerable point of this our
thunderbolte. And sense his days, neither the just, nor the unjust, the good
nor the badde, the rightous nor the vnrightous, the faithful nor the
vnfaithefull, the humble nor the proud, the meek nor the stubborn, the
mighty nor the weak: the stowt nor the timorous: the wise nor the foolyshe:
the wyll^ nor the simple: the high nor the sow, the great nor the small, the
fair nor the foul: the swyfte nor the slow, the healthy nor the sick.
The Emperor, nor his peer, the king nor his cou^selour: ye prince nor his
subject: the bishop nor his chaplain: the lord nor his yeomen: the nobility
nor the commons: The queen nor her maids: The lady nor her handmaydes: the
rich nor the poor, are, or ever were able to pluck their heddes out of our
universal yoke and collar. Neither man nor beast, fyshe nor foul, serpent or
woorme, or any thing else, possessynge the breathe of life, in this our worldely
kyngedome, but they have or shall taste the deadly and inevitable shot of this
our mighty dart, two only excepted, we mean Enoch and Elyas, who thorough the
Omnipotents protection, have escaped our hands, to our no small heaviness.
Hercules for all his might, nor Sampson, for all his strength, could make
against us no resistance. Hector the worthy, Cresus the rich, Cyrus the
politic, Annibal the laborous, nor ambicious Alexander the great, whom the
whole earth could not satisfy, were unable by any means to avoid from our
dint. Sara the sobre, Lucrece the chaste, Penelope the virtuous, Helene the
bewtiful, nor pleasant Lais, could move, persuade, or entice our severity,
to spare them any one hour longar, then we had determined. Our majesty
passes not on pleasures, we regard not richesse, we set not by jewels: we
esteem nothing preciouse: we fear not any thretnyngs, we move not for
manaces, we spare not for pytye: we relente not with mercy, we yield to no
overthrow: no dolor troubles us nor fact repents us: but as king over
all, we use our prerogative without controllment: although we confess the
same our prerogative was upon Ezechias for.xv. years by gods mercy
restrained, and his life prolonged. We are that dreadefull death, a prince of
such majesty and notable power, that at our pleasure we do reap and cut
down every creature, without any exception. We observe no time, no manners,
nor years, no laws, nor no rightes can with us bear sway: No region no
ylande, no nation, no people, neither Indes nor Arabies, nor yet thantipodies,
are free from our subjection. When it is our will and pleasure, our power
spares not the pope for his holiness, the Emperor for his majesty, the King
for his highness, the Prince for his auctority, the bishop for his clergy, the
maiestrates for their offices: the monks for their cloister: the priests, for
their Orders: the Judge for his justice: the lawyer for his pleadyng: the
catchpoll for his mace: the landlorde for his rentes, the merchaunte for his
richesse: the farmor for his goods: the grasier for his cattal: the poor for
their poverty: the master for his preeminence: the servant for his
diligence: the freeman for his liberty: nor the prisoner or captive for his
bonds anguishe or distres. Whosoever overcomes, who so ever vanquissheth:
who so ever ouerrunnethe: who so ever breaks down: whosoever destroys, who
so ever by fortune or manhod atchieueth to the high chair of honor, yet do
what he can, in the spite of his beard, we will have the last victory. The
young lusty gallant flourishyng in the best prime of his years healthy or
wealthy, substanciall and rich, beautyfull and amorous, flowyng in pleasures,
araied with natures lineamentes, and swymmynge in all earthly benedictions, we
can intumulate and incloase in a moment, within a filthy sepulcher, where his
dead carcas shall remain, to be devoured by woormes, and his soul
transported to an unknown place. No wall, no tower, no bullwarke, no dyche,
no door, no lock, no force, or fortress, no dungeon, deapth or defense,
can keep us out, but our majesty will use our inestymable power over al men,
in every place. Neither have we respect of nobility or ignobilitie, of youth,
or of age: but as soon take we the child, as the aged, the babe unborn, as
the ancient horehead: the strong as the impotent: for we do account our
highness, and so in deed we are lord wholly of the temporal world, deuouryng
all living creatures, like as our brother Time wastes and consumes in
process of years, all other earthly things. Our majesty smileth in our
co^ceite many times when we call to remembrance, what innumerable people, the
tyranny of kings, the crueltye of princes, the extremity of maiestrates, the
parcialitie of officers, with the rygour of the laws have sent here before,
and daily do send to our mansion, and dwelling place, yea every one yt either
wars or the sword does confound, fire consume, waters drown or ouerflowe,
famyne devour, sycknes exhaust, age take away, or time does bury: they al we
say, land at our haven, to us they come, one time or an other. We are that
only port, whereat, will they, or nyll they, they must ones make their
arrival. And of this thing, above al other our highness is most able to boste,
that our majesty sends al me^ thither, whe^s they never or seldom, make
their return, to tell any tales again. And that you our subjects may the
better understand, that we are no less, but a mighty and terrible prince, the
same does and may evidently appear by our servants and ministers, which ar
almost inexpugnable, as peryls and dangers, quarrels, malicious conspiracies,
battayles, murders, poisons, ruins sycknesses, edge-tooles, gunnes, gynnes,
snares, deceytes, and innumerable other such like, of all sorts, by the
which men do suffer either hurt perdition or other damage. What man is there
living under the sterres, that would not hartyly laugh if he were but a while
in our place or throne, to see both kings and maiestrates upon light
displeasures, or for small offenses, violently to force our cruel styng, to
take away the lives of their servants or subjects, wha^ as they them selves
cannot obtain at our hands, for their own lives, any sure patente for so
little time, as half an hours space: Yea and our majesty often times for
our pleasure, does not suffer them to live many minutes, after the bitter and
heavy death of their said sely underlings. And in this one point also, our
highness high preminence much surmounteth all the rest: that although our
fatal vigor is common over all men, yet the day and time of our coming and
approach is so uncertain, that every one except a few in number) as Moses,
Aaron, Ezechias, Symeon. etc. or ever they be aware of us, or yet do look for
our coming, are daily with our mace suddenly arested and entrapped. It is a
wonder to see how all people lead their life without any remembrance of our
majesty: and more meruayl to behold their greedy desire of worldly things:
From the fruition whereof, we take them utterly away or ever they can or have
thoroughly enjoyed any small part or portion of the same. Where the ambitious
does continually gape so for honor and promotion, as though they were
immortal, our majesty vntwineth the threde of his life in less tha^ the
twinalyng of an eye by reason whereof, forthwith his honor flees away, and
nothing there remains but a vile clod of donge and clay. Who sees not the
proud man, so despisyng al me^, as though he should shortly be exalted into the
third heavens, where we, in a moment, overthrow his great glory, send him to
Lucyfer, his great graund master, in the depth of the helles? Who notes not,
the lecherons and glutton, so pamperynge his bealye, and seeking to satisfye
his lusts, as though he were a cormorant insatiable: where we many times send
him sodaynely on message to our brother Pluto, to suffer woorthyly with him
most terrible pains. Ye see manyfestlye the rich and the covetous, so
scrapynge, and hoordynge, the worlds wicked mucke, as though they went
about, here to stablishe their dwelling endless: Where we in a sodeyne, leave
their dead carkases to worms: and yield over their sowles to be perpetually
tourmented with horrible deuyls. And for the most part, we do steal upon al
me^, at such unset steue^s or unware times, as we do apprehend some slepynge,
some drinking, some eating, some dancyng, some singyng, some weeping, some
sorowyng, some laughyng, some wowyng, some maryeng, some bargaynyng, some byeng,
some selling, some trauailyng, some resting, some rydyng, some saylyng, some
huntyng, some learning, sum teaching, sum defrawdynge, some polling,
some building, some ouerthrowynge, sum catchynge, some spendyng, some at
noone days, some at night, some in the morning, and some in the euenyng, and
some at mydnyght It is a world to behold, how ingrate our coming is to all
people, except it be to a very few: we mean such, as ar either overwhelmed
with great cares, sorrows, grievous torments and extreme pains, or else to
such as remain in execrable captivity, servitude, or bondage: To all other
sorts, we are as welcome as water into the ship. Lord what a revel and
disturbance we make, where as we come once in place. If our majesty take our
progress to the noble man maiestrate, or welthy rich man, tha^ may ye see
verified the saying of Syrake, which says: Oh Death how bitter is the
remembrance of thee, to a man that seeks rest and comfort in his substance and
riches? for he is so unprovided for our coming, what with the love of the
world, the love of his richesse, offices, and possessions, the love or
affection to his dear wife, children, howses, gardens, and pleasures: and what
with the heavy trouble and woorme of conscience: the bitter remembrance of his
former life euilly spent: the recompense and restoryng of evil gotten goods:
besides that his extreme fear, painful sickness, and anguysshe: that if the
most mercyfulle grace of the Father almyghtye, be not present, he takes
Despair for his chiefeste refuge: and in the time of this his passing,
(through our arrest) his wife cries out, his children weep, his servants
bewail, and his friends lamente: that there appears nothing but sorrow and
heaviness on every side. Further, his eyes by us once shut and cloased, there is
by and by no small adooe and ruffle in his house, his children will to law for
their patrimony, his executours for his goods, his wife for her portion and
dowry: the servants for their part, with such thunderynge threatenings,
cruel words and countenaunces one to an other each body pylferyng and
patching, scambling and snatching stealing and catchynge, as our hyghnes
believes that in our said Brother Plutos kingdom, there is not the like
tragedies. After like manner, when our majesty repayreth to the cotage of the
poor man or needye, forthwith he is no less vexed, calling to mind his
manifold and most heinous offenses, the doubtful place and unknown Judge,
whether and before whom he must presently go, to make answer for all his
crimes, curses, sins, and vnpaciencie, with other evil deeds by him
committed, in the time of his life. Besides this, to leave his poor wife, and
children fatherless, in penury and comfortless, is no small corsey to his
poor heart in that last hour: they lamentyng, cryeng, and most bitterly
cursyng our hyghnes for so bereauynge them of their chief and only defense
of poor living.

Thus where soever our majesty is, or abides, there is nothing else heard nor
seen but deep syghes, loud scrikyngs, woeful wringyng of hands, and heavy
salt tears: For we are named to be Lord of lamentation, king of all
sorrows, gouerner of miseries, and the ground of all kind of grievous
calamities, yea, what infelicitye is there with tongue, to be spoken or heart
to be thought, but our majesty sometimes put them in ure and exercise?

If our highness come ones to a conflict or battle, as we are never absent, we
do warant you, from any such, though there were a hundredth of them, in
sundry places, at one moment of time, the^ forthwith there may men see of all
sorts of miseries and mischiefs heaps and abundance. Some are sent to us
fightyng, some fleeyng, some assailynge, some yeldyng: some come to us
headless sum overthrown, some cloven to the teeth, some thrust through the
heart, some riuen in pieces by gunshot, some stricken down, some trodden under
foot, some gaspyng for breath: some most profoundly yellyng and gronyng. So
that by their most hydeous clamours, dolorous syghynges, and dredefull
showtes, it is right well known, seen, and perceived, and they thoroughly
feel, that our said highness is amongst them, as a blood thirstye god, to
receive the bloody sacrifices of their woeful lives. And thus from time to time,
has thinexplicable power and might of our majesty flourished sens the first
killyng of just Abell, hitherto, and shall so continue, until the utter
consummation of heaven and earth by fire. For these therefore and sundry other
considerations, it becomes all you our subjects, of force and necessity,
to fear our inestimable indignation and displesure.

Now also we will let you partly to understand with what sincerity we do
minister our justice: for seeing that true equity and justice consists in
equal indifferency to be distributed to al men alike without any favor or
respect, then dare and may our majesty boldly challenge, that there is none
iuster then we. For who can, or ever could reprove us of parcialitie, seeing
we execute our force as well against the prince as the abject, upon the rich,
as the poor, extinguishynge the life of each living creature, under one our
law, order or decree and first constitution. If gifts could have bribed us,
possessions have satisfied us, requests overcome us, or plesures have wo^ us,
then are we assured, we should shortly have proved the welthiest the rycheste
and the happyest under the son. But our highness never spared any that ever
remained within the compass of our domynion or jurisdiction, sense the worlds
first creation, hethervnto, No not that Innocente and mighty prince, JESUS,
the dear beeloued son and heir of our omnipotente Father: but even he
also felt and sustained the might of our violence, through the faithful
dyligence of Satan's trustye mynisters, the wicked Jews.

Thus have we partly advertised all you mortal creatures, our subjects, of ye
terror of our invincible puissance, and the righteous severity of our
Justice. And now shall we brefely signify unto you what innumerable
benefyttes all persons, of each estate condition and degree, do daily
receive by our authority. And first, for thobseruyng of order, we will begin
with you Emperors and Empresses, you Kings and Queen's, you princes and
princesses, and all such, superior maiestrates, being our chief and
principal subjects: If our power were not, we say, ye, of all other should
live in most cares and fearefulnes. For we of our cleme^cy, take away your
traitors, prostrate your enemies, rid you of your rebels, and extinguishe
your adversaries, restoryng your bodies to suertie, your realms to
tranquillity, your people to peace, and abundance of all things: where as if
the vigor of our majesty were not, they would abandon you from your sceptures
and diademes, bereave you of your estates: cast you into most grievous thraldom
and miseries. Also what gracious good tournes do all common welthes, and al
sorts of people sustein by our favorable frendshyp and magnifice^ce? Which way
could the landlorde enjoy his lands, rents and possessions: the merchant his
goods and his merchandise: the husbandeman his corn and his cattall: the
craftesman the profit of his faculty and science: the labourer his hyre or
his wages, if our power were not? What matrones vnrauished, what wives
undefiled, what maids and virgins vndefloured should there be throughout the
whole earth, if we were not a rightous reward to thoffenders: What wealthy men
spoiled, what good men wro^ged, what pooremen oppressed, what wicked men
exalted, what honest me^ abiected, what trauaylours murdered: what just men
betrayed, what officers killed and resysted should there be, if we were not a
terrible scourge to the wicked? What religion, what law what equity, what
faith, what justice, what truth, what innocence, what Chastytie, what wedlock,
what honesty, what Obedyence, should be found or seen in any place, if we
were not the goulf that swallowe all transgressors? Nay, what wrong, what
iniurye, what disobedience, what manslaughter, what theft, what treason, what
conspyracyes, what lyinge in wait, what bloudshede, what oppression, what
extorcion, what rape, what inceste, what fornication, what adultery, what
witchecraft, what sorceries, what heresies, blasphemies and most detestable
Iniquityes would abound and ouerflowe in every place, if our grace were not
the rooter out of malefactors.

No country, no realm, no city, no town, no village, no hamlet, nor any man's
habitation could stand or continue any time uncorrupted defaced, or utterly
destroyed, if it were not our pleasure to shorten the lives of evil and
wicked men, and to cut of the pernicious, unfruitful, and rotten members of
all inhabited regyons. Through the bountyfulle and beneuolente goodness of our
majesty, Religion is establyshed in his due honor and reverence: the
Governors obeyed in the mynistration of their laws: the godly are cheryshed:
the meke are supported: those that are virtuous are esteemed: the just are
preferred: the honest commended: and al public good ordres and statutes
conserved. Who can then deny, the premises duly wayed, but that our highness
invincible power is to all mortal men, a thing most necessary: as without the
which, the whole earth would in short time he so replenished with iniquity,
that even hell it self (as we think) would be the better of the twain.
Moreover, this inconvenience we coniect would have been, and come to pass, if
we had suffered all nations and people to have remained still on line, from the
beginning of the world, until this present day: that ten such earthes as
this is: would not have suffised to have fed and preserved them with necessary
sustenaunce. And now for the declaration of our sundry other benefits, who
sees not, how the nearer our majesty does approach to the faithefull, the
hartlier they do rejoice: and when we come, they embrace us cherefully: to
the poor and oppressed our presence is joyous: to the captive confortable: to
the tormented, happy: to the pacient in his extremity of sycknesse, wyshed
for: and to innumerable others very acceptable. And that our subject Job right
well knew, whenne he cried: Wherefore is the light given to him that is in
miserye, and life unto them that have heavy hearts, which long for death: and
though it come not, would dig it out of high places, which also would be
exceeding glad and rejoice, if they could find their grave any where. Yea and
our subject Syrak reports no less of our majesty, saying Oh Death, how
acceptable and good is your judgment unto the needful, and to him whose
strength fails, or that is now in his last age, or that is full of care or
fearefulnes, unto him also that is in despair, or that has no hope or
patience? Thus you see well how the coming of our hyghnes is grateful to an
infinite multitude. Furthermore, sens that now it evidently appears, the whole
world to be almost drowned in filthiness, and shamlesse manners, flowyng in
deceates, and surmountyng in oppression: where neither faith, piety, peace,
justice, rest, or quietness remains. Where most horrible crimes rule over
al: where the brother intends the bane of his brother: where the son often
thirsts till we fetch his father: where the woman often longs till we
strike her husband: where the man as much hungreth till we catch his wife:
wheremoste men scrapeth, coueteth and hourdeth: where each man speaks fair,
and woorketh the contrary: where chastity is contemned, and matrimony
polluted: where hunger, thyrste, sickness, impotencie, nedynes, nakedness,
poverty, imprisonment, and so many dangers and continual labors do assail
men on al sides: where all kind of miseries do so compass all manner of
creatures, that none or veraie few in number, in all their lives, can live one
whole day out of some vexation or trouble. Now what wise manne is there then
that setting apart al affections, and ryghtely ponderynge the manifold cares,
perils, grefes, and sorrows wherewith man's life is enuironned on every side,
does not worthelye judge our maiestyes coming, to be daily wisshed for: yea,
and those creatures to be three times blessed, that soonest aryueth at our sure
landing place. Such is the benevolence of our highness, that we fynyshe al
pains, we loose all bonds, we drive away fear, and exclude all doubts.
Yea, and like as men before (their concepti-and nativity) knew no lack, no
heuines, no penury, no oppression, no distress, unquietness or trouble: no
more shall the good feel any the like being once passed our narowe and strayte
passage. And as our majesty supposes in our conceit, who so has once
escaped the terror of our violence, he stands by and by safe on the shore,
and derydynge lawghyng at the folly of others his successors, which had rather
be still tombled and tossed with the stormy tempest is and horrible surges, in
the cruel and troublesome seas of worldly miseries, tha^ to prepare themselves
redily to pass through us into quietness. Thus have we sufficientely opened and
proved to all you our loving subjects, the force of our highness, the justice
of our majesty, and the beneuolent clemency of our gracious goodness, that
(regarding your most bounden duties of allegiance) ye might the rather in
consideration thereof, fear and obey us, worthily esteem us, and humblye
thank us.

FINALLY forasmuch as our majesty does well ponder and perceive our own
highness (in this latter age of the world) which draws fast to his
appointed end and consummation, to be well nere grown to the latter time of
our years: and consyderyng also that our might, force, and violence (by
reason of our short continuance hereafter, is now far more extreme to all
people, then it was at the beginning, when Adam, as ye read, lived.viii.
hundredth years. Noe.ix. hundredth and.xv. years, and Abraham Clxxv. years,
where as we do not suffer you our subjects now adays ye se, and most of
this time, to live passing fiftye or.lx. years, or at the uttermost respityng
very few till they may attain to the nu^bre of.lxx. or full.lxxx.

Further, for that we throughely perceive, that sens our first creation at the
fall of man, when he was banished out of that pleasant garden of Edom, there
was never age of all the six ages past, that ever did flow or abound in ail
kind of iniquitye and abomination, as this last age does, which waloweth
all together in sin and wickedness, and is grown to such mischief, that if it
should long endure, men would scant believe, there were either God, heaven, or
hell, after this mortal life: but that by our separation of the life from
the carkas, both body and soul were utterly extincte: yea and all hope of
resurrection frustrat. We therefore of our majesty's mere motion, special grace
and benevolence, wishyng the safegarde of all, and the destruction of none, if
it might be, do presently publish and declare unto you, and every of you, our
loving subjects, throughout our hole earthly dominions this our general
pleasure, precept, and last commandment (being the only ground, waightiest
cause, and pithyest matter, meant, intended and expressed in this our
Proclamation) that we in the name of our own Supreme majesty and highness,
do generally will and require you, and nevertheless in the behalf of the
father omnypotente, our eternal sovereign do straightly charge, and
command you, and every of you, of what sex, age, state, degree, or condition
soever ye be, or herafter shall be, immediatlye upon the recept, sight, hearing,
notice or publication of these presents all delays and excuses set aparte,
with as much conuenyente speed and dylygence as is possible, every one of you,
prepare your selves wyllyngely to leave this vain world, and to forgo the
vanities, inticementes, and deceaptefull pleasures of this frail and
transytorye lyte, making you redye and meet, to attend and wait on our
maiestyes person, where and whenne so ever ye shall by our auctorytye be
sodeinly summoned, cyted, or called: that at our unknown coming: ye may be
thoroughe our hyghenesse areste found glad, and priest to pass into an
other much better life, replenyshed with al stable joys and tranquyllytye.
Further, exhorting all you our loving subjects in the mean time, to fall
to repentance for your former evil lives, to cry hartelye to the almyghtye,
to grant you his mercy, to Sacryfyce to him your humble prayers, even from
the bottom of your sorye and contrite hearts: to obey his commandments:
to seek only his praise and honor in all your deeds: to relieve your poor
brethren with part of your goods: And to conclude, to live christianly, to
deal justly, and to pass your time vertuousely, that being once passed us,
ye may enter into the glorious kyngedome of God the Fathers dear son, and our
half brother, Jesus.

Fail ye not this to do, as ye entende, not only to avoid ours but also
his terrible indignation for dooynge the contrary, and also incur in the
latter dreadefulle day, the heavy bitter, and most woeful domynyon of our
cruelle Successoure, Death eternal.

Where, we assure you, remains nothing, but most horrible pains,
inexplicable torments, miserable sorrows, endless displeasure, ineffable
terror, and gnasshyng of teeth, with fire and brymstone perpetually bournynge,
and durable for ever.

Given at our majesty's invisible honor and pallaice imperial, Situate in the
Ayrie Region, the last day of June, in the year since our highness first
creation, according to the writing of the Hebrews, five thousand.v. hundred,
and eyghtene.

FINIS.
Here follows five precepts of pure and honest life.
First, To fear, praise, and honor Almighty God, the eternal Creatoure of
heaven and earth, and all things therein contained, with an humble and
faithful mind, that is not defiled or contaminated with fleshely lust,
worldly desires or wicked affections, is the chief and most principal point
of perfect virtue or unspotted life.

The next and second is, That a man warely take heed to his talk, speech,
or tongue: That he never speak either blasphemye of God, slander of his
neighbor, or any wicked lies, or untruth.

And for his better instruction, let manne have always these three times
appointed for communication in his remembrance: Not to speak but when a
question is asked of him, or when no necessity constrayneth him to demand a
question: or to inform or enstructe any parson in knowledge, virtue, or honest
manners to the parties edification, to whom he speaks. In these three only
prescribed times, Speech is better then silence: In all other times it is
better to hold a man's tongue then to speak, for silence is the handmayde to
wisdom and prudence.

The third rule or precept is, To be lowly and gentle of behavior and manners,
that is, To salute every man gladlye, to presume before none, to contemn or
despise no person (be their estate and condition never so mean, poor, or
simple)

And this rule is so profitable to ye society of man's life, that it will not
only procure, and continue a good name to him, who so uses it, but also to
bring to pass, that he shall have each man to be his friend, and none to be
his ennemy.

The fowerth rule to be learned is, To abandon and utterly eschew all bodylye
lust, vain pleasures, play, and ydlenes, the nourisher of vices. And to
forsee, that those battes and enticementes be with vigilancye wholly abiected
and repulsed. For who sees not in fleshely lust and delytes, three continual
euyls, that is to say, The exhaustynge or consumynge of the lively vygour and
powers, as well of the body, as of the mind: The hastenynge also of ryueled
age, with the shortnyng of man's life. And the heavy and most woeful bitinge
or gnawynge of that helly scorpion repentance. Now in pleasures and play what
is there followinge, but extreme folly, waste and loss of that precious
treasure Time, and in the end (for the most part) myserye, pouertye, and
despair.

And as for idleness, is not only of all these euylles above rehearsed, but
also of a thousand mischiefs more, the very patron, lady, and maystresse,
and the ready patheway to Pluto his infernal dwelling place.

The fyfthe rule or point to be learned, is, Daiely with dilygence and
attencion to apply thy self to some virtuous and godly exercise, that is to
say: Thou must addicte thy mind to the study and learning of some serious
and lawdable science,, or knowledge, which may either presently be a lantern
to thy life and behavior, or now and hereafter profitable to the mayntenance
and lawful honest augmentation of thy living and substance: lettynge no
day escape without dooyng sum beneficial exercise, that at the visitation
of syckenesse or age, thou be not oppressed with myserye and indigence, for
the lack of humayne necessaries, which will then ouerwhealme thee with
intolerable calamities.

Thus ends these five precepts of virtuous and honest life, wourthye to be
marked, and followed.
Perused and allowed according to the Queen's majesty's injunctions.

Henry Sutton dwelling in Pater noster row at the sign of the black Boy.
The.8. day of January. Anno. M.D.LXI.

printer's or publisher's device


