STRANGE NEWS of a prodigious Monster, borne in the Towneship of Adlington in
the Parish of Standish in the County of Lancaster, the 17. day of April last,
1613. Testified by the Reverend Divine Mr. W. LEIGH, Bachelor of Divinity, and
Preacher of Gods word at Standish aforesaid.



Printed by I.P. for S.M. and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard
at the Sign of the Ball. 1613.

STRANGE NEWS of a prodigious Monster, borne in the Towneship of Adlington, in
the Parish of Standish, in the County of LANCASTER.
MAN at the first losing of his Innocence, lost also his place, and contracted
a heavy curse both to himself, and to his posterity. The Earth it self
innocent of his crime was accursed for his sake, for whom it was created, and
brought forth thorns, briars, and stinking weeds, where before it was full of
pleasure, and delight, and so had continued, if man had continued in his first
creation: Now the Earth brought forth Monsters and ougly shapes, strange, and
full of terror: The heavens them selves changed the frame of their beauty,
putting forth fiery meteors, blazing comets, and other prodigious sights,
breeding wonder and amazement: Nature suffering violence by sin perverted her
order, producing strange birthes in preposterous shapes, and all grew out of
frame, and sin being the cause of all, brought forth the effects of all:
which serving as punishments betwixt the Justice of God, and the
unrighteousness of Man has nevertheless but corrected, not rectified Man,
that continuing in sin, finds the continuance of punishment, and yet with
obdurate heart, grows from bad to worse, getting by ^ustome an incorrigible
habit of sinning.

All Creatures but Man, have continued in the kind and nature of the first
Creation; The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and every Planet in his several
orb or Sphere, have continued their order to the glory of their Creator, ever
since the day of their first Creation. The fowls, beasts, and fishes in the
Air, Earth, and Sea, and every other insensible Creature have continued in
their kind, to the glory of their great Maker; Only Man, miserable Man,
wretched Man, whom God has made according to his own Image, and has endued
with reason and understanding, only he degenerates, committing sins,
heinous, and detestable in the sight of his Creator, which does many times so
incense the wrath of the most high God against us, that Air, Earth, and Sea,
do many times produce Monsters of ougly and most horrid shapes, to signify
unto us the ouglinesse of sin in the eyes of that pure essence. Never was the
world so wicked as it is now; for it thriues in ill, as it decays in Age. It
is the worst world (says an old Man) that ever was, and the best that ever
will be. No marvel if Nature grow out of kind in the procreation of children,
when men unnaturally go out of kind in the Acts of sinning. Forbidden sins
are most of all practiced, and sins committed that are not to be named: So
deep has Man's iniquity descended, that it has brought misshapen forms and
devises out of hell, and it has again soared so high, that it has brought
down vengeance from heaven.

This causes the Earth to bring forth prodigious Monsters, so far from the
fair frame of Nature, that they make Nature her self afraid to look upon
them, in whom she finds her laws and order to have been violated. Never
Country has brought forth more, then this of England, and that of late
years, which have been so prodigious, that they have brought horror to the
looker on, and have also proved certain predictions, foregoing many notable
events. The Sea cast forth and horrid Monster of a strange shape and bigness,
upon the Coast of Cornwall, in the beginning of that fatal year Eighty
Eight, when the Spanish fleet soon after frighted England with a dangerous
Invasion, even to the utter extirpation of the English name out of this Land,
had not Almighty God with his high hand of grace and glory made prevention,
returning the Spanish purposes upon them selves. The Island of Lecale in
Ireland within the County of Down, produced an hidious Monster, bearing the
shape both of a Man and a beast, whose eyes sparkling like fire, and his voice
sounding harsh and shrill, far from the common strain, gave certain
foresignifications of those troubles that the year following began to vex
both the kingdoms of England and Ireland, in that fearful yet memorable
war of Tyrone, that in few years after proved so fatal to both Nations,
that it brought wretchedness not only to the people then living, but has
also prepared misery for the Child yet unborn, as is too well known by the
miserable death and slaughter, not only of the common sort of people, but also
by the lamentable overthrows and slaughters of many great, and honorable
Personages, famous in blood and quality, that by that unlucky war, and other
fatal accidents depending thereupon, found utter ruin, and destruction, not
only to the incessant grief of their own particular families, and
dependancies, but also to the general loss and sorrow of all the English
Nation: which war, monstrous war, (for so I may call it) when the body
against the head, the subject against the Prince shall rebelliously conspire,
God never gave unto the world a more memorable example, either in what vnsurety
stands the state of any Name, or Nation, or what unhappy success follows such
unnatural attempts, or finally what end follows such bloody, and despiteous
cruelly, as both the head and principal members of that Irish faction, that
bloody, and horrid war, do at this day endure, as appears in the present
state, and condition of the Original of that monstrous war, bloody Tyrone
himself, and other his Associates, who having made by their Attaynders,
forfeitures, and confiscations both of lands and goods, do now wander up and
down Spain, Italy, and other Countries, poor, forsaken, wretched, miserable,
and hated of all the world.

There was another Monster produced in Antwerpe with four hands and Arms, two
heads, and two bodies, joined in one back, not much unlike to this Monster, we
are now to write of; and this happened in the year foregoing the beginning of
those troubles of the low Countries, which the matchless cruelty of Rome and
Spain, has plagued with unspeakable miseries. But above all, that hideous
monster bred in Russia not above five years since with three pair of hands,
foresignifying that miserable war that since has happened, betwixt the three
kingdoms, Russia (otherwise called Muscouia) Poland, and Swethland, under the
Reigns of Demetrius, Emperor of Russia, Sigismond King of Poland, and Charles
King of Swethland, the fame whereof will never dye, so long as the memory of
those kingdoms states endure.

It is credibly reported that near Lirpoole in Lancashire, about a
Tweluemoneth since a child was borne, both monstrous in shape, and strange in
accident; It is fresh in memory, though it lived not above three days. But I
stay too long in matters, though extrauagant yet not impertinent to our present
discourse, where I am to deliver as strange a producement of a prodigious
birth, as was ever known in this part of the world; and this happened but of
late, at a Town called Adlington in the Parish of Standish near Wigon in the
County of Lancaster; where there was a child borne of a strange and wonderful
shape, with four legs four Arms, two bellyes, proportionably joined to one
back, one head two faces, like double faced Ianus, the one before, the other
behind, four eyes, and two noses. It behoues us to look about, when such
examples beyond the order of Nature are brought forth to put us in mind of our
iniquities, especially the sins of Adultery and fornication, which are ever
justly punished by the righteous law and justice of God, even upon the
Childrens children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him,
who also shows mercy unto thousands, in them that love him, and keep his
commandments, which is well proved in the grace, and blessing that Almighty
God secretly infundeth in right generation, the contrary whereof is known in
the curse that he denounces against Bastardy, which the Prophet vtters in
these words, Spuria vitulamina non agent radices altas. Bastard slippes shall
never take deep root: which was shown in the example of this Monster, the
father and mother whereof were both branded, she with the mark of Basterdy,
and from her Parents crimes in Adultery, endured this punishment: he of very
lewd carriage and conditions: neither was this monster borne in the night
time, but toward the day, when the morning Sun began to glad the earth
with his brightness, to this end, that the black mantle of the night should
not cover this child of darkness, but that the day might plainly discover
to all eyes this wonderful example of his Justice.

Certain Gentlemen, and many of the common people, that were then at Cockepit,
when the news came of this prodigious birth, left their sports and went to
behold it with wonder and amazement. Many people came flocking from all places
thereunto adjoining, who beheld it with astonishment. The most impious of all
could not but confess, that it was a notable example of Gods fearful wrath,
which God for his mercy sake turn from us. This happened a little before
Easter Term last upon relation of some of the Inhabitants there, Master
William Leigh Bachelour of Divinity, a very worthy and Reverend gentleman,
Preacher of the Parish of Standish aforesaid, being also an eye witness of the
same.

Thus have you a true relation of this prodigious birth, testified by the
general report, (besides the particular mentions) of that Country. The
consideration whereof I leave to the godly disposed, whether as a punishment of
sins and offenses past, or as a true foresignification of some notable event
to follow in succeeding times, or both; Only thus much, when Nature is thus
violated through the Corruption, there commonly fall out many strange and
unheard of actions, either for the time present, or to come, such as has
amazed the world to look upon, as in that memorable and ever to be adored
Passion of our Savior, where after his bloody sufferings in his body, and the
heavy expiration of his Soul, the veil of the Temple rent in sunder from the
top to the bottom, the Sun without any natural cause lost his light, and
there was a sudden darkness over all the Land, the graves opened and
rendered forth their dead, who appeared in the holy City unto many. In the same
day and year the Panthaeon in Rome, which was the Temple of the Roman Gods,
sodaynely fell, and one cried out in a Prophetical manner, that either the
frame of the world was at that time to be broken, or the God of Nature suffered
violence.

Let us once more cast back our eyes upon the wounders of this misshapen
monster (the cause of this Treatise) the report whereof not giving full
satisfaction to some people that were incredulous of it, unless they might be
made also eye witnesses of such an unheard of accident: the grave was opened
again wherein it had been buried, and the body laid to the view of a great
number of beholders: which were at the least five hundredth, that not only
bear a bare report, but can also give true Testimony of this occurrent to
their much wonder, and admiration.

Yet these monstrous and prodigious birthes as well of other Countries as our
own, are not great^y to be marvelled at, if we look but only into the causes
of them, which for the most part are our sins, and careless negligences: And
they are not slightly to be accounted off, because they seldom fall out alone,
without some other strange event, but are ominous foregoers of some worse evils
to follow. The Circle of misery which has for many years been drawn about us,
is large, the lines of it are not yet closed, the perfect content thereof
cannot be ful^y known, till it please that hand (that first molded the globe
of the world, and which sets down in numbers, and proportion, the state of
kingdoms) to throw away the rod, that it has so long held over us, to
correct, nay rather to draw blood of us. Yet all these work not in us the
effects of our amendment, but that we still wallow in the mire of our wonted
wickedness. The four Elements of Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, have severally
commenced their wars against us: Air has breathed forth pestiferous fumes
to choke us, she has burst open the Clouds of Infection, and has powered
sickness upon our heads. Water (like Egyptian Grasshoppers) has often covered
our Cornefields, and eaten up the fruits of the Earth; whilst the Earth by
that misery has closed up her womb, nothing being promised by her (that has
always been so plentiful to her Children) but barrenness. Fire has also
had his several days of triumph to increase in us our sorrows, and to show
unto us Gods wrath and displeasure against us for our iniquities. So that all
that is above us, and all that is under our feet, have conspired to work our
overthrow, or to cause our amendment. Those Creatures, which in the first, and
great Parliament of our Creation, were appointed to be our Comforters, have
been many times sent forth and armed with Celestial weapons to be our
destroyers.

Besides these inflictions, which Time (occasioning men's sorrows and great
losses) has brought forth, there have been also many misfortunes in the
prodigious portraytures of the like misshapen Creatures: which who can behold
without trembling? or if he behold, not shed tears in abundance to think
upon Gods heavy indignation against us? The causes of his just quarrel with
us, are writ upon every man's forehead, the defiance is in our lips, the
maintenance of it in our hearts, the end of it (unless we suddenly repent, and
amend,) will be dangerous wounds in our souls.

There is yet a means to be made for reconciliation, the first borne of the
great King of heaven and earth, goes between his father and us as mediator to
work our peace and atonement: It may easily be brought to pass and take
effect, if we would but utterly shake of a bad and base company of ugly and
detestable sins, that hang upon every one of us: If we do not, let us be
well assured, that these fatherly menaces, will be turned into causes of
greater mournings, and these friendly chastisments and beatings, will be
changed into blows not to be endured, to the taking away of our lives for ever.

The Earth that has yet but begun to shrink up her nerves, and to hide a
handful of her blessings, will open her veins to swallow up the memory of
them. The water that has gone about but to drown a few, will be instrument of
general shipwrackes. The Air will in surphureous flakes drop down all on
fire, and that Fire bring the world to a consumption not to be restored. Yea
and these Monstrous birthes which as yet the Earth contains in her womb,
shall at length be delivered by her, and produced as witnesses against us of
our hardness of heart, and obduracy, and of our careless negligence and
slacknesse of amendment. The Nature therefore of the disease being known, and
the Physical remedy heard, be Councelled, take what is ministered (so long as
you find it wholesome) and grow strong both to your body, and your souls
comfort.

FINIS.


IN Hassia Germaniae haud ignobili ac Euangelica doctrina potissimu^ nobilitata
prouincia, Vui tzenhausiae tertio post festum trium Regu^ die, infans masculus
biceps, collo duplici, duobus capitibus, ac corpore optime cu^ reliquis membris
compacto natus est.


