Errata sic corrige.
Page 10. lin. penult. lege Incurrat. page 12. lin. 4. defit. p. 16. l. 12.
Legeruntne. p. 19. l. 3. quae. p. 37. l. 4. jure. p. 32. l. 8. nulla. p. 37.
vlt filij. p. 39. l. 2. necquicquam.

The Spiritual Spring.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS, Where (...) declared the necessity of growing in
GRACE, and the goodly gain that comes thereby, etc.

By RICHARD LEE, Preacher of the word of God at Woluerhampton in STAFFORDSHIRE.

Cant. ^.16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden,
that the spices thereof may flow out: Let my beloved come into his Garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for SAMVEL MAN, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Swan, 1625.

To the Worshipful, and his loving friend, the Gentlemen of London,
Benefactors to the Preaching of the word of God, at Woluerhampton.
WHen I was first importuned to commit these my weak labors to a more
general view: I stood in the balance, whether way to take: On the one side, I
saw the world was full enough of Books: and what good would my spoonful do in
the Sea? and how unfit it were that my self, the least of littles, should
deliver knowledge to posterity, and that this wayward age, was so ill-disposed,
that it could not abide vngues in vlcere, we should scratch in the sore; as
also the clowdie style, and stumbling phrase I had writ it in, not dreaming the
world should look on it. Furthermore, I perceived on the other hand, that my
scarce discerned spark, gave a true light; and why may not some gain a little?

I have read of night-trauellers, that have been refreshed by the shine of
Glow-wormes? We are borne in a time, wherein people love new varieties in
apparel, diet, houses, yea, friends: why may not some see this, and be better
for it? It is an ill wind blows no man profit; If but one gain, and that a
little, I have enough. A sick or weak stomach, that at a table leaves
dainties, and feeds of some course dish, the Cook will not repent he sent it
in.

Being moved by these things, I thought I could not do better then to send it
to your hands (although most of you heard it Preached) to express my
thankfulness for that love and liberality I have received from many of you: and
now I am glad, God has given me this opportunity to lay open to wide report,
that worthy work you have done amongst us. There is a cursed crying; Sin
reigns in this age without control, I mean the taking away of Church-rites,
H^^ 18. in. Act.
called by Chrysostom, the dowry of the Bride; robbing of God the Father, and
the Church the Mother: Hence it is, that many brave wits turn to study Law, or
Physic, or follow some other callings, letting pass sacred Divinity, the
Mistress of sciences; and those that have taken on them that worthy function,
yet want of means, has brought want of books and other necessaries; so that
many stuff their heads with ears in stead of learning; mean while the
Gospel droopes, Gods vine-tree spreads not, Popery holds his ground, and
duskie ignorance as a thick mist remains vndispeld in many corners of this
Kingdom, for want of sunbeams. But the more we beat on this point, the
harder men's hearts are; like the Catadupes, that are deaf by the fall of
Nilus. Now blessed be God, who has so mightily wrought in you, to stir you
up to be instruments, to spread heavens sunshine, to those that sit in
darkness; and have sent laborers into others vineyards, and paid them with
your own penny. Happy be the Angel that called on you, to send help into
our Macedonia: I mean, to establish the preaching of Gods word in that place
where I now dwell. I never knew any part of this kingdom, where Romes shakie
brood roosted and rested themselves more warmer and safer, and with greater
countenance, then in our country. But I make no question, it is begun already
that as the day breaks, and the shadows fly away, those owls will betake
themseles to Iuie trees, and no longer dominere over the childish in experience
of many people. Go on worthy Gentlemen with such works, they shall be your
(...) and crown. The Lord stir up your hearts more and more, and grant that
others may glass themselves by you, and through your example, tread this holy
maze. And so I rest, committing my faint endeauours into your hands, desiring
your favorable acceptance, and wonted love. I shall remain

Yours ever obliged, Richard Lee.
Woluerhampton October. 16. 1624.
The Spiritual SPRING.
2 PETER 3. Verse the last. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen:
THe words in hand are a sovereign remedy against the deadly poison of
Apostacy. The Apostle tells us a little before, that in these last and worst
times, many il-aduised men shall cast unsavory scorns in the face of
Christian profession, which shall cause many to faint in their journey to
heaven. A help against cold, is heat, against poverty, is thriftinesse;
against going backward, is pressing forward. We have here pre^enting-Physicke
against relapses, and rather do water and manure Grace, then sow it. We urge
not planting, but prospering; rather food to nourish, then seed to beget.
Here is a single act, with a double object, A charge given, expressing the
matter, Grow, the subject, in Grace and Knowledge; and so shuts up the Epistle
with a Doxologie at the foot of it.

To Grow, is taken either continue, to augment those graces we have: or
Discrete, to add new to our store, as the same Apostle has it, Chap. 5. add
to your faith virtue, etc. Grace is taken either for Gods favor in himself,
Ephesians. 1.5.6. this is that which makes us acceptable before him; Or for the gift
of grace, Romans 1.5. In God as in the Fountain, (...). Jg^i^ and Jgnita
enallag^ ^^^^ri
in us as in the Cisterne; he is the light, we are as John was, a burning
lamp, enlightened from that light. Grace, one for more, Grace, for Graces. Or
rather it is, vox artis, where grace signifies more than graces, causa then
causa; as in the Scripture, Si Christum discis.
man is a larger word then men, Knowledge of Jesus Christ, by a S^n^chdoche, to
know and believe in him. This i^ the fountain and head of all Religion, the
end and perfection of the Law and Gospel, Ioh. 17.3. Grace is set before
knowledge, because a graceless knowing is a fruitless knowing.

Growth here then must be an active motion, or opperation of graces of Gods
spirit in us, whereby they increase either by apposition or extension.

Doct. -- Haec nostro signabitur area curru.
You see now which way the words look, and what smell the flowers bound-vp will
send forth. The quintessentiall doctrine, or maine path, I must beat, is, that
we must not only be careful to have graces, but to increase in those when
they are begun. God would have us good Proficien^^ in his school, and to
thrive under his hand, to mend our pace in our Christian journey, to build upon
the foundation already laid. Gods camp admits of no dwarfes, his flourishing
pastures of no stooklings, his family of no vnchrists. It is that with Grace as
with Nature, in growth (...) makes to be at a stand, and old age makes to
decay; but good men, Psalm 84.7. they go from strength to strength. The
Prophet alludes to the growing of a child, which as it multiplies in years,
waxes stronger, Pro^. 4.18. The just shines more and more unto the perfect
day. As in the ^reake of day, we have a scarce-discerned light, after a while,
the morning shows her white limb through nights black curtains, and so by
degrees wins the field of darkness, and comes (...), yea to a golden splendour:
In the like manner says the Wise man, does graces luster creep on to
perfection in Gods servants. David compares a Christians goodness to the
springtime, Psalm 92.14 when all but rotten trees bud and blossom. In the
Gospel our Savior reprehends the sloathfull servant that puts not forth his
^^^ent. Math. 25. Math. 13.
Again, he compares Grace unto a g^aine of Mustard seed, which is a very
little seed, yet in some Countries is of so great a stalk, that birds may
build their neasts in it. In Syria says ^ai^tan.
Thus you see God stands for it, how holy Writ bla^eth on it with sprinkling
brightness.

Reason.
Now Reason shall stand up like an armed m^n to defend i^: Let us briefly then
consider, his, the Necessity; secondly, the (...), thirdly, the danger of not
growing.

First, Necessity pleads for it, because; first, we have no set pitch in this
life, we must rest when we are dead, here is our nonage, when we are at full
age, to our inheritance we go: This life is our springtime, when we are ripe,
God reapes us into his barn: We are here as young Plants in a Nurserie, when
we are grown up, God will transplant us.

2 We went on a pace in evil, in our vnregeneracie, when we served the
devil: have not we more reason to run faster now, having a better Master, a
credibler service, and greater wages?

3 All will be little enough in times of trial: Desertions, temptations,
sicknesses, crosses, and death, will look us in the face. The wings of our
hope will be cut off, find our prayers will have their moultring time; we
shall fight then against our selves like giants: we gleane but happiness now,
we shall mow misery then; store will be no sore, but a supersedeas in all our
trials, let us barrel up plenty of grace, and feather our neasts, and prepare
oil in our lamps against that time.

Secondly, see the benefits that accrue by our growing.

1 God shall have much glory, Ioh. 15.8. Herein (...) Father glorified, that ye
bears much fruit.

2 Themselves shall have much benefit by it; Luke 8.1^.
they that sow much, shall reap much; to increase in grace, is to furnish our
selves with faith against trials, with joy in miseries, strength on thy
deathbed, ability to pray, and the like: for he that doubled his five talents,
was made Ruler over many things, Matthew. 25.21. His that sows liberally, 2
Cor. 9.^.
shall reap liberally.

3 Others gain by our wealth and gleane at our harvest; We shall by our good
instruction and examples set feathers to other folks arrows; when our herbs
are grown, we shall fraught our neighbors gardens; our light shall enlighten
them, our lives shall shame them, and set Conscience on working; for the fuller
the Fountain is, the bigger the stream will be.

Thirdly, the danger of not growing.

Minime vero bonus est, qui melior non vult fieri. Ber. ep. 91. Qui melior esse
non cupit nec est bonus.
1 Such have no grace at all, only gilded outsides. That seed which grows
not, is rotten under the clods: He was never good that mends not: The goodness
of the ground is known by the crop.

2 Painted corn ripens not: these disgrace the means God has given them, as
the Word and Sacraments; a leane-fac'd servant disparageth his Masters
housekeeping.

3 The curse of God lights on them. We say if our children, corn, cattle, or
grass, prosper not, that they are bewitched: What? a good Farm and thrive
not? surely Gods blessing is not there. It is a heavy judgment on the enemies
of the Church, to be as the grass upon the house tops, which withers before
it grow up, Psalm. 129.6.

Non progredi est regredi.
4 Not to go forward, is going backward; we cannot stand at a stay, either
ascend or descend; coldness lets in custom, and custom causes defending of
sin.

Zeph. 1.12.
but a bankrupt abides not the counting-booke. You have heard the fitness of
this duty, let something be said as a Iacobs-staffe to take the height of your
graces. I purpose by Gods assistance, first to spread a plaster, then to apply
it, first to draw, then to shoot. A little to discover the marks of growing,
and then to lay my finger where it smarts. To deliver somewhat as I may say in
complexo altogether; Know this, that growing children are hungry, they eat
much and often; he waxes but slowly that pants not after the word of God,
the bread of life. Furthermore, note, that as the Philosopher says; Arist. de
ortu and interit. c. 5.
Augmentation keeps the same species, when knowledge turns into idle
disputes, and believing becomes presuming, and a tender conscience falls to
vain scruples, as we see in our bedlam Anabaptists, and fantastical
Brownists, whose doctrine is critical, and their conuersations hypocritical;
here is not Augmentation, but Mutation, not cherishing, but changing. A true
grower adds daily some cubit to his stature, and in holding the truth, he
believes the Philosophers proverb, That he can never offend in the excess.
Again, Philosophy says, Circa quali^ates bonas nemo peccat in excessis.
there must be ^n apt proportion in augmentation: It is unseemly and monstrous
in nature, for a child to grow in arms only, and not in the legs, or in
legs and arms, but not in body; so to have more knowledge, and less humility,
to thrive in joy, and be ^^d^-bound and hand-bound in good works, is neither
kindly nor comfortable. We are to put forward the slowest growing grace. In a
word, some tokens that we are of a larger size, are more accidental: as, it
is a thousand to one but our selves or others, or both our selves and others,
will see^s ^aller then we were, and our ouer^^^pping of those euil^, that were
before too high for us: So also growers shall have ^^yals, the best scholars
are most posed the highest trees subject it to winds, the devil and his
agents a^^ault the richest b^^ties. The hotter the day the ^uster the ^yes; the
more gracious, the more opposed and less esteemed of the world. Good men are
like a Pyramid, the nearer heaven, the less in man's eye.

But we may yet sift this point more narrower, and proceed (...) step by step.
Try how thou are bettered in four things.

First, In Mortification, does thy blood ^^^e more to see iniquity

Secondly, In Vi^ification, have thou more spiritual iournies

Thirdly, how is it with thee in holy duties? Do thou more (...) him, and
resoluest the Minister shall plow, no more on the sands, nor sow on the waters,
but let him shoot and hit the white. But principally the stronger Christian,
the mightier in Prayer. Lovers love meetings, and the nearer marriage, the
oftener they meet; for in this sense the proverb is true, After building comes
begging.

to be a light to them that sit in darkness.

Antipodes, opposite to this doctrine, are first, such as grow not; secondly,
or grow but in general graces; thirdly, or such as fall back. It blots with
blame, yea, bitterly bites Non profici^^^s. Many are as ignorant, as sinful,
as dull, as fruitless, as twenty years ago; they go round as a horse in a
mill; they go to the Church, to the Sacraments, to family-prayers, ^^nne up
and down as Ants in a Molehill and do nothing, and yet think they have
Religion enough, Quomodo proficis si tibi iam sufficis. Ber. de consid. l. 2.
Such are frozen on their dr^gs, twice dead and plucked up by the roots. Nay,
we have another generation of people that envy the growing man. If any be like
Saul among the people, higher by the head and shoulders in matters of Religion,
he is hated; as loytering servants do their fellows that out-worke them.
Dealing with his neighbors, as a Gardner with his hedge, if any part of it
out-sprout the rest, he clips it down. As Esops Fox having lost his tail,
would persuade all other Foxes to cut off their tails. Act. 13.10.
Paul tells us that an hinderer is the child of the devil. As for those silly
ones that are ouer-learning and never (...) come to the knowledge of the truth,
2 Timothy 3.6.7.
but thinks he should be as Pegasus, have a golden bridle to stop his posthast
to God: These are as the proverb is; Grecisemper pueri; says an Egyptian,
apud Plat. in Time^.
Always children. Boys and Trewants must be whipped. Ambrose elegantly observes
in Luke 21. the danger of a suckling, the joy to have it weined, and so grow
up. Abraham says he feasted when Isaac was weined, In ceruitu impij
ambiulant. Eras. coloqui de naufrag.
but the child that was not weined was ouerlaid by the mother. Thou art a
wicked man. Circular motion is the motion of the heavens, but not the
heauenliest motion, nor the perfectest. Fruitless dead trees must be plucked
up. God may very well give thee up to hardness of heart, and say as once a
Captain did to one of his watch, finding him a sleep, he flew him, saying,
Dead I found thee, and dead I Will leave thee; for being dead spiritually, God may
justly damn thee eternally. And standing so worse thou may be, better thou
can not be: The lying stone gathers moss, the standing poole mudde. The bird
mounting upon wing, is out of fear, but sitting on the ground is in danger
both of snare and Fowlet.

This Atheist may stand in his own light, and spurn against our truth with
this poor objection; That grace is a simple essence, and not natural, and so
not capable of growing.

Answ. It is true that a simple essence grows not in God the fountain, or as
I may say in the abstract, but secondarily in us it may be further revealed,
and plentifully bestowed. There is a spiritual growing, as well as a natural.

Secondly, Others stop the mouth of Conscience, with this, that they know more
then they did, and can talk more of Religion then they had wont, and have more
dexterity in prayer, and the like. Such must know that there are some general
gifts of grace which God bestows on unregenerate men as such as these are I
have named. There is saving graces, as mortification, godly sorrow, humility,
and the like; if thou mendst in these last kinds thou art happy indeed, but
if thou growest only in such graces, as Judas, Achit^phel, or such hypocrites
may have, thy show is more worth then thy substance: As a Cynamon tree, thy
bark is more worth then thy body. Thy flourishing is but as a quagmire grown
over with green grass. Psalm. 129.6.
Thy growing cannot last, but as grass on the house top, to wither before it
grow up. A tree cut up by the roots, may sprout forth leaves for a while: A
man after he is dead for a time his nails and hair may grow.

As for the former, they are but as a dog in a wheel; the melancholy Stoikes
went beyond them: and these of the latter sort; it may be evil, is at a stand
in them, through education or want of occasion; as fire may want fuel; but not
one sin yet has his fatal blow as Goliath had, nor so much as a Bucke that
has his deaths wound, though he be not yet hunted down. I say in all thy
flourishing shows thou deceiuest thy brethren with shadows, and thy self
with sin.

Thirdly, But this is not all, we have a disease called a consumption, wherein
men grow, I confess, but worse. We have Towns, Rome.
Cities, Kingdoms, Persons, as the Crab-fish go backward. Shall we begin
with the worst first. Rome was once famous, Her faith was spoken of throughout
the whole world, She was beautiful in her youth. Out of her loins sprung
worthy Martyrs, and reverend Ministers, but now she is dropped into a crooked
old age, a foolish dotage. She has nourished in her bosom a brood of
mis-begotten Controversies, and when we have discovered their young opinions
and blind errors, like Foxes that are hard hunted, they seek intricate holes,
and thorny bushes, they hide themselves in knotty distinctions: So that as one
says, I have sought Rome in Rome, Quaesini Romam in Roma, and non inueni Romam.
and could not find Rome: She will have a Monopoly of heaven, and the prisoner
at the bar will be judge of the Law. She denies children for knowing their
fathers will: She will not only forgive sins, but maintain sins. The
Stews yield good tribute to the grandmother of spiritual fornications.
Gretser p. 159. Bell de summo Pontif. l. 5 c. 7. Bannes in Tho. Aquin. 1^. 2^^.
qu. 12. art. 2. Inst. Cath. 23. Ser. 12.13.
Her subjects must not obey out Princes, but depose them, yea, in some case
kill them, though the Pope grant no special license. Yea, iure and merito,
says Simantha. May not we say of her doctrine as of Ieroboams shields, he
found them of silver, and left them of brass; so that now instead of loving
her, we must leave her, and obey the charge given by the Prophet Jeremiah,
Chap. 50.14. Put your selves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that
bend the bow shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has sinned against the
Lord. England.
Let this be Babylons disease alone. But as for the reformed Churches, let them
ride on with their honor, and good prosperity have they: Far be it from them
with Hezekiahs Sun to go backward. Yet if we look into the general decay
of godliness and virtue, we may with tears lament and say, That at the
beginning men were Giants in body, but now Giants in sin.

Common principles of honesty are become unto many, Mali proficiunt boni
deficiunt. Ber.
as the writings on a tomb stone, by much treading almost quite defaced.
Wickedness grows, goodness decays, by this cloud we may presage a storm.

But of this famous City I hope better things. London.
Your works have blazed all the Kingdom over, and displayed their branches
into other lands, you have clothed the naked, fed the hungry, nursed the
fatherless. And best of all which is put into the mouth of posterity, you have
bought eye-salue, and have sent it to the blind, and have given Torches to
them that have dwelt in the gloomy darkness of thick ignorance. Oh let it
not be said that you retire, or grow not on in grace and in charity as well as
in knowledge. Let it not be said that you feed the poor sparingly, and
plentifully feast the rich, who as Tennis-players, can bandy to you again. As
Rachel disliked her own barrenness, so did her husband: so do you your
fruitlesnesse. Principally have a care so to honor God with your substance, as
to send faithful laborers into his Vineyard. I have observed my self
dwelling in a Country where Popery and ignorance does lamentably flourish, and
their nests are for the most part in the Parish of some ten pound Leuite, and
we shall often hear that in those places, some one or other is drawn to the
superstitious faction; and no marvel when men's minds are as tabula nuda, fit
for any impression, and so embrace that Religion which is next to the^, be it
what it will. Many of you may say with David; Thou tookest me from behind the
ewes; you had poor beginnings, and now God has spread your tables, and filled
full your cups. This life is a journey, heaven our aim; be a viaticum to poor
Travelers, let your purses hire Preachers, and send the Gospel where it is
not, that Romes superstitions may be banished from this Land, and thereby
sin and sinners may be dashed out of countenance. Truly I may say as the
Disciples did of the Ass. The Lord has need of him. Many good desires are
among your poor Countrymen, but in many places for want of preaching (the
fuel for that fire) all goes out: Isa. 37.3.
and as Hezekias said, The children are come to the births, and there is no
strength to bring forth. Poor souls are so wounded by sin, that they need
lie under the Physicians hand. The Proverb in this sense is false. Homo sine
doctore est vt caecus sine doctore. Aug de temp. Josephus l. 3. c. 9.
Misere viuit qui medice viuit; For man without a Teacher is as a blind man
without a guide, says Augustine. And how can men but sleep when the candle is
out? Josephus thought that when God showed to Israel by Vrim and Thummim,
whether they should go to battle, it was thus, the Priest should put on the
Ephod, and if the precious stones shined, they need not fear their foes; but I
am sure, that if our precious stones shine, I mean Gods Word, we need not
fear Antechrists kings of the earth. Well then, though it has been said that
Popery like Leah was bleare-eyed, yet fruitful, and we fair as Rachell, but
barren, Oh put you that song in our mouths, Psalm. 113.9.
that the barren he makes to keep house to be a joyful mother of children,
then God shall have glory, we comfort, you profit.

Magistrates.
But since I have begun to speak, let me say on. May it not be said of some of
our Magistrates executing of Justice, Quorum primus impetus plus erat quam
virorum, secundus minus quam fo^minarum.
as is said of the Frenchmens fight? At the first stronger then men, at the
last weaker then women. Our Laws the Axe-tree of our estate, on whose
firmness we move, upon whose bosom the Church leanes, or either are as a
rusty clock that goes not, often time for flourishing, not for fight. If laws
be put in execution, alas, but for a while, we may say as Fabias said of
Hannibals Army, Ad specimen non ad vulnus Cic. de orat.
like a fire of straw, makes a great blaze, but is quickly out: like the
leaping of the locust that flirts up a little, and quickly down, Locustarum
saltus Greg. Moral. l. 31.
or as the Planets in their Epicycles, sometimes ascending, and sometimes
descending.

Let not prophannesse get the upper hand, nor Popery nor carnal security,
which as Prometheus his vulture eat out the heart of Religion, we may fear,
we may say of them as men do of snow when it melts not, that it lies for
more. For Gods sake you that are our Herculesses against these Giants, bring
down her that sits as a Queen, let not the people say of you, as men do of a
dead Hawke, a good one if she were alive. Let your faith out-looke your eyes,
and march on valiantly.

As for us Ministers, Ministers.
we should be known as Aarons rod was, by blossomming and fruit, and like
Nabuchadnezzars Oven, seauen-times hotter then others. God would have his
messengers as an Emperor would have his wife, without fault, or suspicion of
fault. We should have life in our doctrine, and doctrine in our life; but we
have many like a Raven, cries on every steeple East, West, North and South, but
having got her prey she lies down under a sunny bank, and ye hear no more
of her; so many Preachers spare no pains in season and out of season, till
they be warm in some fat Parsonage, then like Demas, they embrace this present
world: as the Eagle they fly high, and have no eye to their nest. Psalm.
137.5.6.
It is a judgment when the tongue cleaues to the roof of the mouth. When like
the Storke, have a sweet voice being young, but a hoarse one in old age, they
either Preach not at all, or as lightning, only flasheth, but warmes not, and
truly how can it be that the cold can warm others, and he that is dead can
quicken others?

To end with private men. Private Christians.
How many Professors of Religion, with Lots wife have looked back? let these
know that many set out of Egypt, that never saw the land of Canaan: some like
John march furiously, yet sit down and catch cold, and fall into a
consumption. Some now and then smite sin a little, as a mother does a child
that shames her, but love it well enough; others wound sin a little but will
not kill it. When Elisha bad Ioash take his arrows and smite on the ground,
and be smote thrice and staid. The man of God was wrath, 2 King 13.19.
and said, thou should have smitten five or six times, then had thou
smitten Syria till thou had consumed it: So if men would but give their
corruption more deadly wounds, they need not be like a Hackney, that tires in
the heat of the day, or a dull Asses trot, that will not last long, or like
the children of Ephraim, are armed, and carry bows, yet turn back in the day
of battle; yea, deal unfaithfully, and turn aside like a deceitful bow.
Psalm 78.9.
We must tell to these sinking-downe estates, that little decays will prove
great breaches; slidings lead to fallings; indifferency to sencelesnesse.

The more a man is enlightened, the worse he is falling back. A candle never
enlightened smells not, but being enlightened, and blown out, then it stinkes.
The back-sliders in the seventh persecution, Fox Act. Mon.
were punished with strange diseases and evil spirits. When Cranes fly
backewards, it is a sign of a tempest. Aelian l. 3. c 13.
There is nothing but soul weather toward, for him that has broken covenant
with God. When love tokens are sent home, we say a match is broken. The Lord
dwells not in that heart, that has the goodness removed out of it. When we
come into the Kings Palace, and see all the sumptuous Hangings taken down; we
conclude the King is removing of his lodging. When we have shouldred God out
of our hearts, our case is miserable: It is a wondrous danger of a heat to
take cold. The Nouatian heresy, a great sect, and many learned men were of
them, held, that a reuolter could not be received again: howsoever I abhor
their bleare-eyed error, because I here God say, Return O back sliding Israel,
Ier. 3.2.
yet nevertheless there is such intricate turnings, and Meandry windings, that
few return; none without much sorrow and smart: Hierome.
Origens lamentation is woeful, and may affright a faller-backe: such men's
consciences, as a broken leg, will pain in ill weather. Yet O Lord there is
mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. The chief Physician of the soul
has scored us out a way for delivery, Reu. 2.5. first, Remember whence thou
art fallen: secondly, Repent, cry out against this sin, hate it, loathe it:
lastly, and do thy first work: never rest till thou have got thy former
strength.

To these I may add three more; first. Do all this quickly. A candle put out,
blow the match quickly, and it may enlighten: we are like sluggards, the
longer we lie in bed, are vnwillinger to rise: Secondly, ill company is as ill
air, or ill diet to a man in a consumption, which will hinder his health, not
better him: Lastly, know God loves us not the worse, if we heartily mourn for
our faylings, and fly to him. Christ calls his Spouse, fair pleasant, O love
for delights Cant. 7.6. although Chap. 5. she had caught a fall and marred her
face.

Having now as a Hawke struck my talents into the face David and Saul, 2 Samuel
3.1. Now there was long war between the house of Saul, and the house of
David, but David waxed stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker:
If thy flesh be tamer, thy spirit stronger; so that thou can feel old age,
as well by the strength of the soul, as the weakness of the body: Thy
Conscience, Faith, Love, and all other graces are mightier, and as it were, up
in a swarm in thee: Thou art more watchful then before: A child, the older
it grows, the less it sleeps. Thou that before wast afraid to follow God in
the dark, but now art as a Sea-card needle, stand in the greatest tempests;
we have for thee a neast of young joys, we open a mine of gold unto thee, and
tell thee thou art a true Christian, crosses cannot crush thee: God binds thee
up among his jewels, and has made more promises to do thee good, then ever
he made to hold up the pillars of the world.

Some it may be accuses himself, alas, I cannot grow,

I answer, that Grace grows but slowly,



Acts 3. leapt at his first curing, we must not suppose that he did always
afterward in his goings, leap: The Israelites at their delivery out of
Babylons captivity, their mouths were filled with laughter, and their tongues
with joy; we may not suppose that they always after did nothing but laugh: The
Sun is more acceptable at the rising, then at the setting. Secondly, so far
as was to byends: we may hear a Preacher set forth the blessings that attend
godliness; as Peace, Wealth, comfort in our Children, and the like: whereupon
we cheerfully set about all Gods business; but our Lord seeing our
unfitness to have these outward blessings, and so cuts us short of them: we
may then abate of our forwardness, so far as these ends did spur us on, and
be no back-sliders. Thirdly, we may stop so far as blind zeal puts us
forward, and be never the worse. A good man in his conversion, his flesh is as
the flesh of a young child; very tender, being but as it were, newly wounded
for sin. A child in grace is as one in nature, that fears bug-beares and
trifles, which men do not. Now in what he was ouer-scrupulous, ouer-strict,
too straight lac't, he may abate upon more knowledge, and yet stand his ground
in christianity well enough. Fourthly, he may assuage of what he is at
extraordinary times, in days of humiliation, and yet be no faller back.
Lastly, he may be overwhelmed with troubles, or under a temptation, or in a
spiritual desertion; he must not judge himself to be, as he then feels
himself to be; (...).
for all this, it may be said of thee, even in this case, as Homer said of
Diomedes; a little man, but a great soldier.



foul corners of a house cannot be seen; but when the Sun creepes toward
the highest Zenith of heaven, every small spot is apparent. Or take it for
granted, thou art worse indeed, art humbled for this, do strive against it
mightily, as a falling man catches at what he can; is there an amazed kind of
sorrow upon thee for it? I must tell thee, thou may be nearer delivery now,
then ever. The devils in the Gospel, never tortured the possessed more, then
at their going out; I have known it freeze the keenest against a thaw, and
grow darkest toward break of day.

But I should prove an ill Physician, only to bid you grow, and not set in at
a dead-lift. We need help to this business, Helps to grow.
considering that grace in man is like a tender outlandish herb brought into
our countries; we shall have much ado to make it prosper. Therefore,

1 Shun sin, as Ignorance, Pride, Hypocrisy, ill-company, etc. Evil is a
stepmother to good: as an Eastern wind nips our blossoms: as sickness that
keeps down a child; so does our transgressions stint and sterue our graces,
and make us incapable of being bigger.

2 Get a good conscience that will cast up thy accounts every night, and read
thee a curtain lecture for thy negligence.

3 Thou must have good store of humility; Discendendo ascendit.
by descending, thou shall ascend; the low valleys are ever fruitfullest.

4 Labor for spiritual wisdom to be led by the best presidents, to take thy
work out of the best Samplers, Post protogenam lincam ducere.
to write after the best coppies, to draw a line after the best Painter.

Lastly, practice four duties; first, Meditation; secondly, hearing Gods word;
thirdly, Prayer; fourthly, to make a good use of afflictions.

1 Meditate on Gods 3 The excellency of grace. 1 Mercies. 2 His all-seeing eye.

1 Meditate of Gods favor to our persons, to our kingdom. How many dangers
have we been liable unto, have not the Bulls of Basan comp^^sed us about? yet
may not our Church sing with the Church of Israel. Many times have they
afflicted me from my youth: Psalm. 129.2.4.
yet they have not prevailed against me; the Lord has cut asunder the cords of
the wicked: was not King Edward our Darius to build Gods Temple? As for Queen
Mary's Reign, it is true: sucking the blood of the Saints, yet but short, and
out of those ashes had we a Phaenix, the blood of the Martyrs was the seed of
the Church. Did not our late Queen Elizabeth, of thrice blessed memory,
account her self as a sheep for the slaughter, yet did not she outliue six
or seven Popes? As for that cruel exploit of eighty eight: Psalm. 124.2.3.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, they had swallowed us up
quick. What Processions and Masses, said and sung among them, hoping their
superstitions would have given them the day? but our heavenly Father so
apparently then took our part; that it is reported, the great Turk should
say, in that fight God was a Lutheran. Had not the Papists yet a further hope,
when our Queen should dye; had they not Esaus thoughts, the days of mourning
will come shortly, and then, and then, we will slay our brethren the
Protestants? But our Sun did set, and no night followed. As for that
matchless plot, the Gunpowder-treason; before, their practices were fire and
faggot; now, fire and powder; they would have brought Doomes-day upon three
Kingdoms at once: Then had the songs of our Temples ceased; we might have
named our children Icabods; yea, when our Noble Prince took his late long
journey, they clapped their wings, and began to crow: but, Blessed be the Lord,
Psalm 124.6.
who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.

Abortu solis ad Hesperium eubile.
If I should stand here a whole day, I could not recount Gods goodness to us.
As the Cherubins wings hung over the Mercy-seate, so does Gods mercies over us.
Are not we reserved for better times then our forefathers were? Pro
mollioribus and melioribus ^a^is.
where has the Gospel shined more then here? has not a pillar of fire, and a
cloud guided us above threescore years? As a man that at the beginning of a
clear night counts the stars, but after a while, they appear so fast, that he
is confounded. Our stars, our Preachers, in the beginning of our late Queens
Reign might easily have been numbered; but who can reckon up our shining
lamps now? So that we may say of our Land, as Siluius said of Rhodes, Semper
in sole sita est.
It is always in the Sun; our Mustard-seede is a spreading tree, and birds
build in it.

What must we say to all this? Hear the Apostles advice, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having
therefore these promises, let us perfect holiness: what are our, promises?
nay, having these performances, let us perfect holiness, and increase in
godliness. The best herbs grow in the sunshine: our Summer flowers are the
best flowers: we must hatch and ripen too under Gods wing of mercy, or we shall
never be ought.

2 Consider well of Gods all-seeing eye, and thou can not but mend. The
masters eye makes the horse fat, Fertillinus in agro oculus domini est, Plin l.
18. c. 6.
and the field fruitful.

If a Magistrate would but well weigh, though he be a God of men, yet he is a
man of God; Ye are Gods; alas, but metaphorical Gods, a Dietie of some
threescore and ten years; and then he that whileome was a Judge, Nuper Iudex
eram iam Iudicis ante tribunal.
must himself be judged; it would make him not wink in one cause, and have
Ly^ceus eyes in another. If our great men would but dwell on these thoughts,
they would with flaming courage speak for God on the Bench, and in the
Parliament House too.

3 Ponder well the excellency of Grace, and it will cause thee to stir up the
gift of God, 2 Timothy 1.6. It establishes the heart, and like an Atlas
underprops us in dangers, it changes the mind, so that we shall turn no more
to our former course of sinning; whereas, good nature, education, wisdom,
cannot alter one quality, but so as a Wolf in Sheep skins, will turn to his
old by as again: The guilt of any thing will wear off: Riches will take her
to her wings as an Eagle, says Solomon, on which if thou ^^ts^ thy heart, thou
hangst thy jewel at an Eagles leg that will fly away with it. All earthly
things in time of misery, is as a heap of snow, which melts away in a hot day,
and makes the ways miery: But grace is a cordial in every sickness, a house
in every storm: In all troubles it makes the Church our Chair, our Faith our
Feast, and Heaven our home. Who will not work hard for this wages, and sow
much, to reap much of this grain?

The second duty, as a pully to set thy clock on going, is a diligent hearing
of Gods word, that is our food, 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes, desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. There must be nutriment to
augmentation; manuring makes Plants flourish; feeding makes children and
cattle grow. Gods word is our pasci and nasci, birth and breeding: and yet
alas how few respect it, and amongst those that are swift to hear, how many
have we, that are like men sick of an Atrophy, eat much, but thrive not? We
hear much, but practice not; like a bul-rush, dry, though in a wet place.

Thirdly, prayer is a supporting stone in this Building, and a good stake in
this hedge; 1 Pet. 1.2. and 2. ep. 12.
This the Apostle Peter practiced for our instruction, and the rest of the
Apostles together, Bona mea dona tua. Aug. vel ipse velabipso Aug. de doctr.
Christ. c. 31.
Luke 17.5. Increase our faith, for all comes from God that is good; Paul may
plant, and Apollo water, but God gives the increase. Either it is himself, or
from himself. Now prayer sets God on work, and God sets Heaven and earth on
work. He has pawned his word to hear us. His Name is a heare^ of prayers.

Lastly, make a good use of crosses and troubles; let them do the work they
are sent for, pluck thy heart from the world, exercise thy faith and patience,
let them drive thee to God, rowze up thy prayer, and chain thine ear to his
heauenly-voyce.

Grace is like some kind of Fowls, the fattest in the hardest weather, as a
sea-bird that build (...) nest in a storm, as a palm tree that is taller for
pressing.

I have now said what I can in this point, Let us hear the Apostle Paul
speak, Virescit vulnere virtu^. Quid. Eleg.
1 Thessalonians. 4.1. Brethren, we exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that ye would
abound more and more; You look how your children grow, and will now and then
cast up your books to see how your estates thrive, you will walk into your
Gardens and to your Country houses, to view the coming forward of your (...),
and corn; for Gods sake ^ooke to the ^^well (...) the soul in the bosom, God
(...) selves good, and crown you for doing yo^^ (...) into whose hands I
commit you, the Lord of heaven make you know the things that belong to your
peace, and not outstand the day of your visitation. Now is our Springtime.
When one is dead, his days of thriuing are gone. Job 14.7.10
There is hope of a tree, says Job, that it may sprought, though it be cut up,
yet by the sent of water it will bud; but man is sick and dies, and
perishes. Whilst we have time let us do good, let our eyes be in our heads;
The Lord God make us wise unto Salvation. Amen.

FJNIS.

