An exhortation of holy Basilius Magnus, to his young kynsemen, styrrynge
them to the study of human learning, that they might thereby be the more
apt to attain to the knowledge of divine litterature.

Translated out of Greek into English, by Wyllyam Berker.

Anno. M.D.L.VII.

To the reader.
TRue it is (gentle reader) that about the year of our lord, M.cccc.xcix.
there arose thoroughoute the world, by the secret workmanshyp of the heavens,
and cruel constellation of the sterres, divisions and factions of religion,
not only among the Mahomites and Christians, but also in the furtheste and
unknown parts of the earth, as well East as Weste, where the people be
ydolatoures, and honor for their Gods monstruouse and fond creatures: the
greatest effects whereof was seen in Persia and Germania.

Harduelle among the Persians, a noble man borne, was the first that moved
this new religion among the Mahomites, and began to grow into such
reputation for the same, as vssumcassane, the king of the countreye, took him
to his son in law, and married his daughter Marta unto him, who^e he had by
Despina the kings daughter of Trabisonda, a woman of CHRIST'S belief, and by
covenant so contynuynge, brynging up also her daughter in the same, whereby
Ismael, surnamed Sophi, her son, and his succession, have had Christian men
in honor, and do not abhor their religion. This marriage was thought to be
made rather for a fear that the king had of his estimation the^ for any love
to his person, which afterward was well proved, when the king, because his
son in law had such resort of people, and such a fame for his new
doctrine, as he was able to defend it by forse, pryuelye sent men to kill him,
he nothing suspectynge the same, and immediately dispatched all them that were
of his opinion. Notwithstanding his son Hismael, and one of his scolers
Techell, escaped alive. Hismael fled to Coraxam and Techell to the mountains of
Armenia, where he lived certain years in contemplation hardelye, only of
such fruytes as the earth brought forth. Shepheardes were the first that
perceived him, and after other country folk, which marueylynge at his sharp
and holy life, gave him things necessary for his body. He likewise geuynge
such answer to them, as seemed more then a man might do, was first brought
into the villages and after (as it seemed) against his will, into the cities,
where every man wondered at him, and received his doctrine. The sum whereof
was this, that none of them that honored Mahomete should go to heaven after
their death, except they followed those ceremonies of the law, which Halie
one of Mahometes scolers had written and left behind him, the which were
contrary to the interpretations of the mysteries, which Homare, an other
disciple of Mahomete (and before received thoroughoute all Asia and Africa,)
had with more certayntye and gravity of the law declared to the people.

Techel prevailed so much, that of a prophet of religion, he became a
captain of legions, and kept long war with the Turks in Natelia, and his
sect was called Cuselbase, by a red scarf that they carried upon their great
hattes.

Hismael on the other side, by publication of this new doctrine, wared a Lord
of so much people, as he was hable to overthrow Aluante with his brother
Maratcham, sons and heirs to the kyngedome and state of Persia, and that he
might be thought to do all things by inspyration, he surnamed him self Sophi,
according to the title of princes there, being called Magis.

Now for the tumultes and nouities that followed in Alamania, not long after
this, I will omytte to tell, because they be meatelye well known, and should
be to tediouse to be told in this preface, only I will say that they proceeded
so far, as they raunged from Duchelande to England, where was practiced the
like matter, but wanted the like effect, only by the mighty power of God, who
preserved the royal blood, from the crueltye of this factious deuyce.

Many opinions ensuynge of this sect, one was more wicked among us Christians,
then among the Mahomites: for where as they were content to have one of the
ancient interpretours of the law, to be the stay of the same, we wuld have
none at all, but that every manne should be a prophet at his pleasure: by
reason whereof followed ye gross error, that learning and knowledge was not
alonely not necessary and expediente, but also wicked and unprofitable. Who so
ever was reputed learned, he was abhorred like a serpent. The which
blasphemous device, made me practyse with most profounde writers, among the
which, I found this Homelye of so worthy a doctoure, and trauayled in it,
both for latin and English, but never went any further, because I trusted some
other of greater knowledge, wulde have set it forth, with greater authority.
And at that time, it had been more expedient then now, because it is to be
hoped, that the change of time, have changed many men's hearts. But because I
se some remayndre of that infection still left in the dominions of this
kingdom, I do with no less love of my countreye, set forth this good lesson to
my country men, then Basilius did to his kynsemen. For I am of this opinion,
that the fervent love which a man hears earnestly to his countreye, is not
inferioure to that which a father bears to his children. And as he was
careful that his young cosynnes should be well instruct and furnyshed with
such knowledge, as might bring them to the hight of holy scripture: even so,
I as carefully do wysshe all my country men, as well young as old, to
enbrace learning, to study for understanding of Poets and Philosophers, that
they may come the more able to go thorough with the aucthores of Scripture. If
ye bare the science of humanity, ye bare all in effect, yea, divinity to.

Truth it is, that among the Turks is none other learning, than is left
behynd in their Alcorane in so much as the Grecians, that sometime were the
floryshyng people of the world, be now the most vile and baste, and all
because the practice of learning is taken from them. All the ancient Princes
and states, founded them selves upon religion. The Gentyles had their religion
in oracles and sacryfyces, which they kept so straytelye that the people were
moore afraid of God then of the law of men. Is it not euidente that the
Romans would keep their oath whatsoever came of it? Regulus, Scipio,
Torquatus, and many other testifye the same, which in daungerouse times saved
their country; and when this streyghte observation waxed loose among them,
then their state fell to ruin. The Princes and states of Chrystendome, that
will maintain them selves vncorrupt, must se religion duelye kept: if there
be no learning, there can be no religion, if there be no religion, there must
needs be barbarousnes and confusion. Therefore as this holy writer Basilius
Magnus, a noble man borne, wrote this advertisement in Greek to his nephews,
and they gladlye did accept it, so I pray my country men as wyllynglye to
receive the same in English, because they that chiefly be entangled with such
error as I have told, know none other tongue but English. And as the
gentlemen of Cesarea, in Cappadocia, received profyt by this auctor. so may the
translation be profitable to all generallye of this region, the which God
grant. Amen.

An Homelye of Basilius Magnus.
How young men ought to read Poets and Oratoures.
I Am moved by diverse considerations, to give you such counsel as I think
shall do you good, if you will follow it. For being come to this age, and
having had thexperience of many matters, and felt the change of time, that
techeth al men to know them selves, it has made me so practysed in the
world, as to them that now begin to frame their life, I am able to show
what way is best for the^ to take. And because I am by nature, next your
parents most nyghe unto you, and bear you no less good will then your
fathers in deed, I think that you do not desire to be with them, so long as
you may be with me. If you therefore with willing heart, receive mine
exhortation, you shall be contained in the second degree of praise that Hesiodus
gives: if not, I will speak no reproach, for you know what he says.

He is best, that of him self, does se what is his duty.
He is good, that being taught, enbraseth virtues beutye.
He that is not apt to take, nor first, nor last of these,
As all forlorn do him away, no more thy labor lose.
Maruayle not although I take upon me, to find of my self a better way for
you, than you may gather of other, being daily conuersaunt with the best
aucthores, and resorting to the most famous readers of the same. For this is
even the very cause, why I come to aduertyse you, that you ought not utterly
to betake the rule of your minds, as the stern of a ship, to these men, to
follow where they will lead you, but only to take that which is profitable,
and to refuse the rest. Therefore what they be, and how we may discern them I
will teach you. And thus I do begin.

Only the life eternal is to be sought for.
WE, O children, do not esteem this worldly life at all, nor we do not judge
or name any thing good, that is so much desired for the commodity it
brings us, as nobility, strength, beutye, dignity, or the honor of all
men, or a kingdom it self, or any thing that among men is regarded. We do
not think it worthy to be desired, nor we do not pass of them that have it.
We pretend by hope to a greater matter, and make all our purueyaunce for a
further life, and whatsoever profyteth us to this, we say it ought to be
enbrased and desired with all study and diligence, and whatsoever anayleth not
to this, we must reiecte it as nothing worth.

The difference of worldly and heavenly life.
WHat this life is, and how we may live it, is a greater matter than we will at
this present take in hand, and requires a greater audience than you be.

This much shall be sufficient to say unto you now: He that could comprehend in
one tale, and gather together in one sum, all the felicitye that have been
since the world began, shall find it far unequal to the least part of
the good thing that we speak of, and that all the glory of this world, is
less to be comparyd with one of the smalleste parts of this, than shadows
and dreams be to the things that they present. And to use a more plain
example, as the soul in all degree is moore honorable than the body, so is
the difference of these lives.

Things of morality must first be learned, and than divinity.
TO this the holy wrytynges by secreate means do lead us. And till we can
for weakness of age, attain to the depenes of them, we be traned in other, not
all together different from these, as in shadows and myrroures mete for the
eyes of the soul, following their example that shall do any feat of arms, for
they practyse both hand and foot, that they may in their match, enjoy the
gain of their study. We must think we have an empryse propounded to us,
passing all other, about the which we must employe all our diligence and
travail. And for the furniture of this, we must practyse with poets, with
hystorians, and orators, and with all men, that we may thereby get some
commodity to our soul. And as the dier with certain art prepares the cloth
to be colored, and than lays on his flower, whyther it be purple or other,
even so we to make the gloss of virtue durable, do taste the outward show till
we may approach to the secret and sacred mysteries. And as men accustomed to
see the son in water, be after the more apt to dyrecte our eyes to the
clear beams of the same.

Holy scripture is bewtyfyed by humane learning, by thexample of Moses.
IF in wrytynges there be a consonaunce and an agreement, the knowledge of them
is profitable to us, if not, the conference of both vtterynge the difference,
anayleth much to the knowledge of better. For the comparyson of both to some
indifferent thing, do show a shape of both. And as it is the lively virtue of
the plant to be laden with seasonable fruit, and yet has a beutye beset with
leaves and branches. Even so the native fruit of the soul is verytye, and
nevertheless it is not unpleasant to her to be clad with externe sapience, as
with leaves, which is a couerture for the fruit, and a delyghte to the eye.
Moses (whose name for his wisdom is so great with all men) did so furnishe
his mind with the science of Egypt, as he thereby aspyred to the contemplation
of GOD.

Likewise of latter time, the sage Daniell of Babylon, when he had learned the
sapience of the Caldees, came to the knoweledge of dyuyne letters.

The use and imitation of Poets.
WE have showed that extern wisdom is profitable to the soul, now we will
declare how we ought to proceed in it. And first to begin with Poets, because
they be diverse and of al sorts, we may not give our minds to the^ a like.
When they rehearse the noble feats and words of notable men, then we ought to
be enflamed in our hearts, and endeavor our selves to be the like. But when
they utter wicked men and their acts, then we ought to flee them, and to
stop our ears at them, as Ulysses did at the Sirenes. For why, evil talk
is the way to evil deeds. Wherefore we must with all diligence take heed, lest
by lascivious speech, we suffer pryuylye some noughtye thing to come upon us,
as a poison tempered with honye. We shall not therefore esteem those Poets, ye
present us with scolders and scoffers with lovers and dronkerds and such as
measure felycytie by delicate fare and pleasant musycke. And specially the^ that
meddle with Gods and bring them in with discord and debate, ye brother against
the brother; the father stryuynge with the children and the children making
soden war with the father, and when they trete of there dissolutenes and
adulteries, and that of Jupiter, him self there chief GOD as they call him, in
such sort, as without shame a man cannot report of brute Beasts. Let us leave
this to stage players, and the like I say of all other writeres, specially
when they allure men to pleasure.

How Orators are to be red.
WE may not regard Orators when they speak to please ye hearer, for neither at
the bar nor else where, is it lawefull to use lesing for them that seek the
right and true way of life, and by law be forbid to do amysse. But than shall
we enbrase them, when they auaunce virtue and depresse vice, and as all other,
take pleasure only by the color and sauoure of the flower, but the Be
picketh also honey out of ye very same, eue^ so may we gather out of the^ not
only pleasant and sweet matter to the ear, but also wholesome doctrine to the
soul and in every thing we may follow the Be. For they nether go confusedly
to every flower nor when they come, bearethe all away. But takes that serves
for there work, and let the rest alone. So must we judge what is familyer and
allied to virtue, and that admit, letting the other pass and as in a rose
bushe we leave the thorns and take the flower so in such wrytings we ought to
take the good and leave the bad, and in every doctrine we (...) consider how
the beginning agrees with the endyng, according to the Doreanes proverb. The
stone and the measure must agree.

Poets and Oratoures must be red for the virtue that they teach.
AND because a life must be dyrected by virtue, we must learn of all Poets,
of all Orators, and Historians, yea and chefely of al Philosophers, al their
teachinges, that avails us to the familiaritye of virtue, with whom and
young men's minds, we must engrafte an aliance, for things that be learned
in tender age, do abide the better, because the tenderness of their minds,
receives the same to the very botome.

What should we think Hesiodus mente by those verses that every man has in
his mouth, but to excite young men to virtue.

Right paynefull is the way, that leads to virtues gate.
And few there be that can abide, till they arryue thereat.
But when they be once past, the high and werye hill.
All is so plain and fair to see, as their will dwell there still.
Right plesaunt is the way that draws the mind to vice,
And most men are content to follow that deuyce.
But when they see the end, so foul and full of pain,
They wayle their woeful state, and would return again.
I think he meant nothing else, but to stir young men's minds to virtue, and
to encorrage all good men to the same, that they should for no labor give
over til the end.

And whosoever he be that exhorfeth us to honestye, we may well follow his
counsel in that behalf. I hard a man of great learning in Poetrye say, that
all Homers doctrine, was nothing but a praise of virtue, and that he gathered
all to this purpose, except in some by matter. As when he brings in Ulysses
naked and al forlorn by shipwreck, as shamefastnes might have followed to be
seen naked of a Queen and alone, but virtue which was to him as a garment,
made him even than, naked as he was, to be honorable, in so much as the Queen
did him reverence first, and then all the Cuntrye, leuyng their banquet, where
they feasted, to behold him, and there was not one for the time, that rather
desired any thing than to be Ulysses, although he was naked and in shippewrake.
That learned man, that I speak of was wont to cry with high voice at this
place. Ofrendes let us embrace virtue, which in shypwracke swimmeth with us,
and makes a man naked cast upon the shore to be more worshipful, than the
welthye Pheaceans.

And surely so it is in deed, for all other things, be no more one man's then
an other, eue^ as the chance of the dye is uncertain: only virtue, both to
quick and dead, is stable and sure possession, by the which reason I think
Solon was moved, when he spoke to rich men.

Our virtue, with your riches, we will in no wise batter.
For our is sure possession, and your uncertain matter.
The like saying is of Theogius, when he says, that GOD does ha^g a balance
dyuerselye among men, for sometime it flows with riches and sometime it has
nothing. The like is written of Prodicus, the wise man concerning virtue and
vice, and it shall become us to mark what he says, for he is a worthy writer.
He affyrmeth in a place, the sentence whereof I remember, being written in prose,
yt when Hercules was a young man, and much of thage that you be now, and was
musing which way he might take, either the hard way to virtue, or the easy
way to vice, that there appeared two women unto him, that is to say, virtue
and vice, whose diuersitye of array did declare their conditions. The one was
set forth in all kind of gorgyousenes and brauerye, with the which, and
hirlasciuious talk, she devised to allure him to pleasure, and to her purpose.
The other, being sober, and of simple chere, told him a contrary tale: she
promised him neither pleasure nor ease, but pain, peril and travail both by
sea and land, but the reward of this should be, to be made a GOD. Which
Hercules did chose, and follow to his lives end.

Philosophers be to be read because they set forth virtue.
IN manner all that have written any matter of grauytye, more or less, to
their power have set forth virtues praise, whom we must credyte, and do our
devour to show it in our lives. For whosoever expresses by works, that other
do only by words, he is a wise man in deed, the other as shadows vanysheth
away. And as ye workman that paynteth, or graueth the image of a worthy man,
and one that in life expressethe the virtues of the same. But they that
praises virtue abroad, and set her forth with painted words, and yet
prefer pleasure before temperaunce, and lucre before justice, they be like
the stage players, which many times appear as Princes and Kings, and be so
far from the same, as perhaps they be vyllanes, and slaves borne. The
musician if it be possible, never suffers the instrumente to be out of tune.
The scolemaster of daunsing, chafeth when the foot fails: and shall a man
discord with him self, and his life be repugnant to his words? But the tongue
did swear, the heart made none oath (quoth Euripidis) it is enough to sem an
honest man. But this is the rote of all iniquity, if ye will believe Plato, to
appear honest, when thou art not so.

Reding of Poets and Historyes, is profitable for examples.
OF words and wrightinges of virtue, we must take profight after the way that
we have showed. Now of the deeds of worthy ancient men, left to us in memory
by monuments of Poets, we ought to receive good by them after this sort. A
vile and leude fellow, rayled on the worthy Pericles, of Athenes, at the which
he was neither angry nor any thing moved in his mind, the fellow left no
reproach unspoken, Pericles, as things not appertainynge to him, passed not of
them. When it was night and dark, and yet the vile iangler would not depart,
Pericles, caused his man to weight upon him home with torche light, that he
might enjoy his long contemplation in philisophy. A certain man in his rage
thretened to kill Euclides, of Megara, and affirmed by oath that he would do
it. Euclides, swear the contrary that he would so appese him, as he should do
him no hurt. It is very profitable to record some such example to them that be
in rage of anger, we may not believe the Tragedy that says, ire do arm the
hands to fight. For the best way is not to be angrye at al, but if that can
not be, to use resonne as a bridle, and not suffer it to strai to furre. But
let us return to the factes of worthy men.

One did stryke Socrates on the face very spyghtefullye, Socrates, Socrates
made no resistaunce, but suffered him so much as al his face was swelled. And
when the man had saciate his rage, Socrates did nothing else, but in his forehed
wrote his name that had beaten him, as they be wont, that make pyctures.

Such a man did this feate, and sought none other reuengemente, and because
these agreith with our doctrine, I would we should follow the example. The fact
of Socrates, agreith with our scripture which mouisheth us that when we be
strykenne on the one cheke, we should hold forth the other, none other
reuengment is granted us, and the example of Pericles and Euclides, is like to
our precepte, that wylleth us to suffer them that persecute us, and patiently
to bear their anger, and to pray for our enemies, wisshyng them none evil,
and he that is practiced in these, will not discredit the other as things
impossible We may not here forget the feat of Alexander, who having the
daughters of Darius in captiuitye, and heryng marvelous report of their
bewtye, would not suffer them to come in his syghte, thynkyng it to be a
shame, that a Conqueroure of men, should be Conquered of women. This agreith
with our learning, that whosoever beholds a woman voluptuouslye, although he
have no company with her, yet is not without sin, because of the
concupyssence of the heart. The deed of Climas, Pythagoras friend, will hardly
be believed of us, howsoever it be taken, who when he might by an oath, have
escaped the loss of.iij talentes, he rather paid it then he would swear, and
yet should have sworn truly. But I think he had hard of our precepte, that
forbids us to swear at all.

A choice in learning must be had, and our study directed to some end.
I Will return to that I spoke in the beginning, we may not take every thing,
but only good and profitable. For seeing we will dilygentelye refuse those
meats, that might hurt the body, it were a shame to have no regard of
doctrine, which is the fode of the soul. But like a raging streme, to devour
all that comes without respect.

The shypmaster suffers not his ship to be borne with every puff, but
stands at the helm, and directs it to the port, the Archer has his eye
to the prick, the Carpenter and the Masonne, has an end and purpose of their
art, and shall we in the order of life, be inferyour to artificers? It can not
be, that the crafts manne has an end of his work, and we have none of our
life, which they behold, that seek the perfect happy life, if we with out
all reason and stay, be tossed hither and thither in our life, what difference
shall be between us, and ships that have no sternes: in the plays of music
and manhod men do exercise themselfes to that purpose, when a trial of
strength shall be made, no man studieth to be cunning at the Harp or the Pype.

Neither Polidamus nor Milo did so, but the one before the solemn day of
Olimpe, practiced renning Charettes, and the other, with armed shild stood to
his defense, as a thing unremovable, whereas if they had labored the musyke
of Marsias or Olimpe, and left the duste and the game place, theye had won
no praise nor glory, nor avoided the derision of the people. Contraryewyse
Themistius did not leave his music, and try his strength, for than he had not
gotten such an excellency in the same, as he passed al other musicians, who
had so much cunnyng that at his pleasure he could styr any man to ire by
vehemencye of his art, and bring him again to quiet, by the sweet
plesauntnes of the same. When Alexander was at a feast, and he appointed to
play before him by one kind of music called Phrigian, he so stirred the king
as he arose, to take his armure and fight, and by the changing of his armonie,
he made him to return again to the banquet, such effects have the practyse
as well of music as of courage, when they be exercised to the same end.

All things is purchased by labor the happy life and all.
BEcause we be entrid into this matter of Champions, and rewards, Let us
proceed a little further in it. Consider how many thousand pains they take, how
many stripes they bear in lernyng there sense, what a thin dieat they keep? Not
as they will but as there masters command, and to be brefe, in all other,
their life led before the day of proof, is a meditation to the same. In the
end, they come to the place of trial, where they fight with great pain and
peril, that they might be crowned with a garland of olyue, smallage perslee,
or some such like, and to be proclaimed victorius of the harold, and shall we,
to whom so meruelus rewards of virtue be propounded, as their worthynes cannot
be expressed, sleep on both sides at our pleasure, and think to catch it by
holding up one of our hands? Than were slouthe much to be praised in our
life, And Sardanapalus, might be noted ye most happy in the world, or
Margites, who had no good condition in him as Homer says. And if this be true
of Homer, no less true is it that Pittacus, affirmethe. All good thing to be
hard. For after much pain and travel, a man shall have much a do to be
partaker of those goods, with which no thing in the world may be compared,
therefore we may not be idle, we may not forsake so great hope, for so small a
pleasure, except we will sustain reproach and abide blame, not here among
men, (although that is also to be regarded) but under the earth, or else
where, when the last judgment shall be made. And he that of ignorance
offends, may hap find some pardon of God. But he that does evil of
purpose, has none excuse, but must needs suffer great and diverse punishment.

How we ought to use the body.
WHat shall we do than will some man say, what else, but have regard of our
soul al other things set apart. We may not serve the body further than
necessity. But the soul we must noryshe with all good fode, and deliver her
out of prison and the fetters of affections, by the help of Philosophy, the
body must be so used, as it may endure and subdue passions and the bellye
must be served not for pleasure, but for sustenaunce. For they that have there
delyght only in banquetes and festing, seking all the earth and sea, to
satisfye there appetide, be burdened with a miserable bondage, payng a trybute to
a sharp Lord, in no less pain than they that be tormented in hell. Some to
cut the fire, some to bear water in a sieve, and so to fill a botomeles tubbe
with out any end of their labor. To be curious in our hear, or to make
much a do about our garments is the part of them, that be misers or
mischeuous, as Diogenes says. Wherefore to be trym in apparel is as evil as
to be dissolute or adulterus. What difference is there to a wise man, to were a
fine gown, or a course cloak, so the body be defended from hete and cold, and
so in other things not to be more precise than needs, not to puff up the
body, but for the commodity of the soul. And it is nos less shame to him
that worthelye has the name of a man, to be to careful about his body, than
to be subject to any vice out of kind. Therefore to bestow all our study
upon the garnishing of our body, is the part of him that knows not him
self nor do not understand thaduertisment of the wise man that says. The
thing that is seen is not the man. But a greater wisdom is nedful to us to
know what we be.

Pleasure must be eschewed.
But it is more impossible to do this without a clear mind, tha^ to behold the
son with blere eyes, the clensynge of the soul, to speak it breifely, is
nothing else but to despise the pleasures of our senses, as the eyes may not
be fed with vain syghts, or such shows as leaves a provocation of pleasur
neither may the ears be entysed with such melody, as corrupt our minds: for
of such musyck, wantonness proceeds. We ought to receive the music that David
the poet of holy verses used, to deliver king Saul from his madness.
Pithagoras chau^sed to se a company of young men, renning about the town like
dronkardes, he badde the minstrell to change his musik, and play the sad
measure called Dorical, which did so restore them to their understanding, as
they were ashamed of their folly, and threw away their garlandes, and their
dronken garments. This is sufficient to teach us, that great respect is to be
had in the musik that we here. Wherefore I exhort you to beware of the music
that is now in use, as of a thing of great fylthines. As for sauoures or
smelles, or anoyntmentes, what should I need to speak? And as for pleasures by
touching and gesture, no man need to doubt, but if we be well ware of them, they
will compel us to be slaves to the body, as brute beasts.

The body must be subdued to reason.
Finally, the body must be utterly subdued, except we will be drowned in the
gore of pleasure and so much only we may make of it, as it may serve for the
ministry of Philosophy, as Plato says. And S. Paul in effect has ye same
words, when he bids, that no care should be had of the body for to provoke
pleasure. For they ye set their hole care upon the body, and do neglect the
soul, whom it ought to serve, differs nothing from them that with great
diligence seeks for goodly toles, and care not for ye art wherefore they be
made. We must do the contrary, and keep down ye body, as the fury of a wild
beast, and pull in the sturdy head with the bridle of reason, which we may not
let go at large, lest the mind be drawn headlong hither and thither, as the
cart dryuer is pulled away with the violence of his wild horses. We must
remember Pythagoras who, when he saw one of his acquayntaunce, pampryng his
body with wanton fare, he said: This man goes about to make his prison more
heavy. Which inconvenience Plato forseynge, changed the place of study, that
the high complexion of his body might be cut of, as a vine to lusty. And I
have hard physicians say, that to much health is dangerous. Seeing therefore
that to much feadinge is peryllous for the body, and hyndraunce to the soul,
it were very madness, to bestow inordinate labor about it.

Riches may not be desired.
IF the body be contemned, and pleasures despised, what need have we of
riches? Truly I see none, except some man has delight to watch, and keep his
money hyd, as the fable makes mention of serpents. He that knows well to
dispyse these, shall utterly abhor from all dyshonesty, both in word and
deed. And all that is more than sufficient, he will hate it, whatsoever
pretense it has. For sufficiencye is not to be measured by pleasure, but by
necessite. For they that go beyond the bounds of necessite be like to them
that falls headelonge, and can find no fotynge to stay, but the more they
have, the more they desire, to satisfye their lust and pleasure, according to
that Solon says. Affection men's minds do so blind.
That of riches no stay they can find.
And the lesson of Theogius we ought to follow. I do not regard, nor require
riches.
Content with a little, to avoid distress.
I can not but with good will remember the saying of Diogenes, that despised all
worldly things, and yet thought him self to be more rich, tha^ the most
mighty king, because a little served him. And we, except we have so many
talentes as Pythias, and so many acres of land, as we can not well number, and
so much cattle, as can not be told, we are not content. My opinion is, that
we neither ought to desire riches when we have them not, nor to glory in them,
when we have them, except we know how to use them. Socrates spoke well of a
rich man, that auaunced him self for his riches: I will not (quoth he) esteem
the, except I know how thou canste use thy wealth. If Phidias, or Policletus,
had gloryed in the gold, whereof the one made a statue and image to the
Ilianes of Jupiter, and the other to the Argiues of Juno, forsakynge their art
and knowledge, whereby that gold was made moore precious, they had been laughed
to scorn, for chalenging a glove that was none of theyrs. And shall we think
us to be worthy less reprehention, beleuynge that virtue is not hable of her
self to beutyfy us sufficiently.

Flattery and boastyng to be eschewed.
SHall we forsake pleasures, shall we despise riches, and nevertheless embrase
flatterye? and delyght in fayer words, and in the party for of Arclilocus?
Truly there is nothing more to be avoided of a wise man, than to live after
the common opinion, and by vain words to fall into offentation.

We ought so earnestelye to embrase reason, the right guide of life that if al
men wuld cry out against us, we would not forsake our just quarrel, for no
infamy or danger. For he that frames his life otherwise, differith nothing
from the iugler of Egypt, who at his pleasure could make him self a tree, a
best fire or water, or any thing that he would. For if the company serves he
will praise virtue, and if the company be for the contrary, he will praise
vice. Even as Polipus, that turnith his shape to ye color of every thing he
comes to, so he will change his sentence, at the pleasure of every audience.

Al things are to be sought that may bring us to the happy life.
THese matters may be more exactlye learned in mine other works, at this
present it is enough to describe virtue, as in the shadow of externe doctrine.
For he that takes profighte by every thing although he do it by little and
little, yet is it true, that many a little makes a great, as a mighty flod, of a
small fountain. For where the Poet says, put a little to a little and do it
often, it is not to be understand only of thincrease of money, but of every
science. Bias one of the vii. sages, sent his son to Egipte, who axinge his
father, what he might do to please him. He answered, if thou can purchase such
spending money, as may accompany the to thy age. He me^t virtue, by the name of
conduct monye, and yet his limitation of virtue, was to streyghte, to confine
it, within the compass of man's life, for I say if a man might live the
years of Tithon, or of Arganthonius, or had the long live of our Methusalem,
who lived.ix. hundred save xxx. year, or culd number all the ages of men, since
the creation of the world I would smyle at it, as at a thing of small
understanding, in the respect of the infinite time of virtue, the term whereof
no heart can comprehend, no more than the soul immortal. For the which, al
dilygence is to be used, that we may be so furnished, as shall redound to our
commodity.

Pain may not wythdrawe us from the study of Virtue.
AND though these things be hard and paynefull, we may not give over, but
we must remember the lesson that bids us take the best kind of approved life
in hand, and think that use and practyse, will make it easy unto us, it is a
rebuke to leave the present time for a little sloth, and after call for it again
in vain, when no thing will be found, but sorrow and grief. I have told you,
what I thynk most fyt for you presently, and to the same, I will counsel you
while I shall live. There be.iij. kinds of diseases, of the wyich, one is
incurable, into the which I would be loathe that you should fale, or to be
sick in your mind, as many be in their body. They that be a little euel at
ease goes to the Physicians them selves, and they that be very sick, sends
for the Physicians to them, but they that be past remedy by the rage of
melancolye, neither goo nor send to the Physicians, nor suffer them that do
come to them to do them any good. My prayer is, that you do not fall into the
like inconvenience, refusing all good counsel.

FINIS.

