A SHORT TREATISE against STAGE PLAYS

Prove. 10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief.

Prove. 21.17. He that loves pastime shall be a poor man.

Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.

Printed in the year of our Lord 1625.

AN HVMBLE SVPPLICATION TENDERED to the High and Honorable House OF PARLIAMENT,
Assembled May xviij. 1625.
WHereas Stage Plays are repugnant to the written Word and Will of Almighty
God, the only wise Governor and righteous Judge of the whole world; dangerous
to the eternal salvation both of the actours and spectatours; breed many
inconveniences wheresoever they come; procure the judgments of God to the whole
kingdom, for sin tolerated pourchaseth Gods wrath to the whole nation, as
appears Joshu. 22.18. and Solomon says Prove. 14.34. Sin is a reproach to
any people; and have been justly censured and worthily prohibited by statutes
made in the late Reign of famous Queen Elizabeth, and of our Learned and
Noble King James: May it therefore please this High and Honorable House, which
is the most honorable Court in all Europe, upon view of this short Treatise
following, to take once more into consideration this matter of Stage Plays,
and by some few words added to the former Statutes, to restreyne them for ever
hereafter.

A SHORT TREATISE OF STAGE PLAYS.
The Preface.
IN all ages the Prophets have applied their preachings to the present
occasions: and the general concursse of many baptized Christians to
Stage Plays, every where in these times, have occasioned the Lords
remembrancers, which stand continually on their watch-towres, both more
diligently to examine the nature of Stage Plays, which have had much
countenance, and some defense; to try whether they be warrantable by the word
of God or no; and also more earnest prayer to God for his assistance, and
serious endeavors to dissuade Christians from entertayning them. Hence
proceed these few ensuing reasons, briefly contracted into a narrow room,
that the reader may with facility conceive the force of the arguments, and
soundly judge of the truth of them. And for better direction to the Reader,
the whole sum is drawn to these four heads.

First, the original beginning of Stage Plays is showed: sect. 2. Secondly,
the end is pointed out for which they were first devised. sect. 3. Thirdly, the
general matter or argument acted in them, is opened in few words: sect. 4.
Fourthly, the reasons to prove them unlawful are rendered: sect. 5.
1. The original beginning of Stage Plays.
Heathen invented plays.
2. THe first beginning of plays proceeded from those men which were not in
the Church of God. When God had appointed man to get his living, with his
labor Genesis 3.19. Iuball the seventh of Cain his race invented playing. Genesis
4.21. on Instruments, which (as after) is a lawful recreation. But the
invention of diverse sorts of unlawful plays is briefly noted by Plinius
Histor, nature. lib 7. cap. 59. by Eusebius de praepar. euang. lib. 1. cap. 2.
and lib. 2. cap. 2. by Arnobius contra gentes lib. 7. by Polydorus Virgilius de
rerum invent. lib. 3. cap. 13. by Alexander ab Alexandro genialium dierum.
libr. 6. cap. 19. by Caelius Rhodiginus antiq. lib. 8. cap. 7. Whether they
grew up first at Lydia in Asia as says Herodotus lib. 1. or at Athens in
Graecia, as Polydorus Virgilius lib. 3. cap. 13. and Volaterranus lib. 29. ca.
11. report, it is not material. Pausanias in Eliacis writes that Iphitus was
admonished by the oracle of Apollo to restore the Olympike games. Josephus
Scaliger poetices lib. 1. cap. 22. etc. may satisfy all men that desire to
read more of this point. About the beginning of the Persian monarchy, The
solemn beginning of plays.
which was almost 500 years before Christ, and about the time of the Jews
return out of the captivity of Babylon, this miscreant author always of some
hurt, never of any good to Christian or heathen, first came abroad with great
solemnity, as it may be gathered by Herodotus. Afterward from those Lydians
in Asia, or from the Grecians at Athens, came plays to Rome in the reign of
Tarquinius Priscus, as Eusebius notes in his Chronology at the year of the
world 4602. Alexander ab ^^^and. lib. 5. c. 16.
Hermanus Contractus at the year of the world 3341 notes the same. And Titus
Livius lib. 7. Pomponius Laetus in Philippo, Funccius in his worthy
Chronology at the year of the world 3512. and Herodianus lib. 3. witness how
the Romans augmented their plays afterward.

The entrance of plays into the Church of the Jews.
The first authorized entrance that any such kind of plays or heathen exercise
had into the church of God, seems to be about 170 years before the birth of
Christ, when that wicked Jesus affecting heathenisme, changed his name into
Jason, and for 150 talents of silver purchased a commission of Antiochus
Epiphanes king of Syria, that he might erect a place for heathen exercises at
Jerusalem, and train up the youth of the Jews in the customs of the
Gentiles, 1 Maccab. 1.12. Joseph. antiq. lib. 12. cap. 6. but more specially 2
Maccab. 4.7. etc. Which exercise though it was not to play on the stage, but
for activitie of their bodies, yet it may here be observed as an entrance to
other heathen customs, and as that which makes way to bring in Stage Plays
afterward. Then Herod the great increased heathenish plays and exercises
greatly in his days, building one theater at Jerusalem; Joseph. antiq. lib.
15. cap. 10. or 11. and an other at Caesarea Stratonis; Joseph. antiq. lib. 15.
cap. 13. and lib. 16. cap. 9. The horrible sins of the Jews cut them off
shortly after from being the Church of God, and therefore no more can be said
of their heathenish exercises.

Their entrance into the christian church.
How or when Plays came into the Christian Church, and who first gave them
intertainment, is more incident to this present purpose, and fitter testimony
to give evidence hereafter either for them or against them. When the Roman
Emperors delighted too much in all kind of plays, and when christian religion
grew mightily under them in Europe especially, christians imbraceing the Gospel
could not be altogether ignorant of these stage plays, but sometimes some
christians resorted to these plays, as by the complaints and invectiues of
some ancient fathers against them, it does appear. And though secretly by such
means plays through satan's subtilties approached near to the church door,
yet all this while neither the Emperors power thrust them upon the Church, nor
the reverend Fathers and faithful Pastors of those times gave way to such
open wickedness by their silence. But when that great scarlet colored whore of
Babylon with her golden cup of abominations in her hand, which has a name
written in her forehead, a mystery, great Babylon the mother of whoredoms,
and which reigns over the kings of the earth, was set in Peter's chair at
Rome as the Papists say; then did the king of the Locusts, called Abaddon and
Apollyon, having the key of the bottomeles pit, with full power for such a
purpose, set the church door wide open for sundry sportes and plays to
enter freely into the house of God, as Platina reports Paulus II. did. And
that not only in their great solemnities and festivals, which were spent
commonly in belly cheer and Plays, as Peucerus writes of Vrbanus IIII. much
after the fashion of the Israelites, sitting down to eat and drink, and
rising up to play: but specially in their rich Iubilies, first begun in the
Christian church by Bonifacius VIII. in the year of Christ 1300. and
afterward continued and hastened by his successors. Of which Sports and Plays
Aventinus annal. Bojor. lib. 7. speaking of Clemens VI. and Bale in the life of
Julius III. do write. And thus much shall suffice for the beginning of Plays
among the Lydians of Asia; and among the Grecians and Romans in Europe; as also
for their entrance into the Christian church, first secretly by the malice of
Satan stealing some Christians affections to such vanities; then openly by the
power of that Abaddon of Rome, who besotted men's senses with such fooleries,
that he might rob their purses in his rich Iubilies.

II. The end for which Plays were devised.
3. THe final cause or end for which the Heathen first devised Plays, was to
pacify their angry gods, and so remove some present calamity which vexed
them. The Lydians sought by Plays to remedy a great famine that was among
them, as Herodotus witnesses in Clio. The Athenians renewed their Plays about
the latter end of the Persian Monarchy, in the days of Euthydemus their
governor, thereby thinking to remove a grievous pestilence, as says Diodorus
Siculus lib. 12. Also Livius lib. 7. and Paulus Orosius libr. 3. cap. 4. write
that the heathen Romans sore afflicted about the same time, with pestilence, by
the advice of their idol priests, set forth their Stage Plays to turn away
that affliction, thinking their Plays would please their gods.

But Dionysius Halicarnasseus li. 7. Arnobius. lib. 7. contra gentes. Pausanias
in Corinthiacis. Augustinus de civitate dei lib. 2. cap. 13. and lib. 3. cap.
18. and lib. 4. cap. I. and cap. 26. Polydorus Virgil. de inventione rerum lib.
3. cap. 13. and Volaterranus lib. 29. cap. II. write so plainly and fully of
this matter, that the reading of any one of them may satisfy the sober minded,
and give them to understand, that as Christians by direction out of Gods word
use prayer and fasting to turn away the Lords provoked anger: so heathens
instructed by the Devil their master thought to remove their afflictions by
Plays. But the Popes of Rome solemnised their Festivals and Iubilies with all
sorts of Plays and Sportes for recreation, and to delight the people with such
fooleries.

III. The argument of Stage Plays.
4. WHereas Stage plays ordinarily go under the name either of Tragedies or
else of comedies; we are to understand that the argument or matter acted in
tragedies is murder, treason, rebellion, and such like; and in comedies is
bauderie, cosenage, and mere knaverie.

Bucerus de regno Christi lib. 2, ca. 54
for we know but in part. I Cor. 13.9.) or else perversely irreligious, will say,
that sometimes the sacred Scripture is or may be acted by players on the stage,
and thereby a man may learn more then at a sermon.





1. They seldom come to the Church to learn religion according to Gods
ordinance, though God command them so to do, Deuteronomy. 12, 5. But ye shall seek
the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes, to put
his name there, and there to dwell, and thither thou shall come, etc. though
God entreat them so to do, Prove. 1.20. Wisdom cries without: she utters
her voice in the streets. etc. as also (...) cerning good and necessary
matters.

As for hawking, hunting, fishing, fouling, and such like, they are rather to
be counted honest and lawful callings, wherein men may get their living with
their labor, then recreations, except it be by change of labor, as in other
lawful callings.



First, they are not worhie to be compared to any of the former lawful
recreations. Secondly, they serve not the end of recreations, which is to
refresh the weary, but not to make men delight in sin. Thirdly, the most
persons that ordinarily resort to them, are very idle persons, that should
rather be set to some honest labor, then so unprofitably to mispend their time
to their own hurt.
The original beginning then is sufficient to persuade the faithful to
renounce Stage Plays, and say unto them, Get thee hence. Esai. 30.22.

The second reason.


It is not lawful for Christians to sport themselves either with the
dreadful judgments of God, or with the abominable sins of men.

But in Stage Plays there are acted sometimes the fearful judgments of God,
as in tragedies: and sometimes the vile and hateful sins of men, as in
comedies.

And therefore it is full of horror seriously to think upon them, and much
more to be either actor to show them, or beholder and hearer to laugh at them,
or delight in them.

Ham derided his Fathers nakedness Genesis 9, 22. but he was accursed for it.
Curses are denounced in Gods Law against all sinners, Deuteronomy. 27, 26. And they
that make a sport of sin cannot avoid Gods curse, no more then they that
feasted when they should have fasted, Esaias. 22, 14. Surely this iniquity shall
not be purged from you, till ye dye, says the Lord of Hoastes.

The third reason.


The woman shall not wear that which perteyneth to the man, neither shall a
man put on woman's raiment: for all that do so are an abomination to the Lord
thy God. For this change of apparel makes the man effeminate, and the woman
manish, as some can testify if they would, some have confessed, and the
Heathen know. Cyprianus lib. 2. epist. 2. speaking of this change of apparel
in Stage Plays, says thus: evirantur mares; men loose their manhood etc.
Charondas made a law to the inhabitants of Thuria (which is a city in Greece,
described by Pausanias in Messenicis, and by Strabo lib. 8.) that if any man
refused to go to wars, or being in the field cast down his weapons and
ran away, he should stand three days in the open market in woman's apparel,
which argued effeminatenes in him, as if formerly he had used it. Diodor. lib.
12.
The fourth Reason.
adulterium discitur, dum videtur, they learn to commit adultery, when they
hear and behold such immodest and unchaste words and gestures upon the stage.
And many go honest thither, which return home dishonest. Job made a covenant
with his eyes, that he would not look on a maid, Job 31.1. David desired God
to turn away his eyes from regarding vanity, Psalm.119.37.

The fifth Reason.


trade betimes, whiles the Lord grants space to repentance. did. 86, c. 8
which otherwise they might have. for the prodigality lavished upon
Stage Players, restrayneth the liberality that might and ought to be bestowed
upon the poor. Redeem the time, for the days are evil; but some men say,
Let us have pastime, that is, any sinful course, whereby we may pass away and
mis-spend the short time which we have in this life, that the day of death,
judgment, and condemnation may come speedily upon us before we repent, and
before we consecrate our selves wholly to God. Peter says: It is sufficient
for us, that we have spent the time past of this life, after the lusts of the
Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony, drinkings,
and abominable idolatries. 1 Pet. 4.3. And if any be otherwise minded, the Lord
in his time will either convert or confound him. if any man have not the spirit
of Christ, the same is not his. Romans 8.9.
The sixth Reason.
10.

Orthodoxal Protestants.
First, all orthodoxall Protestants of all ages and times, which maintained the
general doctrine of the Catholic church, have censured Stage Plays, as
unlawful from age to age hitherto. To report and repeat their several
judgments out of their own writings, or out of histories, is more then I can
perform, it would make a great volume, it would be tedious to read, and
perhaps not so necessary.

Wherefore it seems rather convenient to call a great number of them
together out of all the places of their dwellings, and as it were out of all
the world, that they all may be heard to speak altogether with one consent and
voice. But because it would be a very tedious, and troublesome thing, for so
many, so reverend, and so old aged Fathers to travel so far; it is more
convenient and reasonable to spare their labors so much as may be, and call
them together at three several times, and in three several places of their
habitations; that is, to call those of Asia, to meet together in Asia: those
of Africa, in Africa: and those of Europe, in Europe.

Asia, In Asia,about two and twenty of the most reverend Fathers of those
times, met together in Laodicea, somewhat more then 300 years after Christ, and
holding a council there, decreed cap. 54. that none of the Clergy should be
present at Stage Plays. And the Centuriators of Magdeburg have inserted this
whole Council in their laborious and worthy history Cent. 4. cap. 9. col.
834.

Afrike. In Africa more then 400 years after Christ there were some four and
forty of the worthiest and learned Fathers assembled at Carthage in the
third council that was holden there, amongst whom was that worthy Augustinus,
and they decreed cap. 11. that the children of ministers or of others of the
Clergy should not be present at Stage Plays, seeing none of the Laity might
be there. Semper enim Christianis omnibus hoc interdictum est, ut ubi
blasphemisunt, non accedant. that is; for all christians have evermore been
forbidden to come in place, where blasphemers are. And the same religious
Fathers then, and there decreed also cap. 35. That the church should not tefuse
to receive the Stage Players into their fellowship, if they repented and
renounced that their trade of playing. Whereby is evident that Stage Players in
those former and purer times, were generally excommunicated, and cast out of
the society of the saints.

Europe. In Europe diverse worthy and grave Fathers of the church, called and
summoned by Constantinus Magnus, a little after the Nicene Council, to come
together at Arles in France, held two Councils there, the first, and shortly
after the second. In both which they decreed the excommunication of all
Stage Players, so long as they continued that trade of life. And in the first
Council, cap. 5. thus they say: De theatricis, and ipsos placuit, quandiu
agunt, a communione separari; that is, as touching Stage Players, we think it
good, that whiles they continue in that trade of life, they be kept from the
communion. And in the second Council held there presently after, they decree
the same thing again, can. 20. and almost in the same words.

But yet to give in more evidence, we may have all the worthy Fathers of the
Churches in Asia, Africa, and Europa, assembled together in the sixth general
Council, which was held at Constantinople, approve that which at Laodicea in
Asia, and at Carthage in Africa, was decreed against Stage Players. For when
Constantinus Pogonatus in the year 681 called that sixth general Council at
Constantinople against the Monothelites of those times, as Zonoras, Tomo tertio
shows, about five years after, his son Iustinianus II. assembled the
Fathers there again, as Gratianus did. 16. cap. 7. and the Centuriators of
Magdeburgh, Cent. 7. cap. 9. col. 455. do witness: and can. 20. they approve
those two former Councils of Laodicea and of Carthage.

And thus we have the judgment of all the orthodoxall and true Catholic
Fathers of the churches throughout the whole world, against Stage Players, and
Stage-playing, with one consent.

Papists. Secondly, the Papists, though they be favorers of Stage Plays, and
actors sometime upon the Stage (as lately at Lions in France) yet they cannot
for very shame justify them, but contrariewise condemn them in their
writings. And in their great Canon book of Decrees compiled by Gratian, they
ratify the four first general Councils, and all the other Councils made
afterward, and contained in that great book of Decrees, did. 15. cap. 2.
and 4. and did. 16. cap. 6. etc. they approve by name the three Councils
alleged before. More particularly they approve that which was mentioned before
of the Council of Laodicea, de consecratione did. 5. cap. 37. and that which
was decreed against Stage-plaies in the third Council of Carthage, de
consecrat. did. 2. cap. 96. and the canons of the sixth general Council, de
consecratione did. 3. cap. 29.

Parliament. Thirdly, the Honorable Court of Parliament in this Land, has
justly censured Stage Players, as those that live not in a lawful trade to
mainteyne themselves by. as in the xiiij. year of Elizabeth, chap. 5. and in
the xxxix year of Elizab. chap. 7. and in the second year of King James,
chap. vij.

The civil Law.
says thus of Stage Players Pandect. lib. 3. tit. 2. Eos enim, qui quaestus
causa in certamina descendunt, and omnes propter praemium in scenam prodeuntes,
famosos esse, Pegasus and Nerva responderunt; that is, Pegasus and Nerva said,
that those were infamous which tried masterie for gain, and all that came upon
the Stage for a reward. Also who list, may read somewhat to the same purpose.
Novel. constable. 51.

Heathens. Fifthly, the infidel Heathens, howsoever they first devised them,
and after used them very much, yet have they disalowed them, as Augustine de
civitate Dei, lib. 2. cap. 13. rehearsing the words of Scipio out of Tullie,
shows: Quum artem ludicram scenamque totam probro ducerent, genus id hominum
non modo honor civium reliquorum carere, sed etiam tribu moveri notatione
censoria voluerunt. that is, The Romans accounting those plays, and the whole
Stage to be reproachful, when they valued the goods and enrolled the names of
their citizens, gave not the honor of other citizens to Stage Players, but
razed their names out of their wards or companies. Suetonius taxes Nero for a
favorer of them, and an actor among them. Arnobius lib. 7. contra gentes,
appealing to the conscience of the Heathen, shows that they disallow them,
and says thus of the Stage Players, actores inhonestos esse jus vestrum
judicavit, that is, your own law has adjudged the stage plays to be no
honest men.

And these judgments of men are sufficient to condemn Stage Plays as
unlawful, and dishonest also, as Cornelius Nepos says in his preface before
the description of the noble Emperors.

The seventh Reason.


1. Philip king of Macedonia, and father of Alexander the great, was slain at
a play by Pausanias, as Diodorus Siculus writes lib. 16.

Plinius histor. nature. lib. 7. cap. 53. speaking of diverse that dyed suddenly,
says, that one M. Ofilius Hilarus a noble player of Comedies, after he had
played his part gallantly on the day of his birth, and was vaunting at supper
of his days work, died suddenly at the table.

3. Paulus Orosius lib. 7. cap. 4. writes that in the twelft year of
Tiberius, (which was three years before Christ began to preach the Gospel
publicly) there were twenty thousand persons slain by the fall of the
Theater at Fidena in Italy.

4. About thirteen years after, Caius Caligula the Emperor was slain at a
play. Joseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap. 1. Suetonius in Caligula cap. 58.

5. About 150 years after Christ's nativitie, whiles the Plays were kept at
Rome with great solemnity, for the space of three days and three nights
together, continually and without intermission, a great part of the city was
set on fire and consumed. And Phillip the Emperor was slain at Varona, and
his son at Rome, as it is reported by Sextus Aurelius, Pomponius Laetus, and
Eutropius lib. 9.

6. Tertullianus in his book de Spectaculis, says, that a Christian woman
going to the plays, was then possessed of a devil, and when other Christians,
intending to cast the devil out of her, demanded of him, how he durst presume
to assault one that believed in Christ, the devil answered, that he found her
in his own house, and therefore had good right to seize upon her. Also he
writes in the same Book and place, that an other faithful woman going also
to behold the Plays, had either a fearful dream or a vision the next night
after, wherein she was checked for going to the Plays, was warned of her
death, and dyed within five days after.

7. Aventinus annal. Bojorum lib. 7. writes, that about 1200 years after
Christ, three hundred men were slain with hayle and lightning at Pisonium, a
city of Bavaria, in the confines of Italy, whiles they were there to behold
the Plays.

8. The same Author Aventinus annal. Bojor. lib. 7. writes also, that when
Pope Nicholaus V. solemnized his rich Jubilee, in the year 1450, with Stage
plays, five hundred and threescore persons, coming to Rome to behold the
Plays, were partly trodden to death, and partly drowned in Tiber.

9. At London in the year of Christ 1583 eight persons were slain, and more
hurt, by the fall of the theater.

10. At Lions in France in the month of August, in the year 1607, whiles the
Jesuits were acting their Plays, to the disgrace of true religion, and the
professors thereof, the Lord from heaven continuing thunder and lightnings, for
the space of two hours together, slew twelve persons presently, and amassed
all the rest with great terror and fear.

FINIS.

