THE ANCIENT History of the destruction of Troy.

Containing the founders and foundation of the said City, with the causes and
manner of the first and second spoils and sackings thereof, by Hercules and his
followers: and the third and last utter desolation and ruin, effected by
Menelaus and all the notable worthies of Greece,

Here also are mentioned the rising and flourishing of sundry Kings with their
Realms: as also the decaie and overthrow of diverse others.

Besides many admirable and most rare exployts of Chualrie and martial
prowess tested by valorous Knights with incredible events as compassed for,
and through the love of Ladies.

Translated out of French into English, by W. Caxton.

Newly corrected, and the English much amended, by William Fiston.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed (...)

THE PRINTERS to the courteous Reader, health and happiness.
WHereas it is, and ever has been a custom, that among all manner studies, the
reading of Annals, and Histories, most delights men of all ages, but
especially young men, whose affections are quickly incensed, and their hears
set on fire with an emulation of whatsoever notable and valorous enterprises
they shall hear or read of: but most principally young Gentlemen and Noble
men, are by the viewing of memorable deeds and martial prowess, so inflamed
with an approbation of good and famous exployts; and with a detestation of
ignomious or cowardly persons and deeds, that the reading and hearing hereof,
do as it were kindle in their minds an ardent burning desire of imitating, if
not matching, or ouergoing the most glorious attempts, of the greatest and most
excellent. In regard whereof, the memorable sayings, deeds, and endeavors, of
the wisest, most learned, and most valiant of all ages, have been still
committed to writing, and left to posterity, in all civil Countries, to be as
whetstones for the wits of other to come, and as spurs to prick forward
unto fortitude and magnanimity. And, to this purpose, not only true Histories
have always been published, but many fictions of admirable and most strange,
yea of incredible things achieved by industrious valor, and constancy in
Lovers. If then feigned stories of martial men and loving Ladies, may be
necessary and delightful, how much more profitable and pleasant may this
History be deemed, which compriseth both rare and worthy feats of Chiualry
great store, and also diverse wonderful events brought to pass by the steadfast
faithfulness of true Lovers: and this story, in respect of the subject, is
very true, howsoever in the circumstances, some poetical paintings and
hyperbolical praises may be found. And whereas before time, the Translator
William Caxton, being (as it seems) no English man, had left very many words
mere French, and sundry sentences so improperly Englished, that it was hard to
understand, we have caused them to be made plainer English: and if leiure had
served, we would have had the same in better refined phrases, and certain
names that be amiss, conferred with Authors, and made right. But if we
find your favorable accepting hereof to be such, as we may shortly have a
second impression, we will have all amended.

Fare ye well.
The first Book of the destruction of Troy.
CHAP. 1. Of the lineage and offspring of Saturn, and how for his inuenting of
sowing corn, planting, etc. he was honored in Crete as a God.
WHat time all the Children of Noe, were spread by the Climates, reigns, and
strange habitations of the world, by the general division of tongues, made at
the foundation of the tower of Babylon; in those days that the world was of
gold, and that the men were steadfast and poysing, as mountains, and rude as
stones and beasts, enhaunsing their great courages, fowling and showing their
great conceits: and that the enemy of man induced maliciously to practice to
make Towns, Cities and Castles, to make Scepters and Diadems, and to forge and
make the cursed sect of gods among ye possessors of the Isle of Crete: There
was a rich man inha^ansed full of couetise, happy, of aventurous enterprise,
and right rich of the grace of fortune, some men called this man Celion, and
some Vranus, he was lawful son of Either, son of Demor Gorgon the old
dweller in the caves of Archadi^e, and first beginner of the false Paynim gods.
This Vranus* had to his wife his own sister called Vesca: he lived gloriously
with her, and had possession of the most part of the Isle of Crete, and
abounded prosperously in worldly goods, in increasing his natural appetites,
first in increasing and ampliation of wordly Lordship and seigniorie, and
secondly in lynage, and was marvelous rich. He had two sons, that is to wit,
Titan, and Saturn: and two daughters, that one was called Cibell, and the
other Ceres, of whom shall be made mention hereafter: and he had many other
sons and daughters, of whom I make no mention, for as much as they be out of
my purpose. What shall I rehearse more of the glory of this Vranus. He had all
thing as he would, and was fortunat, and nothing went against him: his goods
multiplied, his children grew and increased, but Titan the oldest son was
foul, evil favored, and counterfeyte, and Saturn was marvelously fair, and
amiable: for which cause Vesca the mother loved much better Saturn than Titan,
and that by nature, for naturally the mothers love better their fair children
than their foul: wherefore Saturn was nourished most in the lap of his
mother: and Titan was put out, and in manner banished. And when Saturn was
great, what for his beauty, and for his cunning and science and other virtues,
he gate the whole love of all the people.

In this time it was so, that whatsoever man practiced or found any things
profitable for the common wealth, was recommended solemnly, and called and
named a God, after their foolish and dark custom. Saturn was named a god,
for in his youth, by his cumming, he was the the first finder to give
instruction of ea^ing and laboring the earth, and of sowing and reaping the
corn. And this invention was applied to Saturn, with divine reverence, with
love upon love, not only anenst Vesca, and Vranus, and his kinsmen: but above
measure all the people of Crete, and of the Marches and Countries lying by, and
there about. And thus his name arose, and was renowned, that from all places,
men and children, Nobles and villains, came to his school for to learn. In
these days that Saturn began thus to flourish, and was twenty years of age
and his brother forty, Vranus their father by a sickness that he had, dyed, and
departed out of this world, leaving his wife Vesca endowed largely of
possessions. His death was noyous and sorrowful to Vesca his wife, which
caused her to weep out of measure, and his sons and daughters also, they did
his obsequie reverently, in abounding of great and bitter sorrow. The obsequie
done (their weeping and sorrow yet during) Vesca saw that Titan her eldest son
pretended to have and enjoy the succession of his father: she on a day called
her dear son Saturn, with Titan, and other of the Country, and there
rehearsed and said unto them, that her young son Saturn should succeed, and
have the heritages of her husband. Titan hearing the will of his mother,
redoubled his sorrow, and it caused him to weep great plenty of tears, and
kneeled too fore his mother humbly, and said in in this wise: Mother, I am
right unfortunate, when ye will that my right patrimony be put from me, and
that naturally me ought to have by right, should be given from me: and yet
because that I am not so well formed of members, as my brother Saturn is, which
sorrow is to me passing noyous, ye will put from me my fortune and birth, which
ye may not do by lawful reason. I am your first son, ye have nourished me
with the substance of your blood, as your child, borne in your belly nine
Months. Also I am he that first dwelled and inhabited your feminine chambers:
none tofore me took there any seisin: when I took that, then ye gave, me
your due love, and sorted to me the succession of your heritages. Then whence
comes this, that ye now subvert and destroy that nature has once joined and
given me: every mother is bounden to hold the conservation of the right of her
child. Alas, mother, will ye make me bastard fro my right? am I a bastard? was
not Vranus my father? am not I he that ye were so glad for, what time ye felt
first that I was conceived in the lawful bed of my father your husband? am I
not be that ye bare, and gave me suck of your breasts, and oftentimes kissed
me, that is to say, in my tender days, what time my members were soft and
tender? Ha mother, acquit you ayeinst me, as ye beholden and bounden by right,
and knowledge ye that I am Titan, and for as much as I am less and not so well
adressed as my brother Saturn, so much ye ought the more desire my promotion,
and furthering.

When dame Vesca heard her son Titan speak so sadly, and profoundly, she had
pity on him: yet the pity was not of so high virtue, that might surmount the
great love that was rooted between her and Saturn, and then she said to
Titan her son: Titan, my son, I deny not that thou tookest thy substance
between my sides, and were brought into this world: and know verily that I
love thee entirely, and that I desire thy weal: but it is so clear and
evident in every man's sight, that for the default, loathlinesse, and
abomination of thy members, thou art not a man sufficient to defend thy
fathers heritage, with great labor and pain: for if it happen that one man
would make war, thou were not able to resist him: what would thou that I
should do? thy brother has the love of all the people, for his beauty, and his
virtuous manners, and every man holds him in reverence, and thee in derision
and scorn. Be thou content, thou shall lack nothing, and if thou lack,
speak to me and I shall remedy it: but speak never no more to me for the
heritage, for Saturn shall obtain it, by the favor of his wisdom,
meekness, and benignity, and also because the common sort judges him, and
sees that he shall once be the man whose life shall shine gloriously.

Titan was sort troubled of the words of his mother, and he began to change
color, and wax red, having suspicion to Saturn, that he had contrived this
matter against him: whereupon he drew him apart to him, and said: Saturn, the
envy that thou have to reign above me, has now engendered in my heart thy
mortal mischief, whereof the hate shall endure unto the mortal separation of
thy life, and of mine, and of my children. Thou know well that I am the
eldest son of our father Vranus, how art thou so hardy and presumptuous, to
inhaunce thy self above me by conspired imagination? I will that thou know
verily, that like as thou have conspired in my temporal damage, semblably I
shall conspire to thy eternal damage and hurt. And name me from henceforth thy
mortal enemy. When Saturn heard these burning and enflamed menasses of his
brother Titan, he excused himself and answered, that he never thought in his
life to come to the succession of their father, nor never had imagined nor
conspired it. Then Vesca their mother, Cibell, and Ceres, took the words fro
Saturn, and said to Titan, that his threatening to Saturn was for naught, for
he should reign and be Lord and master. Titan full of felony, and more
angry then he was too fore, said plainly that he would not suffer it. Saturn
had a great part of the people that assisted him, and gave him favor. And
Titan also had other on his side, which began to murmr, the one party
against the other. All the compapanie was sore troubled, and began to thrust
in, and enployed them to cease the noise, and to accord Titan: notwithstanding
it was hard to do, for always he would have run upon Saturn, if he had not
been hold and let always. In the end, the wise men showed Titan by great
reason, that he was the more feeble, and that Saturn was more in the favor of
the people, and that he would modere himself a little, and said that he
should agree, and grant the reign to Saturn, by condition, that if he
married, he should be bound to put to death all his children males, that should
be begotten of his seed, if he any had, for ye well of both parties. Vesca
with her daughter, and the ancient wise people accorded to Titan this
condition, and labored so to Saturn, that they brought them to the Temple of
their god Mars, that was in the city of Oson, whereof was Lord a mighty man
called Milliseus, and that before the image of the god Mars, Saturn swore that
if him happed to marry, and that he had any children males, he would slay
them all, and thus was Titan content yt his brother should enjoy the land of
Crete, and the peace was made between them both.

CHAP. II. How Saturn was crowned first King of Crete and how he found first
diverse sciences, wherefore the people held him in great honor as a God.
AFter the treaty made of the peace of Titan and Saturn, Titan saw in
himself that he might not worshipfully abide and dwell, being under his
younger brother: had lever go and search his adventures in other places, then to
be thral to his younger brother. He took his wife his children and friends,
and departed at all adventure into diverse places, where he found fortune so
good and happy that by arms and strength he made himself king of many diverse
Realms, which he departed unto his chlldren, and commised and ordained
certain espies to epsy and wait, if his brother Saturn married himself,
and if his wife brought forth men children, and whether he put them to death.
During these said things, Saturn dwelled with his mother and his sisters
Cibell and Ceres, and began to reign with so great magnificence, that they
of the country seeing their neighbors by them did make and ordain Kings to
reign on them, of such as were noble and virtuous: assembled together on a
day, and made Saturn King over them, and upon their lines, and crowned him
with great glory, with a crown of Lawyer, with great joy. Saturn anon took
and accepted this royal honor and worship, and took the scepter in his hand,
and here the crown on his head, and reigned wisely, inducing his people to
live honestly, and to love virtue, and ordained a naked sword to be borne before
him, in sign of justice. He did justice on malefactors, and enhaunsed them
that were good, he did build a City, which he named Crete, because the I Will
bare the said name, and he was the first inhabitour and dweller. When he had
founded the City, he ordained his Palace and dwelling place in the middle
thereof, in example, as the heart is in the mids of the body, to minister to
the members, so he would instruct and govern his people. And after this, he
chose an hundred and four wise men, which he instituted and ordained
counselors and governors of his Realm. And then they of Crete seeing the
right great wisdom of their king, assembled together diverse times, and named
him a god: and yet more, they founded unto him a Temple, an Alter and an Idol,
bearing in the one hand a sickle, in signification that he destroyed the
vices, in such wise as the fickle cutteth herbs and destroys the weeds: and
in the other hand he held a serpent, that did bite his tail, forasmuch as
Saturn said, that every man should bite the tail of the serpent, yt is to say,
that every man should fear and flee the evil end: For the end oftentimes is
venomous, as the tail of a Serpent: and that appears yet daily by the end
of many evil disposed and inuenomed men.

By the mean of these things the renoume of king Saturn grew, and that
world was the time of gold: That is for to say, it was much better, and more
abundant in the days of man's life, and in plenty of fruits of the earth, then
in any other time after. The Poets by this color, compared the world at this
time to gold, which is most precious of al metals: wherefore many men say, that
Saturn was the first man that found the manner to melt metal, and to affine
gold, and made his vessel, and vtensilles of his house, of diverse metal. And
under this color, they figured at that time, the world to be of gold. Then
began the men by the doctrine of Saturn to use and were gold, to mine the
rocks, to pearce the mountains perilous, to haunt the thorny deserts, to fight
and advance the orguillous serpents, ye fierce dragons, ye deadly griffons, ye
monstrous beasts, and to spread abroad their worldly engines. By these exercises
was then Saturn the fourbisher and beginner of the style, to learn men to
take these beasts. And first found the manner of shooting and drawing of the
bow. Of this gold, made Saturn his house, his chambers and halles, to shine by
maruailous working. He was strong and hardy, he had no fear nor doubt of any
Serpent of the mountain, nor any monster of desert, or of beast dwelling in
caves. He knew the veins of gold in the earth, and could discern them from
the veins of silver. He edifies rich things of gold joyous unto the eye sight,
and h^te and courageous to the heart. For at that time the courages by
perdurable fire chasing the affections of man, in manner of a contagious heat
so singularly, that after always that they coueted, they desired to accomplish.
In this time of the golden world, the creatures lived and endured greatly and
long. And all the world labored in edification of science and cunning of
virtue. And that time were the men more virtuous in bodily edifying, then ever
they were since. Among whom Saturn was never idle, after that he had once
labored corns in earing and sowing. He molte and fined gold and metals, and
induced and taught his men to draw the bow and shoot. He himself found first
the bow, and the manner to go and sail by the sea, and to row with little
boats by the riuage, and took his own pleasure for to endoctrine and teach
his people in all these things, and he had great abundance of worldly goods
reserved, only he durst not marry: and that he had sworn to death all the
men children that should come of his seed. Whereof he was oftentimes anoyed,
and had great displeasure, etc.

CHAP. III. How Saturn went to Delphos, and had answer, how he should have
a son that should chase him out of his realm. And how he married him to his
sister Cibell, etc.
WHen Saturn saw his Palace flourish and shine of gold, and saw his people
obey him, saw his goldsmiths and workers break mountains with their Pikares,
and instruments: saw his mariners cut ye waves of the sea with their Oars, saw
his disciples learn and labor the earth, saw his Archers shoot with their
arrows, and smote and took the birds, dwelling in the high trees, and flying
by the air: he might embrace great glory, and inhaunce on high his throne,
and his felicity. But on the other side, when he remembered the covenant made
between him and his brother Titan, he was like unto the Peacocke that is proud
of the fair feathers diversely fair colored, which he spreades round as a
wheel, and withal only looking on his feet, he leeseth all his joy. Saturn
likewise by this treaty, lost al his joy, his glory, and his pleasure. He was
long time leading this life, now joyous, now sorrowful, growing always and
increasing his realm, and daily thought and poised in himself if he might
marry or not, for nothing in the world he would false his oath. He was just and
true in deed and in word. Nevertheless, nature moved him, and cited him to have
generation, and to come to company of women: and this moving was al all times
refreshed and renewed by a continual sight that he had daily in a passing
fair maid, that is to wit, his sister Cibell, which he saw continually: in
whom was no default of all the goods of nature appertaining to woman. She was
out of measure right humble in speaking: wise in her works, honest in
conversation, and flowing in all virtues. And for this cause Saturn beheld
her often times. And so happened on a time as he beheld her affairs and works, he
cast his eyes on her virtues that pleased him so greatly, that in the end he
was desirous of her love, whereof his mother Vesca had great joy, and pleasure.
And she perceiving of the desire of Saturn, gave him courage and will to marry
her. And so labored and solicited the marriage so effectually, that with great
worship and triumph, Saturn spoused and wedded Cibell his sister, after their
usage, and she was the first Queen of Crete. He living with her, paid in this
wise the due debt of marriage, that at the end of nine months, Cibell had a
son, which Saturn did put to death, acquiting himself of the oath that he
had made unto his brother Titan. And of this Boccace makes no mention. But
they lay together again, And Cibell conceived then of the seed of Saturn,
another son with a daughter, that by space of time appeared great in the
mothers belly.

In the time when the law of nature was in his vigor and strength, the men
married with their sisters. And in especial the Painims, if they were not
content, and had suffisance of one wife, they might take mo without reproach.
When Saturn knew that his wife was with child the second time, the death of
his first son came before him, and he said in himself, that he would that
his wife had been harren. Then he began to be full of diverse fantasies of
forthoughts, and desired to know what should befall of the fruit of the womb
of Cibell. He went himself forth to the I Will of Delphos unto the Oracle of the
god Apollo, that gave answer to the people that demanded of things that should
after fall and happen. And then when he had done his sacrifice, and made his
prayer, the Priest of the Temple put him into a perelos, under the altar of the
foresaid Idol: and there he heard a great whirling wind that troubled him, and
all his wit and understanding, that he was in manner of a spasme or a sowns, by
which he fell to the ground, and after that when he arose, him thought that the
god Aprllo appeared unto him with a dreadful face, and said thus to him.
Saturn what moves thee to will to know thine evil destiny? thou have
engendered a son, that shall take from thee the diadem of Crete, and shall
banish thee out of thy realm, and shall be without phere above all people, the
most fortunate man that ever was borne in Greece. After these words Saturn
came again to himself, and remembered him of his evil prophecy that touched
the bottom of his heart, and so sore anoyed, and right pensife, he went out of
the Oracle with a troubled heart, and all bare of gladness, and all oppressed
and environed with wanhops, came to his folk and departed thence, and went to
ship: and when he was in his ship, he hung down his head, which he held not
up till he came to Crete. And when he had his head so inclined, he began to
think and be pen^^fe. And after many right sorrowful fighs, engendered in the
root of Melancholy, said in this wise: Alas Saturn your king, what avails
me the dignity to be the first king of Crete? what profited me these divine
reuerences? or what good do me my science, when I feel me in putting back
of fortune? O fortune soon turning, frail and variable, and plying to every
wind like a roster: at least stay, that the wheel that turns without end,
may speak to me Saturn, that inuenter and finder of the common weal. And if
thou will not lend me thy clear and laughing visage, at least lend me thy
large ears. Thou have given me triumph and glory of Crown: and now thou
suffer me to fall from this great worship, he gods witness it. And what is
this? thou have consented to my prospertie, and now conspirest my mendicitie,
my fall and shameful ^nde: and intendest that I shall be named the unhappy
Saturn. If all my life has been nourished in happiness, and the end
unhappy and woeful, I shall be called and said unhappy: and all my happy
fortunes and blisses shall turn more to reproach and shame, then to praising
or to any worship. O fortune: in what thing have I offended? have I foughten
against thee? or have I done any folly against the magnificence of the gods?
Have I rebelled or offended the aires, the worlds, the heavens, the planets,
the s^^e, the moon, the earths, the seas, what have I done or trespast tell
me. O my God where art thou? Have thou ennie to me, be (...) I have been in
the Oracle of the aforesaid God Apoll^ he has showed unto me the ruin of my
(...), she (...) thing and breaking of my Dyademe, the (...) the clearenesse of
my reign, the enhaunsing (...) and the putting me out of my Realm, that shall
or ^eade of his insurrection. Alas what remedy to this great sorrow that I
have? I have slain one of my sons, wherefore I have great and bitter sorrow:
and have concluded in my self, that never hereafter I will so cruelly spill
the life of my children, for to die with them. After this conclusion, I must of
very force, and sore against my will, return and continue in my first
unnatural cruelty. For if my son that now is in the womb of my wife, be
suffered to live, he shall exile me and put me out of my Realm, and down off
my throne, which shall be to me right hard and grievous to bear and suffer
patiently. And therefore it is better to slay him. Alas and if I slay him, then
it seems me I should resist the will of the gods, which peradventure will
raise him again, and that should be worse, for then I should not only be
called an homicide and mans^ear, but an unnatural murderer, not of a Giant,
nor of a strange man of another land: but of a right little child, issued of
my proper ^eines, bones, and flesh: That after the Pronostication of the gods
is preelect, and chosen to be the greatest Lord of Greece, and sovereign of
all the kings in his time.

Saturn thus feeling him in great sorrow and trouble, and always worse and
worse, as before is said, began to change his color and wax pale, full of
melancholy, and of fantasies, and could not appease his vnfortune. His most
privy men, and they that were most familiar with him, durst not approach unto
him, but seeing his sorrowful manner, they were discomforted in his desolatio^,
sorrowful with his sorrow, and angry with his anger. He was in short time so
greatly perturbed, and impressed with so eager impresson of sorrow, that his
face was like unto Ashes, or as he had be dead always: and after many thoughts,
he opened his mouth, and spoke softly thus: I slay my self by melancholy, and
am a man greatly abused: I have made an oath unto my brother Titan, that I shall
put all my children male to death, that shall come of my flesh. Peradventure the
gods would not suffer that I shall be forsworn: and have let me have knowledge by
my god Apollo, that my wife has conceived a son that shall put me out of my
Realm, to the end that I should slay him: forasmuch as I had concluded in my
self, to have broken mine oath, and have spared the lives of my children. And
since it is so, I shall no longer spare them: if it happen that my son be
borne a live, certain he shall be put to death: for it is better that he die a
child, then he should wax a man, and wax rebel against me, and enhaunce
himself above me, by his malice, insurrection, or otherwise.

In this will and resolution, this sorrowful Saturn returned into his house,
continuing in this estate, and sorrowful sighs, and melancholious fantasies,
in such wise that Cibel durst not come into his presence, nor could not get of
him a joyous sight: wherefore he got him a surname of sorrow, and was named
Saturn, the triste, or sorrowful. And it was so, that when he had bin in his
house a certain space, and saw the day approach that his wife should be
delivered of child, for to execute his sorrowful courage, he called his wife and
said: Dame it is so apparent, that shortly thou shall be delivered of ye fruit
of thy womb: if thou be delivered of a son, I command thee upon pain of
death, that thou slay him, and that thou send me his heart. And when Cibell
heard these words, and this rigorous and unnatural violence and will, anon
she fell to the ground in a sown, for her legs failed her. And in the
releeuing of the sown, she kneeled before the feet of Saturn, and said on
this wise. Sir, have thou no shame, that wilt be husband of a woman murdering
her own child: I thee require of mercy and grace, beseeching thee to have
regard, that I am thy wife, and have the heart of a woman, and not of a tyrant,
or a murderer. Dame (answered Saturn) require me no more of things touching
this matter: it is judged by a foreseen and counterpeysed sentence, that if
thou have a son, he shall be dead: for I have promised and sworn so to my
brother Titan: and above this, I have answer of the god Apollo, that in thy
womb is a son, that shall cast me out of this realm: and therefore, see
that at his birth he be dead, as dear as thou love thy life: and also, as I
have said, send me his heart meddled with wine, that I may drink it. And how
sir, answered Cibell, know thou not that I am a woman, and by proper and
singular inclination, I have a very love to small children, and must give them
to eat, and suck? O weenest thou that I have an heart so hard, as for to foil
my hands with the blood of my son? I pray and require thee, to revoke thy
sentence, and be pitious to thy wife and generation. Thou art wise after the
judgment of thy people. In this party, thou show thy self not good: for
by thy oath thou art not bounden, nor holden to slay thy son, seeing it is
truth, that all oaths made against good manners, ought not to be holden. For to
slay thy son, it is a villain case, and contrary to honor, reason, pity,
equity, and justice. It is sin against nature, against virtue, and against
all good manners. Then, thy oath for to slay thy son is naught, and thou
ought anull it: thou art king, and that upon pain of death forviddest thy
people to make murder, or homicide. By this thou that art myrrour and example
to other, ought to be content and appease thy self. And me seems on that
other side, that thou interpretest, and construest evil, the sentence of god
Apollo, saying, that I have in my womb a son, that shall put thee out of thy
kingdom, For by this, it ought to be understand, that the son that I bear,
shall ouerliue thee, and put thee so out of thy kingdom, that is to say, into
thy Sepulcher, the day that thou shall depart out of this world. And if this
may not appease thee: if it so happen that I have a son, thou may do him to
be kept in a strong Tower, and there to set such ward upon him, that he shall
never be of power to enhaunce himself against thee.

Saturn had then the heart passing great, that for semblable compassion, Vesca
the mother, Cibell and Ceres, wept, and gave out great plenty of tears, and
in like wise all the assistants that were in the place, wept out of measure
abundantly: yet nevertheless it might not soft nor attemper the hard
commandment of king Saturn. But in conclusion, he said to Cibell, that she
should no more procure the respite of the life of his son, but he should be
dead, and she also with him, if she did not his commandment. With sorrowful
conclusion Cibell departed from thence, all in a trance half dead, and
casting abroad her arms and hands, with great excess of tears, that ran
like a river from her tender eyes, entered into a Tower, her mother that
desolate Lady following her. She being in her chamber for frushed, and all
distempered with sorrow, began to travel anon, and was delivered of a
daughter, and of a son. The daughter was borne before the son, and was sent
by Ceres, and borne to nourish into the City of Parthenie, and was named Juno:
and the son began to laugh at coming out of his mothers womb, and was named
Jupiter.

When Cibell and Vesca, saw the child laugh, their tears began to grow
double, and they had not taken great regard and heed to the child, what time
Cibell all angry and corrupt with wanhope, with a sigh and feeble spirit said
to her mother: Ha, my mother, what pitious case shall this be now? give me a
sharp cutting knife, and I shall murder my son, by unnatural error
against my will. And after this villainous deed, for my absolution of the great
sin, I shall murder my self also. And this is my full purpose: for, after
so cruel a deed and work, notwithstanding any excusation, I never will
longer live. The mother of Cibell was then al bewept and greatly dismayed, when
she heard the air of the tender mouth of her daughter redound in her ears, of
so hard a cruelty: she being all afraid, said to her, my daughter what think
thou to do? art thou enraged out of thy wit, or foolish? My mother, answered
Cibell, yea verily, I am verily as you say, enraged out of my wit, and foolish,
and yet more I am furious wood. Make me no longer to languish. Give me the
cursed mortal knife, forged in an evil hour, for of force I must obey the
king Saturn, your right well-beloved son, my right redoubted husband, that
has commandment over me, and will shamefully put me to death, if I accomplish
not, and fulfill his commandment in the death of his son, which he has
charged me to slay.

Anon, as Vesca considered that her daughter said, and in the error that she
was in, she took the child that was in her arms, and plucked it from her by
force, and always the child laughed. When Cibell saw her son in the arms of
her mother, as a woman enraged and out of her wit, she began to cry, that she
should slay the child, or give it her again; or else she would arise out of
her bed, and go and complain to king Saturn. After these words, Vesca
delivered the child to a Damsel of the house, that only was there with them,
and bade her, that she should go slay the child in the presence of Saturn, or
in some other place out of their sight: the poor damsel excused her, and
Vesca gave her in commandment, and charged her with great menaces, that she
should go forth and take the child, and the knife, and ^^ea it. And so by the
commandment of these two Ladies, she took the knife many times, and put it
to the throat of the child, for to cut it asunder, and always the noble child
laughed at the knife. And when the damsel saw this, that it was innonocent,
she might not find in her heart to do it any harm. In this sorrow, and and in
this pain and vexation, Vesca, Cibel, and the damsel were a long time. Now
they judged him to death and put the knife to his throat: and suddenly the
Damsel revoked it, and swear that she would never be persecutresse of one to
fair a child. And thus they began all three to weep and sobbe, bewailing the
child, by so great affection that it was pity to hear. After this, when they
had long wept and sobbed, and bewailed the tender weeping and pain of Cibell,
they began a little to pacify their hearts and began to return to motherly
pity. Cibell called her that held the child, and required her pitiously, that
she would give her her son, to kiss and hold in her arms, promising that
she would do him no harm. The Damsel that wist not what should fall,
delivered her her tender child: and then when Cibell beheld her child, with
her face all bewept, and all distempered with tears, she kissed his laughing
mouth, more then an C. times, and came again to her nature, knowledging her
sin, and began to say. My child, I had bin well unfortunate, if I had taken
thy life from thee. I have co^tended thy death: my right sweet son, alas
shall I persecute thee after the will of thy father king Saturn? It is his
commandment, and I owe him obeysaunce: if I obey, the culpe and sin is due to
him. If I obey not, I make my self culpable of death. Ah what is this? shall
thou die by my hands* by the hands of thy proper mother? H^, shall thy mother
be thy m^^tyrer? Shall thy mother be thine enemy, and bitter mortal
adversary, for doubt of death? I wot not what to say, but will I, or will I
not, thou art my son. Every mother loves her child: how may I hate thee? It
is much better that I tie then thou, I have lived long though, and thou art
now (...) borne. Verily thou shall not ^^s at this time. I shall save thy
life: or, I shall die for thy health, requiring the gods mercy for the evil
will that I had against thee.

CHAP. IIII. How Saturn had commanded to slay Jupiter that was newborn, and
how his mother Cibell sent him to king Meliseus, where he was nourished,
THe right sorrowful Lady, after this came better to her self, and took
heart to he^, and kissed her child that always laughed. And Vesca beheld her
countenance all new, and sat down on the bed side where her daughter lay.
There they two began to speak together of Saturn, and of the fortune of this
child, and that he had been in great adventure: and promised the one unto
the other, that they would save the child, unto their power. After this
promise, in the end of diverse purposes, they concluded to send this child
secretly unto the two daughters of king Melliseus, the which Vesca had
nourished in her young age. Of these two daughters, the one was named Almachee,
and the other Mellisee. This conclusion fully finished and taken, Vesca lapped
and wound the child as it ought to be, and delivered it unto a damsel being
there present, with all things, and gave her charge to bear it secretly to
Almachee, and Mellisee. The good damosel enterprised the said charge, and
departed out of Crete with the child at al adventure, and so worshipfully
guided her, that she brought the child living in safety to the city of Oson:
which she presented to Almachee and Mellisee, rehearsing how Vesca had sent him
to them, for the great love and trust that she had in them, and how Saturn had
commanded that his mother should flea it.

Anon, as these two damsels saw the child, and understood how Saturn had
judged it to death, they received it with pity, and in favor of Vesca,
promised to nourish it in the secretest and best wise that they might, And
forthwith the same hour they bare the child unto a mountain that was nigh to
the City, wherein dwelled their nourse in a deep hole of a cave, which was
richly entailed, and carved with Chisell and other diverse instruments. And
then they sent again the Damsel that brought the child into Crete. In this
manner was the life of the child saved. Almachee and Mellise nourished the
child with the milk of a goat. Fortune was to him more propice and helping the^
nature. What shall I say, in the beginning when he was put in the cave, as his
nurse on a day saw him weep and cry by his proper inclination of chilhoode,
because he should not be heard, they took Trumpets, Timpanes, and nimbals,
and made them to sownd so greatly, that a great multitude of Bees fleeing about
the mountain heard their sound, and with this sownd entered into the cave, and
took an hole by the child, flying about him without any grief or harm doing
to the child: and yet more, they made there honey, whereof the child did eat
and was nourished from thence forth, which was a maruailous thing. And for to
atchieue the matter, beginning at the damsel that had borne this child
thither: when she came again, she rehearsed to dame Cibell and Vesca, all her
doing and work, and gave them a right great comfort touching the child. Then
the two Ladies, by mere deliberatio^ took an Abest, which is a precious
stone, and brayed it into powder, and after that they mingled it with wine in a
cup of gold, and dame Vesca bare it to her son Saturn, and she abounding in
bitter tears all bewept, said unto him: My son, thy wife has sent to thee
this drink, know thou verily that she this day has rendered and yeelden the
fruit of her womb, a son and a daughter: she has sent the daughter to nourish
in the City of Parthenie: but in the obeying of thy straight commandment, we
have defeated thy son, and put him to death. Of whom the body, the flesh, and
the little tender bones be now turned into ashes, and she has sent here to
thee, the right noble heart tempred in wine: which I present to thee, to the end
that thou do thy pleasure, and be no more in doubt by thy son to be put out of
ye realm,

Anon as Saturn heard the pittious words of his mother, understanding the
new tidings that she said and showed him, he began to frown, and said in
this manner. O pity without pity: ought not my heart be terrible angry,
and restrained with pressours of sorrow, when it is force of that to mine heart
this present heart, issued of his blood and roots, be given in meat and
pasture, for to staunche the disconuenable hunger of mine dishonest desire.
These words accomplished, Saturn was greatly displeased and full of renewing
of sorrow, drank the drink, weening that it had been as his mother had done
him to understand: and after went into his chamber, and there began to be
greatly in melancholy: and after that, forth on he purposed and trowed to
abstain himself to pay his wife the dew debt of marriage. But as there is no
sorrow that ouerpasseth not by space of time, he forgot this sorrow, and lying
with his wife, engendered another son, which she saved like as Jupiter was saved
(notwithstanding that Saturn charged her to put him to death) and this child
was carried to Athenes, where he was kept and nourished and named Nepune. Yet
after this he lay with his wife, and engendered another son and a daughter,
which at time conuenable were borne, and departed from their mother: but at
this time she told not of her son, but hid it from Saturn: which son was
named Pluto, and she did it to keep in the parties of Thessaly, that afterward
was named hell. And for to content her husband Saturn, when she was delivered
of these two children, she sent to him her daughter, which was called Galanta,
and she died in her tender years. And thus of all these generations, Saturn
supposed that none had been reserved but Juno his daughter, whom he went
oftentimes to visit in Parthenie, where he did it to be nourished with many
noble virgins of her age, and also many ancient gntlewomen, to induce and teach
them gentleness and virtue. But of all them I will a while tarry now, and
also of Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto. And now I will show how Dardanus put his
brother Iasius to death, for covetousness to reign in the City of Corinth:
and how he departed out of Corinth, and how he set the first stone in the City
of Dardane, which afterward was named Troy.

CHAP. V. How after the death of King Corinthus of Corinth, his two sons,
Dardanus and Iasius, strove who of them should have the kingdom: and how
Dardanus slew his brother Iasius by treason, wherefore he must depart out of
the country.
IN this time when Crete began to be a Realm, and a kingdom, and was in
possession of their first king, the same time in the City of Corinth which
stand in Naples, reigned Corinthus their first king: and Corinthus had to his
wife one of the daughters of king Atlas of Libie, named Electra. They reigned
together and achieved prosperously their life: they left after them two
sons, whereof the one was named Dardanus, and that other Iasius. Some say
that this Dardanus was son to Jupiter: but Boccace trowed he was lawful
son of Corinthus (as it appears in the sixth book of the genealogy of
gods) Dardanus then and Iasius, (after the death of their father Corinthus, and
of their mother Electra) would succeed in the realms, and in no wise they
could accord. Dardanus had a high and hautie courage, and Iasius in likewise.
They argued and strove together, the one against the other, oftentimes of this
matter, and conspired and made secret menasses under covert, in such wise that
Dardanus on a day assembled all the people that he could get, for to destroy
his brother Iasius, and his friends were then assembled in a secret place, for
to treat the peace, and to see how they might content and please Dardanus.

When Iasius saw his brother come all in arms, all his blood began to
change, and seeing that his Brother was moved and full of evil will, deeming
that this matter should turn to great mischief, he cried and said: Alas, what
avails for to speak and counsel, and seek means of peace between my
brother and me: we be betrayed, lo here is my brother that comes upon us all
in arms, each man save himself that may. With these words Dardanus came in
to the consistory, smote his brother unto death, and said: Iasius, thou may
not abstain thy self from thy imaginations: Thou have enhaunsed thy self
against me, but now I shall make an end of thee. Iasius fell down dead among
the feet of his friends, and their cloths were all besprent and be-bled with
his blood. When the friends of Iasius saw this tyranny, they saved themselves
as well as they could to their power, and fled from thence all enraged. Then
Dardanus returned to the royal Palace, and the friends of Iasius gathered
them, and went to arms, and made a noise, and murmur so great, that in little
space all the City was strangely troubled for the death of Iasius, which was
greatly in the grace and favor of all the people of Corinth. For when they had
rehearsed the death of Iasius, they took great sorrow, and menaced Dardanus to
death. And forthwith in effect they assembled by great routs in the streets,
and said one to the other: Alas now is dead the love of Corinthus, that had
more amity and love to the common weal then Dardanus: Let us go and avenge
his death: Go we and punish the malefactor; let us no longer tarry: we shall
do a meritorie work. Who that ever does injustice and tyranny, is not worthy
to be chief and head of clemency, nor of justice. If we suffer a murderer to
reign over us, never shall there good come thereof. Where the head is sick
and evil the members may not be whole nor good. Dardanus has slain his
Brother Iasius wrongfully. It is very likely, that he shall slay us after
his will. Let us take from him his puissance, and let us show that we be men,
destroyers of vice and enemies unto all them that seek and engender tyranny in
their courages.

Such were the clamours of the Corinthians: by such noise and semblable
clamours, they chafed themselves, and in the end assembled in one place, and
were of ardent appetite, to correct the malefactor Dardanus, and his
accomplices. In this tempest and swelling furour, they went to the Palace where
Dardanus had put himself for refuge, but they found the gates shut, and
could not enter into it: wherefore they besieged the place making a great
noise, and so great stir, that Dardanus was abashed, and anon he assembled
his friends and asked them their counsel. They answered and said, that he and
they were in great adventure and peril, and that the people so moved, might
not lightly be appeased, and for this they said to him: save thy self, and us
also with thee: Thou have slain thy brother Iasius, whom the people loved
maruailously for his benignity? the trespass is great, seeing it is so done,
the best way ought to be taken: we counsel thee that thou leave this Palace,
and find manner to issue out, and we shall follow thee, and go with thee, and
search our adventures in other lands: for it shall be great pain, by
possibility, ever to content and appease this people: For it is so, that the
Corinthians be terrible to all men that they have inhate and in despite.

Dardanus hearing these words, began to sigh, and considering that he must
depart from his City by his misdeede, fault, and desert, he smote himself on
the breast and said: Ha fortune unsteadfast, what is me befall? My hands be
foul and filthy, with the blood of my lawful brother. The insurrcetion, and
the rebellion of my people, hanging before mine eyes, it is force that I flee
for to save my life, and purpose to live of rauin and theft. What mischance?
what evil hap is this? Since it is so, I yield me fugitise, and shall go my
way, at all adventures be it. When the friends of Dardanus had understood
that he was concluded and purposed to save his life, they joined to him, and
appointed together that the next morning, in the first breaking of the day,
they would depart from the Palace, and take the adventure to pass by their
enemies, saying, that if they might escape, they would go to the riuage of the
sea, and take the kings barge. And all they swear to help and company each
other unto the death. The night passed, the day appeared, and then Dardanus
that had not rested that night to his pleasure, but had watched with his armed
men, and were ready to take the adventure that the gods and fortune would give
and send them, issued out of the palace, and found the most part of his
enemies asleep: he thrusted among the villains, and passed forth with little
resistance (that notwithstanding, the waking Corinthians) he came to his royal
ship, and took the sea, and saved himself, whereof the Corinthians had great
sorrow.

When Dardanus saw that he was so quit of the favor of the Corinthians, he
went sailing by the sea, and landed first at the port of the City of Samos,
being in Thrace, and there vitailed him, and went to sea again, and arrived in
Asia, in a quarter where the land was joining to the sea of Hellespont: And
finding this land right good and fruitful for to enhabite, he made there his
habitation, and there set the first stone of a right great city that he
began, and after finished. This City was that time named Dardane, after the
name of Dardanus, but afterward it was called Troy. Dardanus peopled and filled
his City with men and women, which he gate by sweetness and fair promises
And the other part he conquered by force, theft and pillage. He made himself
king of Dardane, and ditched the City about with great ditches. After long
time he passed out of this world, and left a son of his wife Candama, that
was second king of Dardane. This king was named Erutonius, and reigned seven
year in augmenting and increasing his City and people, and at last came to
the end of his years: And there reigned after him Troos his son. This Troos
was the third king of Dardane, and was a strong man fierce, and hardy in arms,
and increased greatly his seignoury and his Crown, insomuch as the Dardanians
said, that there was no king but Troyes: and named them Trojans. And thus was
Troy enhaunced more then all the Realms of Greece, so highly that the king
Tantalus of Frigie had great envy, and gave his heart and courage how he might
anull and put down the name of Troy that was his neighbor. And began to assay
to bring it down, as hereafter shall be said.

CHAP. VI. Of the great war that was moved between the Pelagiens, and
Epiriens, and how king Licaon of Pelagy was destroyed by Jupiter, because of a
man put to him to hostage, which king Licaon did roast.
THe wise and subtle Virgin Minerue (as saint Austen rehearses) showed her
self in this time by the stang or river called Triton, by the greatness and
subtlety of her engine: for she found the manner to forge and make arms. And
to this purpose, Ouide rehearses that she had foughten against a Giant named
Pallas, and slew him by the flood of Triton. In the same time that the arms
were founden, and the sciences of Minerue where practiced by all the world, a
fierce discention engendered between the Epiriens and the Pelagiens that after
were named Archadians. And hereof makes mention Boccace in the fourth book
of the genealogy of gods. Among the Pelagians reigned that time a king named
Licaon, eldest son of Titan. The Epiriens then enterprised upon the
Pelagiens, and so made that a right great noise arose and sourded. For which
cause they assailed each other by feats of arms, so felonious and asyre, yt
both parties suffered many foul mortal shoures. When the wise men of Epire,
saw this war so dissolute, and that they of their party had iniustly and
unrightfully undertaken and begun this war, they knowledged their fault,
and went to the king Lycaon, bearing branches of Olive, in signification of
peace and love, and him required that he would condescend to accord and peace
of both peoples. Lycaon considering that his people had as much lost as woonne
by this discention, and that the battles were perilous, accorded to the
Epitiens the peace, by condition that they should deliver him one of their most
noble men, such as he would demand, for to be his servant a space of time, in
token that they had unrightfully engendered this discention. The Epiriens
consented to this condition, and delivered to king Lycaon in servitude the most
noble man among them: and thus ended the war.

The term and the time drew over, that the Epirien served king Lycaon his
due time: and then when the time was expired, the Epiriens assembled them
together, and by deliberation of council, sent an Ambassade to Lycaon, for to
treat the deliverance of the Epirien. These Ambassadors departed from Epire,
and came to Pelage, and showed to the king, how their man had served as long
as he was bound: and required him that he would render and deliver him, and
ratify the peace, to the end that ever after that they might be the more
friends together. When Lycaon that was hardy of courage, fierce and evil unto
all men, and also unto his own people, understood the words and requests of
the Epiriens, he had great sorrow and anger in himself, and said to them
with his mouth (thinking contrary with his heart) that on the morrow he would
feast them, and have them to dinner, and then he would do like as they had
demanded. With these words the Epiriens departed ioyously fro the presence of
King Lycaon, and on the morrow they came to the feast that was richly
ordained, and made for them in great plentiousnesse, which was right fair at
the beginning, and in the end right foul and abominable: for when it came to
the performing of the feast, the king Lycaon rose from the Table, and went unto
the Kitchen, and there took the body of the Epirien, his servant that he had
murdered the same night, and all roasted and sodden, brought it in a great
platter to the feast, and presented it to the Epiriens, saying: lo, here is the
Epirien that has served me, which was cause of the eschuing of the ruin and
perdition of Epire. I said yesterday, that I would deliver him this day: take
him who so will, I discharge and quit my hands from him, and will him no more.

All they that then were present, as well his servants as strangers, as well
Epiriens as Pelagiens, had anon great horror, when they heard and understood
the words of king Lycaon: they had great shame and furor to behold so
shameful and abominable a work, and outrageous sin: and were so troubled,
that the blood went fro their faces, and they laid their hands before their
eyes, as they that abhorred to behold the poor martyr Epirien. And there was
no man wist what to say of the infamy of king Lycaon, uneath. When the king
saw them so troubled, and that every man began to frown and grudge apart, he
left them, and went from thence into his chamber: and then every man rose from
the Table, abhorring and eschewing the sent and savor of the dead man, and
would have departed and gone their way all confuse, had not Jupiter the son of
Saturn been, which the Epiriens had brought with them in their legation and
Embassage, forasmuch as he was a fair child, amiable and gentle. He then
when he saw that every man drew a part his way, put himself in the midst
of the Epiriens, and began began his glorious enterprises, and said to them
in this wise: O what is this? Where is the blood of the Epiriens? Are they
banished out of hardiness? be they exiled out of valor, and of honesty?
Which be the Epiriens that by force will expose themselves to the vengeance of
so foul and horrible a deed? This case is not to be borne. And the
terriblenesse of the tyrant Lycaon, is not to be bettered, when it bydeth
unpunished. Ye see that the Pelagians make semblance that they be evil apayed
with him: he must be punished. I say, as for me I shall never have pleasure in
my life, till I see him restrained of his tyranny.

What time the Epiriens had conceived the great courage of Jupiter that was so
young of age, they thanked their gods of that, that they had brought him with
them, and said to him all with one voice: Child, blessed be the womb that
bare thee, and blessed be the gods that foreseeing this injury and wrong to
us, have so inspired us, for to bring thee with us. We had been now without
courage, hardiness and will to do well, and had not been so hardy, to have
taken any term of vengeance. Thy words have awaked and quickened our
spirits, which were dead and a sleep, and had passed by the counterpeysed
infamy of the tyrant Lycaon. Thy hardiness has made us hardy: thy valiancie
has made us valiant, and l^uers of valiancie: and, thy wisdom has inlumined
us. In this case, thou shall be conductor and leader of this work, and
commander, and we shall obey unto thee. etc.

Jupiter answered and said: worshipful Lords and sirs, I am not wise enough
to receive the honor that ye do me: nor my tender years shall not accept it.
Always by form of counsel humbled under all correction, I will well say to
you that me thinks expedient for to be done. If ye find no man say better,
then you shall do by my council and advise: ye shall take this poor Epirien,
in the same estate that he is delivered to you, and bear him unto the common
place of this City: for it is this day Sabbath and holyday, the Pelagians
been there in great number and multitude, passing their time with diverse
plays and sports. Then ye shall show this poor dead man: for it is said that
the King is not well beloved with his own people for his vnmanlie works, and
this misdeed and trespass is passing foul and pitious: anon as they shall
know what he has done, by this foul work: ye shall well see if they will
take in this sin, pleasure or displeasure. If pleasure, then it were in vain
and folly for to speak thereof, for this present time any more, but we must
seek remedy, in our return to Epire. If they take displeasure, ye may
plainly discover your courages, and provoke and call them to purge this crime
that is so cursed: and I ween that they shall right lightly intend to us: And,
for none amytie that is between him and them, he shall not dominere nor reign
over them by tyrany: For, he is not their natural Lord: but, he is the son
of Titan, brother of Saturn: And, is not King by election: but by force.

All they that heard Jupiter thus speak, meruailed greatly of him, and
accorded them to his council, in such wise that no man contraryed it nor again
said it. And so suddenly they took the murdered Epirien, and bare him to the
common place, and there they showed him openly in every man's sight. When the
Pelagiens saw this dead man, of whom the skin was scorched, the flesh roasted,
the knows shronken, and that the bones appeared by the ioyntures: they
assembled all about him in great number, and casting their eyes upon him, they
had so great horror, abhominacion and abashment, that their hearts trembled,
playning each to other: and many went away for compassion, wept, and araged
trembling for anger. And, other took duste and powder and casted into the air
in sign of sorrow, cutting their clothes, and saying, lifting their hands on
high. O gods almighty, what people be these Epiriens? Have they roasted a
man's body, and have brought it to fore us? What mean they? are we eaters of
man's flesh? or bring they it to us to show the cruelty of their courage? or
come they for to eat this dead man among us, for to fear us withal?

Jupiter there being awayting, and laying his ears, and seeing with his eyes
the manner of the Pellagiens, and their countenaunces, concerning that they
condescended in the condemnacion and enimitie of him that wrought this piteous
work: when he had heard their reasons, and had seen their woondrings, he
adressed himself among them, and said in this wise: O ye men of Pelage,
marvel you of this unmanly and unnatural work? Have ye not enough learned
and known the tyrannies of your king Lycaon? he has murthred this man, and
this man is the Epirien that was delivered to him at the treaty of the peace
of you and of us, for to serve him. Lo this is the guerdon and reward that he
has done to him. He has tirannised right evil, and has done him evil for
good. O what great infamye is it to you, that the people and folk of every
other city, have reigning over them kings, noble men and virtuous: and they be
crowned by election for their virtuous deeds? ye be different from them and
all of another nature: A Tyrant is your king: a murderer, an unjust man, a
sinner worthy of infamous death, and unworthy for to be left alive upon the
earth. Consider: yea consider, under whose hand ye be, and how nighe ye find
your self in maladye and peril of death. When the head aketh, all the other
members suffer pain: then ye may not be whole and sound. What shall we now
do, think ye, and council ye us? we come to you for refuge, and to demand
you, how we ought to do and behave us against one that is so foul a king as is
Lycaon. Tell us the very truth. If ye confess the truth, and that ye be
lovers of reason, justice and of equity: ye shall judge and condemn him, ye
shall lay your hands and puissances in correction of him, and so ye shall be r^^
of his malice.

Anon as the Pelagiens understood of Jupiter, that Lycaon their king had
committed this vilanous crime, also that he had presented to the Epiriens the
body of their friend so dead, they being at table: they condemned his sin,
and murmured against him, saying, that they would no more be governed and
norished under the rod of so perverse and infamous a tirant: and said to the
Epiriens, that they would abide by them, and stand their friends. With these
words Jupiter put himself among the Epiriens, and by his hardiness
admonished them to conspire against their king. With which conspiracion
accorded all they of the City. And the words of Jupiter were so agreeable to
them, and his manners, that they put in his hand the death and destruction of
their king Licaon. And to the end that he should trust and have affiance in
them, they sent for their arms and habillementes of war, and armed them.
After, they assembled about Jupiter, and said to him, that he should be their
captain and their conducter, to achieue this said work.

Jupiter being joyous of so great an honor and woorship, excused himself. But
his excusations had no place, the Epiriens and the Pelagiens ordained and
constituted him head over them. And he being constituted in his dignity, set
his people in order, and after did them to march toward the palace. They had
not long gone on the way, when they saw King Lacaon issue out of his palace
with great company of his friends all armed, as they that had bin advertised
of the said conspiratio^ made against Lycaon: and feeling that his enemies came
for to assail him, for to show himself a man of fierce courage, came against
them, weening presumtuouslie for to have overcome them. And anon, as they began
to approach, they challenged each other to the death without other council: And
strongly moved, they assembled to a battle that was right marvelous sharp.

Lycaon did set and lead his people, in order against Jupiter. They meddled them
hastily together with little strife of words: and with great strife of armor
and strokes.

The strife cost much, but in especial to Lycaon: for his people were less in
puissance and might, then the men of Jupiter, which were strong and of great
enterprise: so they fought and smote upon the Pelagiens and cast them down
now here, now there, so fiercelye and so vnmeasurablye that none might abide
that was there before them. Among all other Jupiter did woonders and
meruailes: by his well doing he put Lychaon in a passing great distress and
noyance. And in this great anoye, he pursued passing fast, for to have come
run upon him. But when the false tyrant saw him come, and he saw that
Jupiter set his strokes so mightily that all them that he raught were smitten
down to the earth and confounded, then all his heart began to fail him, and
went on the other side: and he had not long abidden there, when that Jupiter
had vanquished and overthrown the Pelagiens, and made them to flee from the
place before him, like as it had bin the thunder of tempest.

In this manner, when Lichaon saw his accomplices and fellowship in such
extremity, he fled himself, not as a king, but as a poor man out of comfort
and hope, so desolate as he durst take none of his accomplices with him to help
him away, nor to comfort him. He doubted Jupiter as the death: he (so flying
away as is said) durst not enter his palace, but issued out of the city and
went unto a great Forest that was nighe by: and from thence forth he was a
brygand and a thief, and for this cause the poets feign that he was turned
into a wolf: that is to say, he lived as a wolf, of prays and roberies.
Albeit to confirm this mutacion, Leoncius rehearses, that Lichaon so flying,
as said is, fearing to be sued after of Jupiter and to be put to death, put
himself in a river or a great lake, and there saved himself: where feeling
that the water of that river had a singular property, that is to wit, that the
men that put themselves in that water, should be turned into wolves for the
term of nine years, and the nine years expired, if they would put themselves
in the water after that again, they should recover again their first
likeness. And so it might well be done, for Lichaon put himself into the
water, and was transformed to a wolf by space above said, and lived of theft
and pillage in the woods and forests, waiting often times how the Pelagiens
governed themselves: and in the end when he had accomplished his penance, he
returned into the river and took again his man's form, and knowing that the
city of Pelage might never be recovered, he returned poor and wretched unto
his father Titan, of whom I will say a little, and shall tell, how Jupiter
began to be amorous on Calisto daughter of the said Lycaon, etc.

CHAP. VII. How Jupiter after the discomsiture of King Lycaon, transformed
himself into shape of a religious woman, waiting on the goddess Diana, for
the love of Calisto daughter of the said Lycaon, and did with her his will.
AFter the discomfiture of King Lycaon, which was transformed into shape of a
wolf, and began to be a rauishour of the substance of men of the country,
eater of their children, and murderer of wild beasts, that he often times
assailed by rage of hunger, which constrained him to cherish and keep his
miserable life: when the Epiriens saw that Jupiter had vanquished their
enemies, and that he abode master in the place, they brought him with great
joy and glory to the Palace, and sought long Lycaon, first in the place
where the battle had bin, and after that, in the chambers of the Palace: but
they found him not quick nor dead, nor could hear no tidings of him.

And it happened, that as Jupiter sought him thus from chamber to chamber, he
found in the highest tower, the daughter of the king Lycaon, named Calisto,
which was passing fair, young and fresh of color. The damosel bewept right
sorowfully the less of her father, which she had al newlye understood. When
Jupiter saw her so desolate and discomforted, he set him down by her and said:
Damosel comfort your self, and speak to me, and cease your weeping. Alas sir
(said the Damsel) how should I recomfort my life? The Epiriens have slain
the king my father. Ought I to take consolation in his ruin? Ought I not to be
angry? ought mine heart to be without sorrow, my stomach without sighs, and
mine eyes without weeping? An hundred thousand infortunes trauerse my body,
and trouble me: And I see me so poor a gentle Damsel, daughter of a king,
that I desire more death, then life, and am more in wanhope, then in hope.

When Jupiter knew by the words of this Damomosell, that she was Daughter of
King Licaon, he had more great pity of her then he had before, for as much
as she was Daughter to the king, and said to her: Damosel appease your heart:
I wot well that it is of force that nature acquit himself: but ye ought to
consider the inordinate works of your Father, which ye are bound to bewail.
He was a less reasonable man then a king ought to be. He is not dead: he
has put himself in some place secret to save himself: his sins were too
infamous, and who shall bewail and sorrow him? The Gods and Fortune have
suffered the overthrow and casting down of his pride and of his tyranny. It
is a right other wise thing that ye take it: have patience in his righteous
adversity: For his demerites give you cause to take patience, where as nature
enclineth you to vnpatience: and yet ye ought not to be impatient for his
reprehension and casting down: For, it is so, that the loss of a tyrant
turns all a Country to joy. O then comfort your self Damsel: The
outrageous sins, nor the unmanly furours of your Father, nor his shameful
deeds, shall nothing be hurtful unto you, nor turn to your prejudice: no man
shall mislay nor do to you, nor touch you in any manner of wise, I assure you
certainly.

Sir, answered the maid, I thank you of your courtesies, and of the fair
words which ye pro^er, and say unto me. I wot well that my poverty has
made me indigne and unworthy, but since I see that the infortune of my father
is irreuocable, and that his infelicitie is past remedy, I renounce the world,
and pray you that it please you to entreat for me unto the Epiriens, that I
might go yield my self into the religion of dame Diana the noble Virgin,
Daughter of the wise Jupiter, sometime king of Attique, and borne in this land.
Whereupon ought to be remembered, that right anciently issued out of Pelage, a
wise noble man named Jupiter, of whom Boccace makes mention in the first
book of the genealogy of Gods, which Jupiter was King of Attique, who for
as much as he induced the people to honest laws, and did first ordain and
halowe marriage: For before that time the ( Atticiens married them not, but
used women in common) and of this Jupiter came a Daughter named Diana, the
which willing to abide in the state of virginity, made a cloister in the Woods
of Archadie, where she assembled many Virgins that passed their time, with
hunting and chasing the wild beasts. For to turn to our purpose: this noble
Virgin Diana, lived the same time of the subversion of the reign of Lichaon.
When Jupiter understood of Calisto, that she would yield her self with the
Virgins, he beheld her, and said unto her: and how Damsel be ye so
despayred for a little tribulation that touches not your person? ye be young
and fair, among none o^ you that so go into Religion, may grow no fruit of
children. Advise you well, It were better that ye abode among the worldly
people, that replenish the world. Many women, and also men, enter into Religion
in their youth, and repent them in their age. Sir, said Calisto, tempt me no
more. If there be any gentleness in you, receive the prayer and request of one
so desolate and unfortunate gentlewoman, more desirous of the health of my
soul, then of temporal pleasures. During these devises, Jupiter, beheld
without ceasing this damosel, and could not enough complain her beauty: for
as much as she would into religion, with great pain, when he had heard her
answers, and had seen how sweetly she had taken it, and would not be turned
from her will: he said to her, that her request should be accomplished. Then
he called the Epiriens, and required them that they would be content to suffer
this virgin to enter into religion. What shall I say? The Epiriens put the
request in the will of Jupiter: and Jupiter did so much, that she was
conducted, and led into the religion of virgins. After, he searched all the
Palace of King Lycaon, and made the Epiriens to seize his richesse. And there
Jupiter abode a certain time, with so great worship, that the Pelagiens and
the Epiriens would have crowned him to be their king: But he would never
consent thereto: as he that considered over his young age, and the variations
of fortune, and said, that it avails more to a man, and is to him more sure,
to be made king in his old age, then in his youth, for the diverse perils that
may fall. Always he accorded that he would be Captain of the realm, and was a
man of great justice, sweet and courteous unto al manner of people, etc.

This was the first coming up of this noble Child. When he had brought in
subjection to his pleasance the Pelagiens, he buried the Epirien that Lycaon
had murdered, as it is said before, and did his obsequye solemnlye, and after
he did burn into ashes the Pelagiens, that had been slain in the help of
Lycaon. And after that he sent word, and did all these things to be known and
showed to the Epiriens that were left at home in Epire, as to the King
Meliseus: whereof all the Epiriens, and the king Melliseus gave thanks unto
their gods. But for as much as I must tell all: after this he gave not his
heart and courage so much to accomplish these things, but that otherwhile he
gave himself to remember and to think on the beauty that he had seen in
the religious Calisto, whereby the sparkles of love environed strongly his
heart, in such wise that day and night, he wished her in his arms, and
repented him that he had consented that she went into religion. And so labored
in this manner, that his rest in the night was taken from him, and he was not
now his own man, so increased he to love and desire this virgin: and for to
see her, he made her pastime to haunt the wooddes, and continually to hunt the
wild beasts in the Forest with Dame Diana, where, by Fortune and adventure
otherwhile he recountred and met the maid Calisto. And when he had once
seen her, that day he was all joyous. And if he saw her not, he had
abundance of many thoughts, that ran readily in his mind. I may not all
day tarry on this matter. He thought still how he might come to the grace of
this religious Calisto, and all thoughts reduced and brought into one, he
concluded on a day in himself, that he would put him in the habit of a
religious woman, and would go into the Cloister of dame Diana, faigning to be a
woman, and requiring to be received with the virgins.

This conclusion taken and ratified in Jupiter, by many deliberations in
diverse days, he did make his woman's clothing by a sec^ete workman, which
promised him to keep his secrete^. When his clothing was made, he assembled
the Epiriens in ^^euening, and took his leave of them for a certain time,
saying: that he would go alone, for to do certain secret things. The
Epiriens were all dismayed and desolate, when they heard the intention of
Jupiter: and prayed to the gods that they would conduct and speed him in his
journey: requiring him instantly, that he would return shortly again to
them. And he promised them that he so would: and then he withdrewe him into
his Chamber, and took the keys of the great gate, and on the morrow betimes,
when he was arrayed and dressed in the vesture and cloating of a maid, he
departed from thence alone, and entered into the woodde, and so behaved himself
that he came to the habitation of the religious maidens. Jupiter had yet no
beard, and was white and fair colored in the visage. When he came unto the
religion, he knocked at the gate, and then came to him a passing fair maid
named Athalanta, that after was wife unto the king Meleager of Achay. And she
demanded him, what he would. Jupiter answered: noble virgin, Alas I am a
poor woman of a noble house: I have auowed to the gods my virginity: I pray
you that you will present me unto the Lady of this place, to the end that I
might serve the gods, and be of the number of the other virgins. And, if it
please the gods, I shall deserve it at your hands. Athalanta moved with
compassion to the maid, accorded him his request, and presented him to Dame
Diana. Jupiter spoke all so sweetly and demurely, and made so humble and
feminine manners, that he seemed properly to be a maid. Diana be held him
well and long, and said, that she had never seen so fair a maid, nor so
great: and then welcomed him, and received him. Then Jupiter thanked Dame
Diana of her grace, and Athalanta of her courtesy, and had good hope in his
enterprise, when he saw himself so soon received without knowing. Then
Jupiter began to learn to spinne, and to work in silk, and to do the
exercises of maidens. And it became him as well as he had been a maid. He was
humble, and of solitary conversation: he labored with his hands, with his
eyes, and his heart: with his hands he made corporal works, with his eyes
he beheld often times secretly the beauty of Calisto, and with his heart,
imagining and plotting how and by what mean he might beguile and deceive
Calisto, he often times conuersed, and fellowshipt with her.

His heart was always in right great pain: otherwhile he was moved with great
heaviness, and otherwhile in comfort and hope to speed well: and wist not what
to say nor do, forasmuch as shame and dread were more in him than hardines.
What shall I say more he was lo^gin this pain, more doubtful and shamefast the^
hardy. But in the end he adue^tured himself, and finding on a day Calisto
beside a well where she refreshed her, as she that was weary that had run
long with dame Diana, chasing then and hunting a wild beast: he sat him
down by her and said: My sister Calisto, I yield me to thee, and to thy
grace. I am a man, and no woman: thy beauty has overcome my courage. For to
come to the point where we he now, I have clothed me like a woman and a maid.
Alas I require thee, that thou receive me unto thy love, so shall we live
together in the religion, and we shall take our sports and pleasures. A man
has nothing in this world but his life. They that have more pleasure then
that, they be judged so much more fortunate and happy. Thou have withdrawn
thee thither for displeasure: and loosest thy flourishing youth. Calisto, I
cannot enough complain, nor bewail this damage. I may not praise thee
enough, I have bin so desirous to find thee in secret places, that the force of
my will has made me do this, and that I have enterprised this adventure,
hoping in fortune that she shall give me grace, and suffer our youths to be
used together secretly. For we may commune together the one with the other,
without knowing of any person, not only in the chambers, but also in the bushes
of this wood. O my sister, take heed what I say: and as I received and
furthered of late thy request, I pray thee receive and allow the request
without disdain, of him that thou may see is very lover of thee.

When Calisto had heard Jupiter and knew that he was a man, she was afraid,
and rose up, weening to have fled, but she might not, for Jupiter held her fast
by the clothing, and made her to sit down by him, clipping her about the
neck, and kissed her by force, so much that Calisto cried out and said. O
Jupiter, what folly is this? weenest thou that I am so to be overcome of thy
flattering words? I had much lever the earth would open, and swallow me up
into his womb. My sister (answered Jupiter) there is no remedy that may let
that my will be accomplished? ye shall do my will and pleasure, be it by
force, or be it by love. with these words Calisto began to cry with all her
might: and Jupiter began to accomplish his pleasure of her. There was neither
man nor woman there abouts that heard it, notwithstanding that the cry of
Calisto was great. So Jupiter did his will of his body, and knew her fleshly,
and engendered on her a son. After, he comforted her, and promised to help her
in all things, and to take her to his wife, if she would return to the world
with him. But his fair speech, nor his promises might not comfort her, nor for
nothing that he could do or say, he could not come into the grace of Calisto.
And always she swear great oaths, that she would complain unto her mistress
Diana. And made so much adoo, that Jupiter departed from her all displeased for
her displeasure. And then he went by the woods, thinking what was him befall,
and also what he had to do.

CHAP. VIII. How Calisto, for as much as she was with child, the goddess Diana
put her out of the order, and of her company.
AT this time began to rise in ye mind of Jupiter many thoughts, and for the
better, he concluded in himself to return to Pelage from whence he came. And
then, for because that he was displeased with himself for the enforsing of
his Lady, dame Calisto by love, he departed from the wood, and so hasted on
his way, that he was on the morn among the Epiriens in his first habit. When
the Epiriens saw Jupiter come again, they made him right great cheer, and
great honor. And the same day Jupiter fained him, that he would go on hunting,
and so went and found means to speak with Calisto, and required her that she
would be his love: but she in no wise would assent to him. He returned from the
chase so grieved, that for to pass his melancholy, he departed out of the
country. The fourth day following after that, he ordained there folk that
governed the people, and returned into the house of king Melliseus, who
received him as his son, and there he dwelled a long time without adventures,
whereof any mention is made: and also Calisto dwelled in peace a while: and
when she heard tell, and understood, that Jupiter was gone, she was passing
joyous, for she had lever have him far then nigh: always the time passed, the
fruit of her womb grew: and the day came that Diana and Athalanta, with other
virgins, perceived that she was with child: wherefore they assembled al in their
Chapyter, and called Calisto, and then spoke Diana to her, and said: Calisto my
daughter, thou have done fornication with some man, this fornication is not
excusable: The virgins of this place be sorry for thy sin, and have
abomination of thy shame. For this cause it is of force that thou depart out
of this house: thou shall be no longer their fellow. Thou have made thy self
worthy to depart, by the breaking and loosing of thy virginity. Take thine
array, and go thy way into some place, where then may be delivered of the
fruit that rests in thee, for thou shall no longer be here within.

When Calisto heard the goddess Diana, and knew that she said truth, great
tears fell from her eyes, and weeping by great abundance, excused her upon
Jupiter, rehearsing the abuse and violence that she had. Diana and the maidens
had great marvel of Jupiter, that had them so deceived. Calisto cried her
mercy right humbly, and many times offered her self to the correction of the
maidens. This notwithstanding, albeit that she was held excused, they received
her not to mercy. She was condemned to go out of the cloister: and so much
went the matter fort of that the poor religious woman departed from thence all
bewept, and so ashamed, that she would not go to no town, city, nor house:
but in a deep cave that she had seen before time in the wood. And first she
made her provision of herbs and roots, for as much as the winter was coming.
After she entered into the cave, and there she held her so long time as the
bear holds him in his den: wherefore the Arcadiens feigned, that she was
turned into a bear. And it is not to be forgotten, that during this time she
was delivered of a son, which she named Archas. This child was great and huge
of members. Calisto nourished him among the wild beasts, with roots, fruits
and herbs, and of the proper meats and prays that the cruel and terrible
beasts lived with* and there was no beast that did him any harm, nor none was
so hardy to do him any greeuance. And he was so cruel and fierces that at the
age of seven year, as his mother angered or troubled him on a day, he lifted up
himself against her, and would have slain her. In so much that Calisto was
constrained to flee before him by the bushes, and to issue out of the wood, and
go to Jupiter, which at that time was in the city of Pelage.

Are has pursued Calisto his mother until he came within the city, and so
forth entered after her into the Palace, and held in his hands two great round
stones. When Calisto entered into the palace, by adventure she encountered and
met with Jupiter, whom she knew: and she kneeled down on the earth before
him, and required him with afraid spirit, that he would do her justice of her
son that would flea her. Jupiter that nothing knew Calisto, for as much as
she was evil clothed and half wild and savage, beheld the child, and made
him be taken, and after he demanded Calisto what she was? Sir (said she) I am'
Calisto, that for thy sin was long since banished out of my religion. I have
had this child of thy seed, such as thou see, this is thy son. I have
nourished him seven years in the forest among wild beasts. He now would slay
me, for as much as I have angered him: I pray she save my life. When Jupiter
heard these words of Calisto, he was right glad and joyous, for it was said
that she was dead; and he comforted her the best wise he could. After that he
called Archas, and made the peace between him and his mother, and did cause
him to be clothed and retained him in his palace. And the^ceforth the same
Archas governed him so well and so wisely, that at the prayer and request of the
Pelagiens, Archas was made king of the country.

CHAP. IX. How Titan assailed by war his brother Saturn, for as much as he
had not put to death all his Children males. etc.
IN this time that the young Archas was crowned king of Pelage, and that he
named the City Archadia after his name, the king Saturn was so great, and so
puissaunt, that for to ample and increase the splendour of his nativity, he
named himself Saturn son of heaven, and of earth. But then as he began to
study how and by what manner he might exalt the splendor of his felicity by
divine mysteries, fortune turned her back to him ward. And as there is
nothing in earth that may abide and endure: so it happend that Tytan was all
acertained, that ye queen Cibell had diverse men children that she did cause to
be kept secretly, and so had saved their lives. Boccace that recounteth this
history, in the fourth book of the genealogy of the gods, says not by what
mean. Titan knew this thing always, either by suspection or by envy that he
had of the glory of Saturn his Brother, or by secret advertisement, Under
this color, he determined in his courage, that he would assail Saturn by
arms, and for this cause he did assemble on a day al his sons, and them
required, that they would aid and help him to get the land of Crete, saying
that he would make war against Saturn his Brother: and that by right and
just title he had good cause, for he had not put to death diverse men children
that his wife Cibell had conceived of his seed, like as he had promised and
sworn.

The children of Titan, the one was Lycaon: yt at this time was no longer wolf
nor king of Arcadia, another had to name Tiphon and was king of Sycilie and of
Cipres: the third was called Briarius, and was king of Nericos, the fourth was
named Ceon, and was king of the I Will of Cea, the fifth was named Egeon, king of
the Sea Egee, and of the I Will desert, and the sixth was named Eperion, king of
Plipheros. When they had heard the will of their father, that had purueyed them
all these Realms, that he had conquered after his departing out of Crete,
they desiring to please him, and coveting the recoueraunce of their ancient
heritages, that were then of great renown, said to him as by one voice, that
they were ready to accomplish his good pleasure, and to go into Crete with
armed hand, and swear that they should constrain Saturn to seek and fetch
his sons, and persecute them with his hand unto death.

The old Titan had in his heart great joy, when he beheld the free and great
courages of his sons. And there they promised and swear together, that they
all should employ them to the recoueraunce of their heritages. After which
communication, they ordained in such wise, that they gathered them together at
the port of Sicill, and sent unto their Lordships to assemble men of Arms, and
of war. They went and made such diligence, and so exployted, that there were
assembled great armor and harness, and much people at the said port. And when
the day was come, they so desired to labor this matter, that they departed
from Sicill with a great host, and took the Sea, and so made their iourneys
with good speed, that in few days they sailed unto Crete, at the port
arrived and took land. And then entering fiercely into the land, they destroyed
and wasted all before them so cruelly, and continued in their war so mortally,
that they came unto the City of Crete, where King Saturn dwelled and was
resident: and then Saturn was advertised of their coming and descent. And
Titan that might no further pass without battle or assault, sent to Saturn
a letter, whereof the tenor follows. O Saturn glutted with worldly he ^our,
and covetous of glory: for as much as thou art occupter of the seignorie that
by right belongs to me Titan thy Lord and elder brother: furthermore, because
thou art fals^ie perjured, for thy wife has diverse men children that thou
have not put to death, in like wise as thou were bound: know that I am come to
take possession of thy kingdom, not appertaining to thee, but to me.
Wherefore, come to mercy, and meek thy self to grace. Or else make thee sure
of thy person, for if it be possible for me, I will come and have reason of
thee.

When Saturn had read this letter, as a man all amazed, sent for his wife
Cibell, and took her apart, and adjured and charged her to say the truth, and
tell him what she had done with his children. With this charge the poor Lady
changed color, and seeing that she was constrained to say the truth, she
said: Sir, thou know that I am a woman, the heart of a woman naturally does
works of pity. Had not I been in nature an abominable monster, if I should
have devoured with my hand the children of my womb? where is that mother that
will murder her children? Certes, my hand was never man-slear, nor never shall
be. I have erred against thy commandment, in the favor of nature: and since
it must needs be so, I had lever to be murdered then a murderer: and to be
named pitious, then cruel, for murder is cruelty appertaining to
unreasonable beasts, and to tyrants: and pity is naturally appertaining to a
woman. And therefore I confess to have borne three sons, conceived of thy
seed, which I have caused to be nourished secretly: but demand me no
further, for where they be, they shall live, as long as it pleases fortune,
will Titan or not: and there is no death whereof any woman may be tormented
with, that shall make the places to be discovered where they be.

Saturn hearing these words of his wife, was so astonished, that he wist not
what to answer. Notwithstanding, for the better, he assembled all the wise
men of his City, and to them said: My brethren and friends, what is best to be
done? Titan my brother has begun war in this Realm: my wife has
confessed, that she has received of me three Sons, which she has
nourished in a strange land, under the color that I should not flea them.
Titan assayleth me. What shall we do? Sir, answered the wise men, where
force is enhaunced by over great presumption, there must be policy to conduct
wisely, and to put the hand to withstand it. Thou have a strong City, and
fulfilled with great people: thou art wise for to govern them: put thy self
in arms, and take no regard to the quarrel of Titan. A man is not worthy to
be a King, but if it be in his virtue and gentle manners. Crete was never
Realm but now. Titan has been all his life inclined to vices, and is all
wrapped in sin, in which purpose he seeks to come to thy Crown* If he
extol himself, thou must debase and put him down. This is the remedy, help
thy self, and we shall help thee. He that flies, causes his enemies, to
chase him. Thus now it may not be eschewed, but we must withstand and
assault our enemy, and that courageously. For what a man may do this day, let
him not put it over till to morrow.

Arm thee then well and surely, and assail from thy City thine enemies. If
thou so do, thou show thy courage to be advanced greatly,, and not lightly
to be overcome by any: and so thou may abate somewhat their pride and
presumption. If thou behave otherwise thy self, and let them take their rest,
that shall be matter and cause for to encourage them: upon which they will
wax proud, hoping to come to their purpose, which shall be to thee more
harming then auaylable: For courage and hope often times (men say) make men to
attain to become conquerours great and hie. Notwithstanding, thou art king:
thy will be accomplished and fulfilled.

Saturn answered and said. Brethren and friends, it were great shame to us
and our City, if we suffered it to be dissipate and destroyed. It is of force
that the war be begun and open, and every man dispose him to save his
worship. Titan assayleth mine honor, and requires my dishonor. Since it must
be that of this matter the arms and war be judges, we shall arm us this
hour, and pursue the intertainment of the right good adventure of Fortune that
shall come to us. And my heart tells me, that as suddenly as our enemies
be entered into this land, as suddenly we shall make them to go and issue
out again. With this answer all the wise and noble men of Crete took great
pleasure.

Then Saturn gave the answer to the Messenger of Titan, and said unto him:
if Titan, returned not within two hours, that he would come and take the
battle against him. With this answer the Messenger returned to Titan, and
told him the intention of Saturn. Titan swore then that he would never
turn backewarde, till he had attended and abiden the battle. Saturn was a
man of great valor, and hie will. When the Messenger of Titan was departed,
he made sownd to Arms, at which sownd the young and old armed them, and made
them ready. What shall I make long process? in short time they were ready at
the point: and when Saturn saw that his enemies made no semblance to move,
he went and ascended into his Chair (for in this time the Kings went to
battle in Chayres.) After he issued out of his City, and raunged his
people about him, and anon after he caused them to march against his brother
Titan, etc.

As soon as the Titanoys saw the Saturniens come, they were right glad, and
made themselves the greatest cheer of the world, and moved themselves ioyously
against them: and with a great cry, they had great sheelds of tree, maces and
pollares, and guisarmes of strange fashions, and they were all on foot except
Titan, and his sons, which as kings had their Curres and Chayres, in which they
were brought and carried, not by the force of horse, but by the puissaunce of
men. They approached so nigh, that they came to fighting, and began to fall to
work: then the archers of king Saturn began to draw and shoot, and made the
Tytanoys to stay and stand as long as their shot dured, and slew and hurt many
of them. When the shot failed, the Tytanoys, that had great sorrow for to be so
served of the Saturnyens, ordered themselves again, and swore the one to the
other, that they would be avenged, and came forth and fought hand to hand: in
which they bestirred them so eagerly, that for the noise and dinne that their
axes and guisarmes smote upon their shieldes, it seemed as it had been
thunder. At the encountering then the battle was right fell: Lichaon, Egeon,
Ceon, Tiphon, and Encheladus, were in the first front: there was many a shield
broken, with the weight of clubs and polaxes, and many heads broken. Ceon and
Tiphon, at the beginning maintained themselves right valiantly, and conducted
their folk all within the battle by the rigor of their strokes, insomuch
that whom they met of the Saturniens, they beat them down. By their well
doing they were known and doubted of their enemies, insomuch that Saturn made
his chair to be led out of the way, for the great bruit and noise that they
made about him. There was great effusion of blood, for the Tytanoys did what
they could to have endured in their bruit and cry: and the Saturniens with
Saturn labored for to abate it and break it. And so the coming of Saturn
was cause of prowess upon prowess, and and of many one dead, and they
intended one and other so busily to their work, that the most part of the day
they fought so, that none might glory for victory, nor be troubled for
discomfiture. But in the end when the Tytanoys saw the sun decline, as
covetous of glory and of worship, at one cry that Titan made, upon Saturn,
Lichaon and Egeon, with many other enclosed about him (he being from his
company, his chair broken by force of polaxes) and gave him many wounds: and
finally they took him, and brought many of the Saturnyens to death, and
overthrew them in discomfiture. And that worse is, they were so discouraged,
when they understood that Saturn was taken, that they lost the vigors and
strength of their hearts, and the might of their arms, and turned their backs
and fled all so out of order, that the Titanoys entered with them into the
City, and took it, and wanne it without any resistance, beating down the
people, with great murder of men, women, and of small children.

At this time men might see the Ladies and Matrones of Crete, take the dust,
and cast it into the air, and run by the streets, now here, and now there,
all without kerchiefes, with their hair hanging about their heads, casting
away their attire, and their little Children crying after them. The wise men of
the Town, seemed out of their wits, and the City was so troubled, that they
might not be more. Among all other, Cibell, Vesca, and Ceres, made great sorrow
likewise, without ceasing: for Titan, that never loved them, came then into the
palace, and put in prison Saturn and his wife, and swore they should never
depart thence, till they had put to death all their sons that were come of
them. And furthermore, Titan did cause himself to be crowned king of Crete. So
auailed not the infinite prayers and orisons that Dame Vesca made to Titan, in
the compassion of her son Saturn, and of Cibell, for their deliverance: nor
the fair speaking of Ceres, nor the tears moved of charity, were of no
value. The more prayers that they made unto Titan, the more found they him
discourteous, fellon and hard hearted. He did execute and put to death all them
that held or were appertaining to the party of Saturn: and by the space of
four days vexed and troubled Crete, in robbing and shedding the blood of the
Citizens: and he persecuted not only the men, but ^o women and children, and
took their goods, and departes among them that held on his party. When Vesca
saw all these things happen in the City, and that her son Titan governed
him so maliciously, and always worse and worse, without any compassion on the
people, she came to the prison where Saturn and Cibell were, and said to them
with a mouth voyding dolorous sighs. Alas my children what will ye do? What
shall become of you? How shall ye be saved? The land of Crete is not only
drowned by the tears and weeping of your best friends, but with their blood,
and with the blood of their wives and children. And the heart of Titan is so
terrible hard and endured, that ye shall die here in miserable pain, or ye
must put your sons to death. Since it is so, it is better that they be put to
death, and that ye send to seek them, when for your life is none other remedy.

The anger of Cibell was right aspre and sharp, to hear the sorrowful
tidings, insomuch that her heart failed, so as Saturn and her mother thought
she would have dyed When she was come again to her self, she cried and said.
Ha my mother, what say ye to us? Have we so great pain for to keep our
children, and that we should this hour abandon them to the death? Shall I use
treason to my children that begin to flourish in right clear fame? That shall
never be (if it please the gods) I had leauer die. Jupiter my son has a
great name, and has won the love of the Pelagiens, and of the Epiriens: all
the world prayseth him: and holds him one of the valiauntest men of the
world, he is my son, I shall send to him, and let him have knowledge of the
misery that I am in, by the Damsel that bare him unto the Mountain of Oson,
and shall require him of succor, and I hope that he is a man of so hie
courage, and so fortunate that he shall succor her that has done him that
merit that is worthy to have his succor, and that saved him in his tender
days: and my heart tells me that he shall receive by this tyding a right
great joy, in knowledging the place of his natiuitte. For more greater joy he
may not have come to him, then to know that he is the first son of the
ancient house of Crete. And this shall turn to him a sovereign gladness,
when he shall see thal he is required to come and make the recouerance of his
father and mother, and of his country.

CHAP. X, How Jupiter with the aid of King Meliseus of Epire, delivered
Saturn his father, and Cibell his mother, out of the prison of Titan: and how
he slew Titan in battle.
WHen Saturn and Vesca had heard Cibel so speak, Vesca said, that her advise
was right good, and Saturn was al astonished, for he thought that Jupiter, that
he had seen at diverse times with King Mei^seus, should in no wise be his son,
so hardly he could believe it, and give faith unto the words of Cibell, and
said, if Jupiter would succor him, he were the man to do it, and that he was
content that Cibel should send to fetch him as she had said. Then Cibell sent
for the Damsel that knew all the guiding of Jupiter, and gave her the charge
to go unto him, and to dispatch this business. This Damsel joyous of this
Ambassade, departed secretly, and tarried not till she came unto the house of
Meliseus, and finding there Jupiter with the King, after the reverence made,
she addressed her speech to Jupiter, and said to him: Jupiter rejoice and be
glad, I bring to thee tidings of gladness. For among other sorrows, fortune
that has hold ^^ee long time ignorant, and not knowing the place of thy
right noble nativity, has now certainly laid open the discouerture and
knowledge of the same ignorance, and will that thou know, that thou art the
first son and heir of the King Saturn, and of Dame Cibell. The King Saturn
thy father, as every man knows long since made an oath unto his brother
Titan, that he would^ slay all his children males that should come of his
seed: for which cause the day of thy nativity, he commanded that thou
should be put to death: but thy mother had pity of thee, and for to save
thy life she sent thee secretly unto this house, giving thy father Saturn to
understand, that she had done execution on thee. And so for to eschew the
furors of thy father, thou have been here nourished all thy days, and know
not thy self what thou were, and now thou art certain. What joy is this to
thee? certainly great. And thou ought to go ioyously unto thy father and
mother, presenting thy self unto their grace: if it were not that after these
tidings of joy, I must needs show unto thee (Jupiter) other tidings: and that
is this. Thy mother that has saved thee, thy uncle Titan holds her in
prison, with Saturn, for that that she has nourished thee: and he has
overcome and vanquished thy father in battle lately, and taken from him his
Realm: and yet more, he will put them to death. Wherefore they pray and
require thee, that thou have pity of them: and that thou will employ thee to
go and deliver them out of the danger that they be in at this day.

The King Meliseus and Jupiter hearing these tidings of the Damsel, maruayled
them right greatly: and Jupiter was right joyous when he had understood, that
he was son of King Saturn: and on that other side, he was sore vexed of the
troubling of Crete, and thanked the Damsel. And after that he turned him unto
the king, and said to him: Sira ye may now know and understand, what I am,
and of what house, as this Damsel witnesses. My father and my mother be in
the hands of their enemies: I pray you in their favor, that ye will help me
to succor them: and that we go hastily, oppressing him that has oppressed
them: and I have a singular hope and trust in fortune, that she will help us.
Fair son (answered Meliseus) know that I have more joy in the recoueraunce
of thy lynage then I can show or make semblant of, and in sign of this, I
promise to help thee as much as in me is possible. And then Jupiter assured the
Damosel, and swore unto her, that he would put him in arms against Titan: and
had her return unto Saturn and Cibel, and to comfort them in hope of right
short succor. The damosel departed from thence, with the words of Jupiter, and
returned in to Crete, and told unto Saturn and Cibell, all that she had done.
Anon after the Damsel was departed, Jupiter sent for Archas his son
hastily, with the Arcadiens, and also sent for the Epiriens and the
Parthenyens, with them of the City of Analcre. All these people loved Jupiter
with great love, and came at his commandment in great number of men of war.
Jupiter welcomed them as well as he could, and told them the cause why he had
sent for them: and told them that he was Son unto king Saturn. After these
things he did cause to be made ready all things that were necessary unto his
Host: and so they departed from the City of Oson, with a right fair company
of men of arms, unto the number of six thousand fighting men: and so well
sped, that in short time he brought them within a mile nigh the City of Crete.

And there Jupiter would tarry upon the top of a Mountain, and called to him
his s^^^e Archas that then had but thirteen year of age, but he was right
wise and well bespoken, and gave him in charge, that he should go into Crete to
give summons unto ye king Titan, that he should go out of the City, and deliver
to him his father Saturn, with his mother Cibell. The young Archas (that was
hardye and had his heart high enhaunsed) with the word of his father went
unto Crete to the King Titan, to whom he gat him to be presented, and said
unto him these words that follow: Titan, I come unto thee in the obeisance of
my father Jupiter, first son of King Saturn, that thou hold in
captivity. He has been advertised of oppression that thou have done in the
person of his Father and of his mother, and the death of their sons: he
signifies to thee by me, that he is son of Saturn, and that he is as much
thine enemy as thou to hi^ soui^^^art enemy. Upon which, I thee ^^^non as
legate once, twice, thrice, that thou yield this Cic^io unto his Father King
Saturn^, and that as hastily as thou have entered therein, likewise that thou
depart^. (...) do (answered Tytan) thou tellest me tidings that be full of
pleasures, and ob^^ltation, by the which, I know by thy words, that Saturn
has a son yet li^ring: nor by this mean. I see clearly, and so sees all
the world, that by good and just quarrel I am made king of this (...) Jupiter
thy father knew, that I doubt him not, nor set nothing at all by his coming:
and also that I will nothing do after his commandment, Titan, (said Archas)
for as much as thou abidest in this will, I will no more at this time trouble
thee: Make good watch: Jupiter is hereby, that tarieth for none otherwise, but
answer from thee, for (...) his endeavor to recover this City.

With this word departed Archas from the presence of Titan, and returned again
unto his father. When Jupiter heard the answer of Titan he was full of gladness,
for he desired nothing but for to be in arms, and concluded with his people,
this on the (...) we he would assault the city, in case that (...) furnished
on him to battle, A^on were there (...) and leaves, and tabernacles: the O^^^
(...) the A^tadiens and the Epiriens, lay upon the agree ver^^le and made their
host to watch: Titan was then in Crete. And it is to wit, when Archas was
departed (...) his presence he assembled all his sons, (...) these (...)
which were to the pleasant and agreeable (...) For they desired nothing but
strife and debate, and assured themselves to have victory of Jupiter, as well
as they had of Saturn. In the same hour they sent four spies, to epsy the
number of their enemies (...) made ready their harness: these spies went so
fa^re, that the saw the host of Jupiter, ma^^ their report to Titan of y^
place where his enemies were; and of what number of people they were. After ye
report of the said spies, Titan concluded, for as much as his enemy were but a
(...) from the City, that there should make them ready, and go to battle
against them, on the most early. The night passed fast, and the ^ay came o^,
and then above the sun rising Titan mounted upon his ^haire that was right
ri^h, and made his Titanoys to range in battle, and left an hundred within
the City, for to keep it from Rebellion, or from treason, and took all the
other ^^th him under his conduct, and of his sonne^ and his espies, etc.

Jupiter, that was not idle, had the same hour set all his men in or^er: and
had then brought all his folk, into a fair plain, hoping of battle. And
this Titan had not far ridden, but the saw the host or Jupiter, for this
plain was at disc^uer (...) sides, and as far as each might see other, each
of them full of joy, enforced him to make shouts and cries, and with great
courage they marched the one against the other, unto the joining and smiting of
strokes. Then Jupiter (...) himself in the front of the battle, and (...)
his bow in his hand, and his (...) by his side, by his s^^ting began a (...)
that was right fierce: for on the (...) and the other, there were right good
archers, and many ^a^ters of polished stones, that failed never: and that (...)
the cause of the death of many. When the shot and casting of stones failed,
they began to go together (...), and then began of mortal fighting hand to
hand, that was so (...) that the breaking of the spears and the this f^es
(...) wells of Crete, and (...) to the cares of (...) and of Cibell, at the
noise whereof they began to reioyn, for they had a good hope that Jupiter would
obtain the victory against Titan. This (...) Vesca: we^^^ upper upon a high
Tower that she might see into the flee (...) and there she same the fighting
of the battle. Th^^ ha^^^ Jupiter his (...) in his ^ne hand, and his sh^^ke
in the other, and with his sword h^e smote into the thickest of his Enemies,
and with his shield he saved himself from their ^^^ies. And with one stroke
of his sword, he divided the body of Enceladus, one of the sons of Titan,
and cast him on the ground at the feet of the Titanoys, that were right sorry
for the death of their fellow. Jupiter assailed them right sharply, and one
cried slay slay: but he that so cried was slain anon by the hands of Jupiter,
that destroyed the blood of his adversaries. He was strong, fierce, young and
boystrous: and of high enterprise. He defended him vigorously as a Lion,
mightily as an Olephant, and egerly as a Tiger, and intended not only unto the
defense of his body: but to save and reskew all them that were in peril under
his charge: he did marvelous things, on all sides the noise and bruit doubled
and redoubled about him. The Titanoys began to be overthrown by great routes:
one fell on his shoulders, an other on his sheelde, and he charged so sore upon
them, that his strokes might not be sustained of men, they were so strong and
puissant. etc.

This battle was cruel and hardye at beginning for both the two parties, and
there were many of the Titanoys, of Arcadiens, and of the Epiriens hurt, dead
and cast under foot. Archas was there accompanied with fifty Arcadiens
appointed unto the guard of his body, for as much as he was young: and yet he
made and put himself to the arms. Meliseus failed not, nor Titan, Lycaon,
Egeon: on the other side also, each man did his best that he might. I cannot
say how many men lay dead on the ground, us how oftentimes the one set upon
the other: but ye shall understand that there was none comparable unto Jupiter,
in strength, in leading his men, nor in prowes: there was nothing to him
impossible. He overcame the ouercommers: he flewe the flears: he smote down
the smyters: he put himself so far forth, and in so many places in the
battle of the Tytanoys, yt in a straight he came and found Tytan in his
chair, that overthrew the Epiriens with stones and round plumettes, that he
cast on them and cried, Titan, Titan, for as much as he thought that he fought
well. When Jupiter knew that Titan was there, he drew toward him, and as
Titan advanced his arm, for to smite upon an Epirien, Jupiter lifted up his
sword, and charged so sore upon his arm, that he smote it off, and departed it
from his body, whereof he had great joy, and cried, Jupiter, Jupiter: and Titan
so hurt, had great sorrow, that he fell down within his Chair.

At this time the Epiriens began to courage themselves, and the Titanoys were
discouraged. Licaon and Egeon were there fast by, where they saw their fathers
arm fly into the field: then they began to assail Jupiter, as men dispayred,
and so began a new combat, where much blood was spilled. But notwithstanding
the fierceness of Licaon that had Jupiter long time in hatred, forasmuch as he
had taken from him his Lordship, Jupiter followed so eagerly to put Titan to
foil, that he brake his Chair into pieces, by the help ^^ the Epiriens: and
with the sword that he smote off his arms, he departed the life from the body
of the unhappy Titan, by a mortal stroke that he gave unto his heart; (...)
then bent he his endeavor and prowess to persecute Lica^^ (...) Egeon, that
had given to him many strokes and (...): and he smote with his sword upon the
head of Licaon so fiercely, that the sword went to his heart, whereat Egeon had
so great sorrow and dread, that he fled and saved him from the skirmish: in
which skirmish the Tita^ois, so vnmeasurably had the woorst, that all were put
to death, and to fight in the fields, some here, and some there: one of the
sons of Tit^^ named Tiphon, seeing the discomfiture, came unto Jupiter, and
said: Jupiter, ^e here thine enemy: fly not after them that fly: it shall be
unto thee more honorable to fight against me that defieth thee, then to run
after the fugiti^es: Never yet was I found fleeing before mine enemies, nor yet
will I. Thou have slain Titan my father, and my brother is slain and
vanquished by force and strength, and so it behooves that this Realm must be
thine or mine: and now let us see who shall do best: if I may I will vanquish
thee: and if I overcome thee, certainly thou shall not ^is by glai^e nor
sword, but by the water of the ^ood that runs all read, and dyed by the
blood of my kin, to the end that thou drink of the blood that thou have made
run out of their bodies, whereof I have great sorrow and grief: for by the
course of nature I ought to take displeasure and annoy thereof, and also to
turn to great dispight the displeasure that thou have done to me, etc.

CHAP. XI. How Jupiter vanquished in the field Tiphon, and cast him in the
River, etc.
THis Tiphon was great and full of presumption and pride: when he had said all
that say on his heart, Jupiter that had then beheld and understood him,
answered to him: vassaile, have thou no knowledge what reason and right the
gods and fortune have done for me? Thou art strong of members: and there
proceed from thy heart words more outrageous then wise, and forasmuch as thou
demandest battle, thou art welcome: make thee ready shortly, and do the best
that thou can, and have thee, for the cause requires it. With this word
Tiphon smote Jupiter so rudly upon the head of his shield, that he dare away a
great ^^arter, and made Jupiter to sloupe with the right leg. There were by
many Epiriens, that seeing Jupiter so smitten, r^^ and come for to rescue him:
but Jupiter would not suffer them that they should help him in any case, but
bad Meliseus and A^chas, that they should follow the chase of them that fled.
And thou he began to assa^^ Tiphon, by great virtue ^^^ce, in such wise that he
gave him many wounds in his body and thus began the battle of Tiphon and
Jupiter: they were both strong and able in the craft of arms, they charged one
upon that other ^olorously and eagerly. It is no need that I declare how many
strokes the one gave unto the other: but I must tell how Jupiter so fought and
smote his enemy, that he took from him his sword and sheeld: and when he was
in that point, he charged him upon his shoulders by forre of his arms, and bare
him to the river that was all died with the blood of dead men: and there he
made him die miserably, casting him into the flood with the head downward, for
as much as he had menaced Jupiter with such a death. What shall I say more of
this battle? after the death of Typhon Jupiter went again to the pursuit of
his enemies, until the sun began to decline into the west, and fo^^owed on
by great slaughter: but in process of time when he saw that Titan and the more
people were so feeble and so dispersed by the fields that they might never
arise again, he sownded the retrayte, and assembled his folk in the best wise
he might, and after he took the right way to the City, having great joy and
e^^^tation of his victory. And he had not tarried long, but that four Cytizens
of Crete came unto him, and to told him, that al they of the party of Titan
were fled, and that they had taken out of prison his father.

CHAP. XII. How Jupiter and Saturn reconcyled themselves together: and how
Jupiter, by commandment of his father we^^^^^ to destroy the King Apollo of
Paphos, and of the ^edicine of Esculapius. etc.
IVpiter received these Citizens and their tidings in right great g^a^^es, and
desiring with all his heart to be with his father and mother, did so much speed
him that he (...) into Crete: Saturn and Cibel, with V^^^^, were at the ga^e,
which received him honorably, and brought him unto the Pal^ato, where he was
(...) with the king Me^^^ and A^^^^, in (...) ^^^^n that it might be no better.
At the coming of Jupiter many tears were wept for joy, by dame Cibell and
Vesca. Cibell kissed and beclipt often times her son. And all they of the
country came thither into the palace, for to feast and worship Jupiter, and
also they gave him many great gifts. And it is not to be forgotten, how Saturn
reconciled himself unto him, and gave him a state as to his son. During these
things, the body of Titan was searched among the dead bodies, by the
commandment of Saturn, and there was made for him his obsequie solemn, as it
appertains to a king, and likewise unto his sons that were found dead in
the battle. All the sons of Titan were not perished and dead in the
battle: for among all other, Iopetus and Briareus were left alive and fled:
That is to say, Briareus was fled into an I Will of Greece named Nericos: and
Iopetus fled into a part of Libie, where be inhabited: And he had with him
three sons that he had by his wife, whreof the eldest was named Athlas, the
second had his name Hesperus, and the third named himself Prometheus. Athlas
dwelled in Libie, and Hesperus reigned in Spaigne, and were both vanquished by
Hercules, as it shall be said in the second book.

For to hold on our purpose: when Saturn and Jupiter had done the obsequies
of the Titanoys, tidings came to Jupiter, that Apollo king of Paphos had taken
part with them that fled from the battle of the Titanoy. This said Apollo had
made aliances with Saturn, and was son of Jupiter of Artique. When Jupiter
and Saturn heard these tidings, anon Saturn required Jupiter that be would
take vengeance on Apollo that was his allie, and that he would destroy his
enemies. At the request of Saturn, Jupiter enterprised the war, and in haste
he went and besieged the City of Paphos, and took it with assault, and put to
sword and destruction all the fugitives that he could find: and more over, he
spoiled Apollo of al hi^ riche^, and of his Lordsh^^, leaving him so nakedly,
that he departed from Paphos not as a king, but as a poor beggar* and fortune
was to him so contrary, that he was constrained to keep the sheep of king
Admetus of Thessaly. In this place some men say, that in the time that Jupiter
began to mount in his reign, and to embrace honor, Esculapius son of
Apollo, which was right expert in medicine, and searching one day his
adventures, as he went by a wood side, he saw from far, where an heard man
with his little horn, fought against the basilisque, that of his nature slew
the people only with his sight. When Esculapius saw this, he greatly
meruailed, and tarried, and he had not long abiden, but that the heardman had
overcome the basilisque, and constrained him to withdraw him upon a Rock that
was there nigh by. Esculapius was all amazed with this thing, so that he wist
not what to say: for he thought it was impossible for a man to overcome one so
mortal a beast. Then when that the basilisque was withdrawn upon the rock,
Esculapius went hastily unto the heardman, and finding that he had on his head
a chapellet or garland made of many diverse herbs and flowers, he judged
incontinently that in this foresaid garland was an herb of such virtue that
kept him from the death, and also from the subtle venime of the basilisque.
Then he entreated so, that the heardman or shepherd, gave him his chapellet or
garland, as ignorant of the virtue thereof: and then the said heardman went
again for to assail the basilisque: and suddenly with one proper sight of
his eyes, the poor shepherd fell dead unto the earth.

Esculapius was then well assured, that he had well thought that in the
chapellet was an herb that suffised to withstand against the malicious
interication of the venomous eyes of beasts: and with the said chapellet, he
went to the Rock, and fought so against the basilisque that he slew him.
Whereof he had so great say, that a heart aspiring to worship might have no
more. When he had thus done, he went unto the heardman, and having pity on
him, took all the heaths one after another, whereof the chapellet was made: and
put them severally each by himself in his mouth. And at last he touched only
the leaves of the virtuous herb, and bruised it in his mouth, so putting it in
the dead man's mouth, suddenly he rose from death to life. O maruailous virtue
of an herb men read that by the same herb, Hippolitus (which came unto his
death by the means of his stepmother, who accused him falsely) afterward was
raised to life again, and after he had been long dead, and drawn through
bushes, hedges, mountains and thorns, when his body was found, and they that
found him laid him in a meddow upon a plat of herbs like unto the herb
whereof is spoken before, by virtue of the same his wounds were healed, and his
life was given and yielded unto him again.

For to hold on the matter: when Esculapius had raised the heardman or
sheapheard, he took the herb and the basilisque, and bare them unto the
City of Paphos, telling his adventure, and from thenceforth he raised men from
death to life, by virtue of the herb, and fought and overcame basilisques.
And for this cause he gat him so high a name, that Jupiter was displeased at
his glory, and undertook war against him, and slew him: whereof his father
Apollo took so great sorrow in himself, that he enterprised the war against
Jupiter, but Jupiter overcame him, and constrained him to such an extremity,
that for to hi^e his name, he went and served the king Admetus of Thessaly, as
is said before. And thus when Jupiter had vanquished Apollo by one mean or by
other, he returned into Crete with great glory, and found there Neptune and
Pluto his brethren, and Juno his sister, that made him good cheer. This Juno
was the most beautiful woman and fairest maid in all the country. After the
return of Jupiter she conuersed with him certain space of time, albeit they
discovered not their minds at this time, And in process of sin Juno
returned into Partheny, with the other virgins which she had bin nourishe with
and there abode in many thoughts and desires: and made never other prayers unto
the gods, but that they only would give here grace for to be wife unto her
brother. And it is not to had forgotten, that as she was strongly set in love
with her brother Jupiter, as much or more was Jupiter firmly in love with her.
For, to see her only (after that he had sent home all his men of war into
their own countries, and that he had established his father Saturn in his
seignorie and Lordship) under the color of devotion he went often times into
the City of Parthenie, and took pleasure to be with her, etc.

CHAP. XIII. How Jupiter with great joy spoused his sister Juno. And how the
king Saturn began war against Jupiter his son, etc.
ANd as Jupiter was thus busy to solicit the virgin Juno in the City
Partheny, for to have the better occasion to abide there, he builded a Temple,
and did to be dedicated unto his mother Cibel, and at last did make an image
or statue of a woman in royal attire, that gave meat unto many small images
of little children, in remembrance that she had saved the life to her children.
And when this temple was perfected and made unto the dedication, Saturn and
Cibel together came thither, with all the nobles of the country, and there
made a great solemnity, that dured 15. days in great gladness. And at this
great feast and gladness failed not Jupiter nor Juno, for about the end of this
solemnity the nobles of the country treated their marriage, and the priest of
the temple of Cibell assured and betrothed them together. And anon after, in
the same temple their spousals were made and celebrated, with so great glory,
joy, and triumph, that it is not possible to be rehearsed. And Jupiter and Juno
lay together, and engendered a daughter, that they named Phebe. The Partheniens
for memory of this marriage, founded there a temple, wherein they set the
image of Juno, in habit of a maid that married her. And always after that same
day that Jupiter wedded Juno, they made in that temple an annyuersarie, and a
great feast, which was held in manner of a wedding. After all these things,
Saturn returned into Crete, and Pluto returned into a part of Thessaly, where
he founded the city of Hell, whereof shall be spoken in the second book, and
Neptune returned into Athens, where the Atheniens made him king, as well for
his virtues, as for that he was son of Saturn, at that time the most
renowned king of the world.

In those days, when Saturn saw him quit of Titan, and of his generations,
and that he saw his children mount from low places into reigns of high
Chaires, all his sorrows vanished away, and then began the clearenesse of
his reign to be peaceable: all doubts, all dreades, all suspicions were put
away: He had of the goods of Fortune as much as he would: None was then so
hardy that durst conspire against his dominion: he found himself in peace
general. And it is to be supposed and gathered by the Reigns of his time,
that he was in so great peace and tranquillity, that he might have finished
and ended his days in the same, if he himself had not sought to begin
war: for he had Jupiter his son unto his help, at that time the most
valiliant in arms that was in all the world. And when Saturn saw him thus
in peace a long time, it happened on a day, when it came unto his mind, that
his God Apollo had prognosticated, that this Jupiter should put him out of his
Realm, suddenly there began to engendre in him a mortal hate against Jupiter
that had done unto him so many good deeds. And seeing that every man held
him in love, and was busy to please him, he was the more incensed, and gave
credence unto his cursed prognostication: and so he suffered himself to be
entangled with so great a follye, that he could never draw it out after: and
thus he returned unto his ancient sorrows, and fantasies, in such wise that
he made them appear outward. etc.

When they of Crete saw Saturn so troubled, the most privy of his secret
council endeavored to comfort him: but it helped naught, nor they could not
get from his mouth the cause of such melancholye, unto the time that he
had determined in his heart that he would persecute unto the death his
son Jupiter. And then he did cause to assemble his Princes and his
councillors, and said to them: I charge and adjure you all, by the names of
all our glorious gods, that ye say to me the troth, and advise, me what
thing shall, or ought a king to do with a man that he doubts, by a divine
answer that has been said to him, that this man shall put him out of his
reygne and Kingdom. When they of Crete had understood the charge and
adiuration of the King, they assembled themselves at a council, and there they
ordained, and appointed one, that for all the other should have charge to give
this answer. Sir, the council knows that long since ye had an answer of
your God containing that ye had engendered a son that should put you out of
your reygne: and that dame Cibell that time was delivered of Jupiter: the
counsel prays you, that ye will consider, how what time ye were depryued of
your crown, and had lost it, he delivered you, and made you quit of all
your enemies. If the cause of your charge and adiuracion touch not this matter,
the council is of opinion, that if the king have puissance and might over him
that he doubts, and that he have cause evident, a king then ought to make him
sure from that man, and free from dangers.

Certes, said Saturn, the advice of the counsel is reasonable enough: and for
as much as I must declare to you, and say to you what I mean: I am the King
that I speak of, and the man that I doubt, is Jupiter my son: him I fear
and dread much more then the death, in so much that I may not endure, nor take
rest for him: For sleeping I dream that he rises against me, and assayleth me
in arms, with a great multitude of Arcadiens, and of Epyriens, and rests
conqueror and victorious over me: and, waking, I have always mine ears open
for to hearken and epsy, if he be about to come on me with men of arms: and
thus I can have no solace, pleasure, nor reast, and am a man lost. This
considered: I will that he be dead: and I take the culp and sin upon me. And,
I will that ye know, yt I am your king, and that ye to me owe obeysaunce: and
for that, I command you, upon pain of death, that there be not one man that
is so hardy to withsaye any thing contrary to my will, and, that each of you be
to morrow found ready in arms before this Palace, for to succor and serve
me in this work, which is the greatest thing that ever shall come to me.

CHAP. XIIII. How they of Crete, when they had heard the commandment of
Saturn, were sore troubled and grieved: and how he gathered his forces against
Jupiter his son.
WHen they of Crete had heard the resolution of Saturn, they were greatly
abashed: for they knew well, that Saturn took this matter greatly to his
heart, and that he was a terrible man to offend: And so they knew, that
wrongfully he willed the death of his son Jupiter, that had restored him to
his Lordship by prowess and valiance. Many there were that went into an other
kingdom, because they would not be with the father against the son, nor with
the son against the Father. But there was no man that durst be so hardy to
replye against Saturn, nor say that he did evil, for they dreaded more his
ire, then to offend justice. What shall I say? After the commandment of
Saturn, each man withdrewe him unto his house, full of grief and bitter
sorrow in heart. And there was not one man, but he had his face charged with
great grief and heavy annoyaunce. etc.

The day then drew past: and on the morn, Saturn, armed himself, and
sounded Trumpettes unto arms. They of Crete arose this morning, and many
there were of them that knew the intention of Saturn: And also there were
many that maruayled of that that the King would do, and could find no reason
wherefore he made this army: For all Crete was in peace, and all the Tytanoys
were disparkled, and put unto destruction for ever. Among all other, Cibell
wist not what to think: Seeing that Saturn sent not for Jupiter, she
demanded him oftentimes whither he would go, and for what reason he took
not Jupiter with him in his company? Jupiter was at that time in Parthenie with
his wife Juno.

When Saturn had heard the demand of his wife Cibell, all his blood
began to change, and he said to her, that all in time she should know the
place that he would go to. Cibell was wise and subtle: when she heard the
answer of the King, and saw the facion of his countenance, her heart gave
her that he had some evil will: and she had suspicion that he would do harm
to Jupiter. Wherefore she went into her chamber right pensife, and at all
adventure she sent hastelye into Partheny, and signified to Jupiter, that he
should depart hastily thence: and that she imagined ye Saturn his father
would to him displeasure, for he made a right great assembly of men of arms,
and there was no man that could tell the cause wherefore.

CHAP. XV. How King Saturn, with all his great host came before the City of
Arcadia, against Jupiter his son.
IT is to be thought that Jupiter had his heart right displeasant when he had
received these tidings from his mother Cibel, and although that she warned him
by supposing, as she that wist not verilye the will of the king: yet when he
considered that he was not sent for unto his army, he doubted him and departed
thence, and said to his wife Juno, that he would go unto Arcadia concluding in
himself, that by this mean he should see the behavior of his father, and to
what place he employed his army. But he was not far on his way, when he
rested upon a mountain, and looked behind him, that he saw the City of
Partheny, that anon was euyroned and full of the men of arms of king Saturn:
that gave to him a great proof of the advertisement of his mother. And for to
see what way he bent his course, he tarried still on the mountain, having his
eyes always unto the City. And anon he saw his father Saturn mount into
his Chair, and all his army issue out at the same gate where he came from,
and took the same way that he had taken: And that gave him verilye to
understand and know, that his father sought him. And so he departed from this
mountain: and went to Arcadia, and told unto his son, and to the Arcadiens
the cause wherefore he was come, and prayed them, that they would furnish him
with good armours, to the end he might defend their City, if need were. etc.

The Arcadiens, at the request of Jupiter, made ready their arms, and their
city, and sent out espies upon the way. And anon, after they were come from
the Pallaice, the espies affirmed to Jupiter and Archas, that they had seen
the champaine country, and the ways of Arcadia all full of men of arms. Anon
there was proclaimed in the City in the name of their sovereign Lord Jupiter,
that every man should make good watch, and keep his ward. With this cry the
Arcadiens armed them with helmets and arms of leather: and went upon the the
walls and towers, having in their hands Axes, Swords, Guyfarmes, Glayues and
Maces. And they had not long tarried there when they saw come from far two
men of Crete, which came to the gate and asked of the porters, if Jupiter were
within? The porter, when he understood what they asked: answered them, that
Jupiter was in the City: and if they had to do with him, they should find
him in the Palace, where he passed the time with his son Archas: and, that
he was newly come unto the town to visit him. When they of Crete heard this,
they were sore troubled: for they sought him that they would not find.
Notwithstanding they went in, and passed forth up to the Palace, and there
finding Jupiter with the nobles of Arcadia, after the reverence made, one of
them spoke, and said: Sir, we seek thee: and we have no will to find thee,
for, we come against our will, to execute a commission, by the which may
sooner come ruin and trouble then peace to Crete and us. Saturn thy father
commands thee that thou alone come speak with him. he has sought thee in
all the places of Partheny. His daughter Juno thy wife (not thinking evil)
has ascertayned him that thou art come hither. He is come after thee in
arms, and we know not what he thinks to do: for was never so angry, nor
sorrowful, nor so fierce as he is now. We be his servants, force has
constrained us in his obeisance, and for this cause will we thee to appear in
person before him this same hour, all excusations set a part.

When Jupiter had considered and well pondered in his mind the adiournement or
summons, with his eyes full of tears, he made ^^s answer, and said thus: I
marvel of the right strange demeanor of my father: and peradventure it is
not without great cause. His Realm is in peace. I have put and set him again
in his Realm, he puts himself in arms without my knowledge, and now he
sends for me, that I should alone come speak with him: that is too strange
a thing unto me. And, he behaueth himself not as he ought to do: for men
ought to praise them that have deserved it, and be of value. I have auayled him
as much as his Realm is worth: and he has other times sent for me to make
war. I wot not now what evil will he has, or may have to me. But here he
is come with his army, where he has nothing to do. And being come, he
demands nothing but me alonely. All things considered and weighed: I have no
reason for to obey his commandment: notwithstanding that he is my Father:
forasmuch as the suspicion is too much apparaunt. But I am content, if he have
to do with me, to serve him, and to come to him, upon condition that I shall
be accompanied with all my friends that I can get, and none otherwise.

The two Commissaryes, with this word returned unto Saturn, and told him the
intention of Jupiter. Saturn took right impaciently the answer of Jupiter,
and approached unto Archadie, and besieged it, with great oaths making his
auowe unto his gods, that if he may have Jupiter, he with his hands would
make sacrifice of him. And then he sent for his most wise men, and willed
them, that in fell menaces they should go summon the King Archas, and the
Archadiens, to yield and deliver him Jupiter: declaring openly and plainly,
that he was more his enemy than his son.

The wise men departed from the Host, at the commandment of Saturn, and did
well their deuoier to summon the Archadians: and said to the King and people
of Archadie: we be come unto you, forasmuch as ye sustain Jupiter, whom the
King Saturn holds for his enemy, telling you if ye deliver him unto Saturn,
ye shall be his friends: and if not, he does you to wit, that ye do keep
you with good watch and ward, for he has not in the world whom he reputeth
greater enemies than you, etc.

By this commandment knew Jupiter, that it was he himself for whom Saturn
made his army. The Archadiens assembled to council without Jupiter, and spoke
of this matter, and made answer to the wise men of Crete, how they were
bounden to serve Jupiter, and how they would keep him, and live and die with
him, against all men, above all other. When the wise men had their answer,
they returned unto Saturn, and told him the answer of the Archadiens. Anon
hastily sore chafed, and enflaming with great ire, he commanded, that the
City should be assailed. Anon went to Arms they of Crete, in such wise,
that they approached the walls and fortes. And when the Archadiens saw their
enemies approach, anon they sounded to arms, and came to the fight, and plied
them to defend their walls with great courage. Then was drawn and shot many
an arrow, and many a stone cast, and many beaten and hurt, as well within as
without: Gunnes, Bombards, he great artillarie was none in this time in the
Realms. Always they of the City had well the craft to cast upon their enemies
burning Brandes, and Oiles and waters boiling with ashes.

And for to do thus, Jupiter had induced and taught the Archadien people men,
and women, that when they of Crete came most strong to the assault, and
supposing to have entered the city, they were charged with fire, Oils and
scalding waters, that of force constrained them to go back, with great loss of
people and to sound the retrait. Saturn then taking the most sorrow of the
world, for that he might not obtain his will, for that by the walls lay more
then four hundred of his men dead, returned into his Tente, after the assault,
passing sorrowful and desolate: and had so great grief at his heart, that he
could neither eat nor drink. But this notwithstanding he thought right well
on his hurt people, and went to their Tents, and did cause to minister
medicines unto them that were hurt. etc.

CHAP. XVI. How Jupiter sent his ambassadors to his father Saturn for peace.
And how Saturn would not hear nor intend to peace. etc.
THe Arcadiens were passing joyous, when they saw and took heed how they of
Crete ceased with shame their assault, and after the assault and retrait of
both sides, always Saturn applied to heal and give medicines unto his hurt
men. The Arcadiens then assembled a council, and by great deliberation they
sent seven of their honorable councillors in ambassadge unto Saturn, of
whom the one spoke and said. Saturn, thou know and ought to know, that
every King ought to labor to live in peace: For, the most fair thing of the
world is peace. Peace norisheth profit: by peace are prospered men and
children: towns and Cities are united and knit together by charytye, and made
as one by amorous communication. By peace, Realms profit, in beautifying and
building fair houses: in laboring and earing the earth and in length of life.
By peace, men's bodies be whole and quiet: and it is that thing that causes a
man to demand soueraygntie. O Saturn, it seems that thou reckest not of
this good virtue, for reygning in peace and tranquillity there is no king nor
Prince that dare show him against thee. Thou have not only troubled thy
Realm: but thou art abuser of war, For to have peace, a man ought to order
and dispose to the war. Thou do all otherwise: and regardest not, that thy
son Jupiter has delivered thee from the bonds of thine other enemies, and
has set thy Diadem in a suerty of peace, which thou might not do without
him? see thou not, that by making him war, thou can not have peace: and,
that thou destroyest and breakest this peace; see thou not that this is thy
son by warring against whom thou art a Monster in nature? The fathers
naturally do love their children: and the rude and brute beasts keep and
hold this condition of nature. Thou seek and would destroy the blood of
thy son. And from whence comes this unnatural appetyte? Might it not
satisfy thy cruel purpose and old error to think on the goodness and
benefit that thou have received lately by his restoring thee to reign? be
thine interior rancours permanent? Shall thy fantasies never cease? Will thou
be in age more foolish and simple then a child? The more that men grow in
age, the more be they wise. Thou have less knowledge now, then thou had in
thy wildest youth. And from whence comes this defaulte? Is this by the
heavenly Influence? If it be thus: where is reason? where is equity? where is
the love of the father to the son? know thou not that had not Jupiter thy
son bin, thou had bin yet in great darkness languishing? I signify to
thee, as the advocate of Jupiter, that he loves thee as his own father: and
further more, I pray thee, that thou will be in peace. And if thou will him no
good, yet at least will him no harm, nor encombraunce.

I should soon yield to your demand (answered Saturn) if the experience of
the life of Jupiter came not to my sight. See I not how he inhaunceth
himself the most he can? See I not how the people by his fair and fawning
words owe him more favor then me? See I not that he flies from me? If he
be not culpable, wherefore flies he? He will say to the people, that he is
innocent. Say ye that he has nothing done against me? I wot not how the
Archadiens take it: but if I may once set my hand on them, there was never so
great a destruction as shall come unto Archadie. And I have not as now any
purpose to depart from this place, till I have utterly razed this City that is
rebel against me, and my commandments. Sir (answered the Archadiens) since
that fair speech may not refrain thy passing great ire, nor restrain thy
war, beware, keep thee well from us, and us from thee, for the matter shall
take his end by war. God speed the right and fortune, we will not long
draw forth time: it is concluded, that the Archadiens and Jupiter will issue
to morrow out of the City: and if they find any that assail them, they will
defend their lives. This speech ended, Saturn turned his back to the
Archadiens, shaking his head, and the Archadiens returned into their City,
and rehearsed and told from the beginning to the ending all that they had
done: and by their report, it was confirmed, that the day following they
should issue out of the City, in such wise as they had purposed among them,
etc.

Jupiter had great displeasure in himself, for that he saw that his father
was so grieved, and would not be content: yet notwithstanding, he doubted not
so much, but that he took courage to him, and said, he was more holden to
keep his life, then to obey the evil will of his Father, that hated him at
his birth. This night passed over, anon after that the sun cleared and lighted
the air, about the third hour of the day, Archas, Jupiter, and the men of
war of the City, went into the field in good order: and they were not so
soon issued out of the gates, but they were seen of the Saturniens, that
waited for them, by the commandment of Saturn. And then began each against
other, so great a cry and noise, that it resounded unto the mountains and
walls. And then they began to assail the Archadiens by shot and stones, so
eagerly, that when Jupiter saw there was no other remedy but to fight, he
put him forth foremost in the front before, and so began to say to them that
sought him, crying with an high voice, to here is Jupiter, each man do to him
what he may.

And thus began the dolorous battle of Saturn and Jupiter. There was the
father against the son, and the son against the father. There lost nature
her fair and commendable properties. The father sought to spill the blood that
he had engendered: and promised great gifts unto them that might take him. The
battle was rigorous and hard: and then wrought and fought well Jupiter and
Archas, and above all, the noble Jupiter employed so hardilie his Swoorde
tempered with steel, that he smote down Sheeldes and Helmes, and cut off
heads and arms, and there was no man might resist his prowess invincible.
He made to tremble the most hardiest that were there: he made retire, and to
go abacke, them that had advanced themselves more then they had power and
virtue to maintain. He brake the wings of the battle: and in their most
strength, he met and encountered many times Saturn his father, and it was well
in his power and puyssaunce to grieve him: but though that Saturn laid on
him, and gave him great strokes and grievous horions, yet he would never smile
again, but said to him often times, Alas my father, wherefore seek thou the
effusion of my blood? I am thy son, and thy servant. Thou have no cause to
persecute me. I will not lay my hand upon thee: but beware and put no
affiance in the Archadiens, for if they may have and get thee in their power,
thou shall find in them little pity nor mercy, etc.

Saturn notwithstanding these fair words, would never refrain his ire: but
smote ever upon Jupiter as fiercely as he might. Jupiter of all his strokes
took no heed, and set little thereby: and albeit that he had occasion to
fight and smite his father: always he turned his strokes, and had no conscience
to occupy his sharp sword upon them of Crete, yet sometimes he so laid on that
every stroke without fault was died with new blood. And, this he did meaning
to show Saturn that he fought against him in vain, and that to him was
nothing impossible. All these things nothing dismayed Saturn. The cry was
great about Jupiter, the arms were greatly exercysed, the ground was all
covered with the effusion of blood, and the dead bodies lay one upon an other
beheaded and smitten in pieces. O right hard and sore battle: Saturn was so
entangled in his obstinacy, that the blood of his men wetting his arms by the
course of the large wounds that Jupiter made unto them, might not moderate his
ire nor heat. And his eyes were so blind in his ire, that he saw not his
right euydente damage: nor how he sought the proper mean, by which he was put
out of his Realm, that he doubted, and against which he intended to make
resistance, and eschew it with his might.

CHAP. XVII. How Jupiter vanquished in the battle against Saturn his father:
and Saturn fled by the sea.
IN this battle Jupiter saved oftentimes Saturn among the Swoordes of the
Arcadiens, and did good against evil: many of them of Crete fought against
heart, knowing that Saturn had begoon, and was cause of the war: and,
notwithstanding they put their hands to work, yet the faynte hartednes that
they had among them, was cause of the loss of a right great number of people.
They doubted Jupiter, and had no power to withstand and fight, so well as they
would have done, if they had felt the quarrel good: and by this manner was the
batteldemeaned, to the great prejudice of the Saturniens. Jupiter submitted
himself to his father, and often times cried in his ear, that he should
withdraw him, or the battle would be worse, or be lost. He withstoode his
strokes a great while, waiting that he would conform and convert himself
from his evil opinion. But then at last, when Jupiter took heed, and saw
that he would in no wise hear him, he opened and displayed his valor, and the
great might of his arms and of his sword, and made such affray upon his
adversaries, breaking their helmes, and hewing their harness, not in manner of
a man having all day sustained the fear of great strokes and conflicts of the
Saturniens: but in the manner of a Champion fresh and new, of whom the
strokes redoubled.

Thus then it seemed unto the Saturniens, that in multiplying of the horions
and strokes, the strength and puissance of Jupiter began to revive and grow.
His well doing and valliance gave unto the Archadiens strength upon strength:
and unto his enemies great loss of blood, and also of life. There was the
ground bedewed with new blood. There were dead bodies covered with new dead
men. There was the chair of Saturn smitten into pieces. Saturn held a long
while the battle, as long as his might would endure: and in no wise would
flee. But in conclusion, when his men saw that the war went with them always
from evil into worse, they began to retire, and turned the back and fled:
and then Saturn turned and fled in likewise. Then they were followed in the
chase, so sharply and deadly, that some were slain in the way, and some saved
themselves now here and now there. And among all other Saturn was so nigh
pursued by Archas and some of the Archadiens, that he had no leisure to return
into Crete, but was driven by force, till he came unto a port of the sea that
was thereby, where he saved himself by mean of a ship that he there found:
and there he went unto the sea with some of them that fled, so sore grieved
and pensife, that he might not speak, etc.

Thus this battle ended, of the father and the son. When Archas saw that
Saturn was saved in the sea, he returned to Jupiter his father, and assembled
again his people, and told them these tidings, and also he assembled his
council for to wete what Jupiter should do. And they of the council were all
of the opinion, that Jupiter should go into Crete, and that they would make him
king: saying, that the gods had showed clearly, that they would that he should
succeed as king in the Realm, which his father was fled from, for as much as
they had then no head. To this counsel accorded Jupiter, and went to Crete by
space of time where he was received for king, for the citizens durst not
gainesay it, for as much as they wist not where Saturn was become. And
although Cibell and Vesca made great sorrow for the misfortune of Saturn, yet
they turned their sorrow into gladness at the coronation of Jupiter: and sent
for Juno. And then began Jupiter to reign in distributing and departing unto
the Archadiens the treasures of his father, whereof they had great joy and
gladness: and for this cause (say the Poets) that Jupiter gelded and cast his
genitoyre into the sea, of whom was engendered Venus: That is to say that he
cast the treators of his father into the bellies of his men, whereof engendered
all voluptuousness, which is compared and likened unto Venus.

CHAP. XVIII. How Achisius had a daughter named Danae, the which he did cause
to be shut in a tower, for as much as he had an answer, that she should have a
son the which should turn him into a stone.
IN those days when Jupiter of Crete flourished in honor, strength, prowess,
and valiance, in the City of Argos reigned the right mighty king Acrisius,
that caused his daughter Danaes to be be shut and kept in a tower. For to know
the genealogy of this king Acrisius: in this part it is to be noted, that of
Jupiter borne of Archade, and of a damosel named Isis, came a son named
Epaphus: this Epaphus engendered a son and a daughter, the son was named Belus,
and reigned in a part of Egypt, and the daughter had to name Libia, and
diuelled in Affricque, where she conceived a son named Busiris, that was an
unhuman tirant, as shall be said hereafter in the deeds of Hercules. Belus then
engendered two sons, Danaus and Egyptus. Danaus had fifty daughters, and
Egyptus had as many sons. And these sons and daughters were conjoined together
by marriage, weening Egyptus right well to have married his sons, but he was
deceived of his weening, for Danaus for envy and covetousness to have the
succession, made that by his daughters, traitorously should be murdered all the
fifty sons of the said Egyptus, the first night of their espousals, as they
slept. And all they consented in this foul horrible crime of sin, except one
alone named Hypermnestra, which had a steadfast heart of pity: for, when she
should have persecuted her husband Linceus, she saved his life mercifully: and
also conceived of his seed, a son that was named Abas, that after was king of
Argos: and he engendered the king Acrisyus, whereof is made mention in the
beginning of this chapter. These were the parents and progenitors of king
Acrysius: he was right puissant in riches, but he named himself poor, for he
had no children but one daughter only, which he named Danaes: and for to have
a son, he went day by day into the temples and oracles of the gods: and
there made prayers and sacrifices enough, fastings, almesses, and other
suffrages. All these things might not help to bring to pass the
accomplishment of his desire. His wife came unto her barraine years, and he
was out of all hope to have any child male, and then he comforted him in
Danaes his daughter, and set his love so greatly on her, that he had no
pleasance but only to be hold her: and he purposed that never man should
have her, but if it were the most noble and valliant man of the world. But for
as much as in this world is nothing perdurable, this love was of little
enduring, and that by the procuring of the king Acrysius, for that the love he
had in Danaes grew in ampliation of natural jealousy, he went into the oracle
of God Belus his old Grandfather, and, searching what should be the destiny
of his daughter, he did cause him to be answered, that of her should come a
son that should turn him into a stone.

By this answer, Acrysius began to fall from the great love that he had to
his daughter: he returned sorrrowfull and pensive into his house; and became
all melancolike, without taking joy or pleasure in any thing that he saw. His
daughter was then young: he saw her often times, otherwhile in cruelty, and
sometime in pity. The remorse of that that he looked to be transformed into a
stone, by him that by destiny should be borne of his daughter, moved him to
cruelty, in such wise that often times he determined that he would put her to
death, and so to spoil his blood, to the end for to remedy his infortune.
But when he had taken in his hand the sword wherewith he weened to flea her,
nature began to meddle and put in her self between them and from this
cruelty made him to condescend to pity, and put away his sword, and let the
sheading of her blood, that was come of his own blood, the which should come
unto the succession of his crown which his ancient progenitors had ordained
before, etc.

For to say the verity: this king Acrisius from thence forth took his rest
crossed with many sighs, and could not be assured of himself. His daughter
grew, and became a woman: she was passing fair, and right comely. Many kings
and great earthly Lords desired to have her in marriage, and would have endowed
her with noble Crowns. But the king Acrisius refused all them that required
her, and imagined, that his daughter, for her great beauty, might be taken
away and ravished, by which she might by adventure have a son that should
turn him unto a stone. And to the end to eschew this peril and danger, he
thought, that he would make a Tower the strongest in the world, and that in
the same Tower should his daughter Danaes be closed and shut, during her life,
without coming of any man to her: for he was so ielous of her, that he believed
her not well when he saw her. In the end (...) sent for workmen, and forgers
of steel, and of copper, from all parties, and brought them unto a strong
place, (...) enuyroned with waters, where was no entry but in one place.

When he had brought thither all his workmen, he said to them, that he
would have a Tower made all of copper, with a gate several from the Tower, to
put in four and twenty men of arms, for to keep the Tower if it were need.
The workmen bargayned with the king Acrisius, to make the Tower and the gate,
and set on hand to the work: the Tower was made in process of time: and
then when all was achieued* Acrisius brought thither his daughter without
letting her know his intencion. And as soon as she was in the Tower, he said
to her: My only daughter, it is come unto my knowledge, that in searching thy
prosperity, to my god Belus, I have bin advertised, that of thee shall come a
son, which shall convert and turn me into a stone. Thou know that every
man naturally coueteth and desires safely to live in his life. I love thee
passing well, and nothing in the world so much excepting my life. But certain
my life touches me more near to my heart, then thy love: wherefore I seeking
and requiring the remedies against my predestinate infortune, would never give
thee in marriage to any man that has required or desired thee. Also, to the
end that generation descend not of thy body, and, that thou should have no
knowledge of man during my life, I have made to be framed this tower of
copper, and will that thou be closed and shut therein, and that no man see
thee. I pray thee my daughter, accord thee unto my will and desire: and take
patience in this place for to pass thy time. I will provide to accompany thee
with many noble virgins, that shall give unto thee all that thou can or
may think needful, etc.

When the noble damsel Danae understood the will of her father, she beheld
the Tower of Copper made for to keep her shut fast there in. And further, when
she considered that she should never marry during the life of her father the
king, she was sore troubled about these things, and by great bitterness with
sorrowful heart began to weep, and said: Alas my father, am I borne under so
unhappy a constellation, for to be a martyresse and prisoner, not in the end
of my years, but in my young time? not in a prison of stone, or of cement, but
in a tower of Copper and Latton, in such wise as I should dwell therein,
perpetually? Thou interpretest evil the sentence of the God Belus, saying that
of me shall be borne a son that shall turn thee into a stone: For, by this
sentence ought none other thing to be understood, but that I shall have a
son that shall reign after thee, and shall turn thee into a stone. That is
to say, that he shall put thee into thy Sepulcher. Behold, then what
simpleness shall it be to thee to behold me thus enclosed and shut in this
Tower. My daughter (answered Acrisius) thou interpretest the Prognostication of
our god Belus after that thee lyketh, to thy joy and profit. It lies me sore
on my heart, that if thou have a son, he shall put me to death: and that is
my judgment and fear. Gainsay no more me, I am thy father, Lord, and master
over thee, thou shall abide here, either by love, or otherwise. At this
conclusion when Danae saw that she might not content her fearful father, as
wise and sage as she was, she agreed and accorded to do his pleasure, yielding
to it with the mouth, and not with the heart. And then the king sent for
virgins, and also old matrones in all the Realm about; and delivered his
daughter unto them for to accompany, serve, and keep her, and made them all
to be shut and closed in with her. After, he took his leave of them,
commanding them upon pain of death, that they should not suffer any man to come
and speak with his daughter, without his witting and knowledge. When he had
thus done, he returned into the City of Argos, and assembled forty strong
women, which he gave wages, and pay to, and sent them to keep the gate, and
the entry of the Tower. And then spread the renown of these things, in so
great a sound and noise, that all Greece was full of the tidings, and there was
no King ne Prince, but that complained the loss of the youth of fair Danae,
then holden and named the most fair of all the Greekish maidens, daughter of
the king, etc.

CHAP. XIX. How Jupiter, in guise of a messenger brought unto the Tower of
Dardan, to the Damsels, and to Danae, many Jewels, faigning that he came from
Jupiter.
BY this Tower, and by this mean Acrisius thought to overcome his predestinate
misfortune, and was well eased that his Daughter was in so sure and safe a
place. All the world spoke of her, and of her Tower: by compassion they
complained her state, and it was so much spoken of this cause, that Jupiter had
his ears full thereof: and not only his ears, but also his heart: for in
hearing the recommendation of the excessive perfection of this virgin. Danae,
he was amorous of her greatly and desirously, as soon as the marriage of him and
Juno had bin consummated. And then he began with all his heart, to think how
and when, or in what manner he might come to see this Damsel Danae. And so
much he thought and studied in this matter, that there was none other thing
that he would hear of, nor no conferences of his men, save only of them that
spoke of the prison of Danae. And he spoke cheerefullye, and talked with all
diligence, couetting instantly to be with her, and that as well in the presence
of Juno, as otherwise: saying, many times, that he would that the Gods would
give him grace and power to bring this Damsel Danae out of the Tower. etc.

By this mean and these speeches, Juno was in doubt, and began to feel the
first sparkle of ielowsie, casting infinite curses and maledictions upon Danae,
and upon all them that had sown those tidings before her husband. This she
showed not only in covert and in her stomach, but more openly in the presence
of her husband, showing evidently that she had the attaint of ielously. This
notwithstanding, Jupiter was nevertheless desirous for to see Danae more then
he was before. The maleditions ne curses might not let ne withdraw his
affections which grew more and more. In the end he found himself so ravished
with her love that there was no more continence found in him. To conclude, he
devised intencions and conclusions, and purposed to go unto the guardiens and
keepers of the Damsel Danae, and that he would bear unto them so largely and
so many owches of gold and Jewels, with money of gold, that he would turn
them with his gifts to accord to him, and let him enter into the tower of
Danaes. Then he sent for the Iewellers, that were wont to serve his father
Saturn, and made them make the most rich Jewels and Owches that were ever
seen or thought. When the workmen had made a part, Jupiter took them, and
laded him therewith, and evil clothed like as he had been a servant, he
alone departed from Crete, and drew him to Argos, the most secretly that he
might, and so went and came seeking the Tower of Dardan. Which he found in an
evening, and saw the walls shining, and came unto the gate, where he found many
of the matrones sitting at the door, for recreation, etc.

When Jupiter was comen, he saluted the Matrones, and said unto them: Noble
dames, the good night come to you. What Tower is this, of so noble and so
strong fashion? Fair son, said the eldest of them, ye be not of this
Country, forasmuch as ye know not the name of this Tower. Know ye certainly
that it is named the Tower of Dardain, and this is the proper place that the
king Acrisius has caused to make for to keep his daughter the virgin Danae
in, which is a Damsel so furnished with all virtues and honorable manners,
that her like is not in all this world: But, the poor maid is so much
unfortunate, that her father Acrisius holds her in this Tower shut, for that
he has an answer of his gods, that of his daughter Danae should be borne a
child that should turn him into a stone. This is cause wherefore we be and
keep her that no man may converse with her in no fashion. And her father is
the king Acrisius, which is so sore smitten to the heart with jealousy, that
if he knew of your being here, he would send to destroy you. And therefore
withdraw you, and go forth on your way. Jupiter hearing the answer of the
woman, gave no regard unto her words, saving that he heard with his ears: for
he employed his eyes unto the marking of the Tower: and seeing that it was
impregnable for any assault, as well for the strength of the place where it
was founded on, as for that it was nigh the City of Argos, which was right
strong: he considered in himself, that for to come and see this maid he
could not obtain but by the mean of these women. And then thus he answered
to the old woman: I thank you of your good advertisement: I am much beholden
unto you, but I shall yet say more unto you, if it please you, I am sent unto
the damsels of this place from the right mighty king Jupiter of Crete, for to
deliver to them certain presents on his behalf, Wherefore I pray you, that it
please you to give me assistaunce to speak with them. When the old matrone
understood of Jupiter, and that he brought presents unto the Damsels: she
answered him, that he was right welcome, and made him to enter into a little
Chamber (which was by the gate, for to speak therein to their friends when
they came to visit them.) And then she went into the chamber of Danae, and
there assembled all the women of the place, and said unto them. My fellows,
the King Jupiter of Crete greeteth you well by one of his servants, whom I have
put into the Chambret of the gate: he has said to me, that he has brought
certain presents. See ye now whether ye will receive them or not: and what I
shall answer to the messenger, etc.

The Damsels were right joyous and glad, when they heard these tidings, and
took their council together, and concluded, that they would take and receive
these presents of the king Jupiter. Then they descended into the chambret, and
feasted the messenger, which did them reverence, and said to them: Ladies, and
Damsels, your renown is so great, that it has moved the king Jupiter to
desire your love. In sign of which, he has sent to you of his Jewels, and
prays you to receive them in good part, and he recommendeth him unto the
right noble grace of your Mistress the kings daughter. With these words
Jupiter opened his sack of leather, wherein were his Jewels, and delivered
them unto the damsels: When they had received, and saw them what they were,
they were all abashed for to see things so precious, and said that they would
go and show them to their Mistress. And forth they went up into the tower,
and showed their presents unto Danae: signifying to her, that the king Jupiter
recommended him unto her noble grace. As soon as this noble virgin had seen
these Jewels, she said, that it must needs be that Jupiter was rich and
liberal: and said moreover, that the gift that he had given was more of value
then all the Realm of Argos: and also, that she would that the man that had
brought these Jewels, where feasted as it appertains, and also willed that
Jupiter should be thanked in her name. Then the Damsels by the commandment of
Danae, went to feast the messenger of king Jupiter, the best wise that they
might, the most part of the night in eating and drinking. And then came the
aged woman that had first spoken with him, and said to him: My son, the
maiden Danae thanketh the king Jupiter of the courtesy that it has pleased
him to do her Damoselles: and, she takes her self greatly beholden to him,
and to you that have taken the pain to bring them: and if there may please you
any thing herein, spare not this house.

Dame (answered Jupiter) ye do me too much honor by the one half: if there
be any thing in Crete to your pleasure, ask you it, and certainly ye shall
have it with good heart. And thus they talked so long that it was time to
withdraw him thence. Jupiter took leave of the damoselles, and concluded that
he would return into his country, on the morrow early. What shall I say more?
Jupiter took this night as much rest as he might, and had the heart so
surprised, that he awoke more then he needed: for the hour was not come that
he attended to speak to Danae. He returned secretly into Crete, and caused to
be made new jewels much more rich and more precious then the other were, for
to go again, and present to the damsels. And as soon as was to him possible,
he gathered jewels together as many as would load an horse. After this; on a
morning early he loaded an horse with these jewels, and without weeting of any
person, with the same he so labored on his way, that without any hinderance
he came unto the tower. And there assembled the damsels, and did them
reverence, and said to them. Ladies and damsels, the king Jupiter has you so
in his grace, that knowing by the report of me, what feasting and welcome ye
made lately for his jewels: he has sent unto you other, and in his name I
present to you these jewels that I have now brought: praying that the present
may be acceptable and well thought of: and that it please you to do so much unto
your mistress that I might a little speak with her, for to advertise her, if
it please her, of certain secret things that touch her, and wherewith I am
charged by Jupiter.

CHAP. XX. How Jupiter in the guise of a messenger, with many jewels, came the
second time to see Danaes: and how he spoke and gave to her in knowledge what
he was: and how he lay with her that night.
WHen Jupiter had achieved his purpose, he showed forth his merchandise, and
when the matrones had understood of Jupiter, that he desired to have grace to
speak with Danaes, they went unto the maid, by the council of the old
woman, for to have her opinion: and coming to her, the old woman spoke for
them all, and said: my daughter, the king Jupiter. has sent hither the
burden of a horse of the most fairest Jewels that ever ye saw. Certes it is a
gallant sight to see them: notwithstanding we durst not receive them, for
as much as the messenger requires to speak with you, which is forbidden us by
your father. Consider what we shall do: we be greatly beholden unto the king
Jupiter for his courtesies, but when we think on the straight commandment of
your father, we wot not what to do. When the maid Danaes had heard the words
and the tidings of the old woman, she was right pensise: but for all that, she
spared not to say that, that her heart judged best: and thus answered. My
mother, ye know well, and it needs not to tell you, that he that does show
love and courtesy, ought to be thanked by kindness. The king Jupiter (as ye
have to me said) has often times done for us. And seeing the first good
comes from him, me thinks, under all corrections, that we may well suffer
him to speak with me. It is a small matter for his servant to speak a word
with me. The king my father shall never know it: it is no need that he know
all that shall fall: but first show to him, how it is charged you upon death,
that no man speak with me. And make him promise and swear, that he shall
keep this matter secret.

The Damsels and the old woman, joyous of the answer of the maid, went
down from the tower, to the gate, and finding Jupiter busy to open abroad and
unbind his jewels, the old woman said unto him: Fair son, the king Jupiter
has found more grace here in this place anenst the maid Danaes, then all the
men in the world. Nevertheless ye must know, that upon pain of death, it is
to you forbidddn, and to other by us: And, we be also charged upon the same
pain, by the King Arcrisius, that we shall let no man living speak with her.
The commandment of the king is so great, and your request is not little.
Certes we dare not bring you unto her, al thing considered: For, if it were
known, without fail we should be all put into the fire. And peradventure, if
ye were found here within, by the king that comes often times hither, he
would put you to death. Wherefore we pray you excuse us against your master. At
hearing of this answer, Jupiter found not that he sought: and then he held
him more near in despair, then he did in hope: but he remembered, that a
beggar should not go away for once warning, and said unto the old woman, to the
beginning of her answer: Dame, ye do well if ye fear and dread the king, which
is to me no marvel. Yet his commandment is not so strait, but that ye may
enlarge it if ye will: he has commanded that none shall speak with her. The
king Jupiter requires that his servant may say to her certain things in
secret, touching her honor: ye shall do that pleases you, but in truth if ye
accord him his request, the accord shall not be prejudicial to you in any
thing. For the king Jupiter is no pratler and knows so much of the world,
that unto you he had not sent me, if he had not found me secret. And thus
if ye will do to him any pleasure, ye have none excusacion reasonable. None
knows hereof but you and I. If I speak unto the maid by your consent, who
shall accuse us? it shall not be ye, for that the matter touches you. And it
shall not be I, nor the King Jupiter: for certainly we had lever die in
sorrowful death, and also abide in grievous pain. etc.

Fair son, answered the old woman, ye speak so sweetly, that we may not
nor can give unto you the refuse of your request. We dare well affye, and trust
in you. Alas dame (answered Jupiter) doubt you? When I shall fault against you
or any other, I wish to be smitten with the thunder and tempest. I would verily
that ye had the prerogative to know my inward thoughts, to the end that in
judging of my mind ye might be assured of me, not to have by my cause any
inconvenience. With these words, Jupiter drew to his will the old woman, and
all the Damsels as well by his subtle language as by his riches. For to use
short process, the old woman accorded to Jupiter, that he shall have the
grace to speak with the maid, and brought him before her, with all his
presents: Jupiter had then more joy then I can write.

And when he was thus above in the tower of Dardane, in beholding the ample
beauty of Danae his joy doubled, and he knew her well by her beauty, and made
unto her reverence, saying. Right noble and accomplished damsel, the king
Jupiter saluteth you by me, and sends unto the women of this house, of such
gods as fortune has given to him: if it be your pleasure they shall receive
them: and after I will say unto you certain things secret, which the king
Jupiter your servant, has charged me to faye unto you. My freende answered
Danae, saving your honor the King, Jupiter is not my servant, but I my self
am beholden to him, and am his servant, and thank him of his bounty: it
seems as he had reigned gold in this place. It is acceptable to me that the
women of this tower have your presents. And it pleases me well also to hear
your charge, to the end that King Jupiter, should not say that I were unkind,
etc.

The matrons and the Damsels were present at this answer, Jupiter delivered
unto them his Jewels which they received with great galdnes. After that Danae
took the messenger by the hand, and led him a part unto the beds side,
where she made him to lean by her. And then when Jupiter found himself all
alone with Danae he said unto her: right noble Damsel, I no more call you
Damsel, but Lady: For ye are my lady and my only mystres, which have maystred
mine heart, and also have overcome me under the sownd and bruit of your
glorious reports and name. For to advertise you, verily I am Jupiter, of whom
now I have spoken to you at the presentation of the jewels, and it is truth,
that it is not long fithen, when I was in my Realm, for to hear reported the
manner how your Father held you shut in this Tower (with little good that may
accord unto your honor) as well for to get your thank and grace, as for
pity wherewith I was moved, I have deliberated in my heart to employe my
self unto your deliverance, and also for to get your grace. And for to
execute this deliberation, I have taken part of my tresours, and have come
hither to present them unto your Damsels, and so departed: and of new am
comen again, in hope to have your love, whereof I am well content and thank
mercy and fortune. Alas madame, if I be so hardy as for to have put my self in
ye adventure of my life for to show the great love that I have to you. Excuse
me, if I have enterprised a thing so hie that I ne me hold worthy to attain,
but in the affiance of fortune, and insomuch as she will favor in this
party. Madame then in consideration of my words, ye may see my life, or my
death, and ye only may lightly make the judgment. If your humility
condescend in the knowledge of pity that I have had of you, exposing my self
into the danger, where I might be sure, I am now nigh the ieopardie which ye
may save: and if not I yield me your prisoner. Certes, the shining
resplendissour of your renowned beauty, whereof the meede passes the renown
and the triumph of your incomparable excellency, has enraged mine heart, and
brought me hither into the prison of your will. Alas Madame, behold, and see
with your eyes full of sweetness, and of clemency, me which see not at this
time, but languish for fault of rest in continual travail, in furies
redoubled, and in sighs upon sighs, which may not be puruaied of remedy, but
by your benignity and amorous good will.

At the beginning of the first recommendation that was made of you in my
presence, and at the point that I enterprised to deliver you out of this Tower,
I beheld my self right joyful and happy, because of so hie an enterprise:
but seeing the perils that I find my self in since, I wot never what I may
say of my self. For by month upon month, week upon week, and day upon day,
your name has had domination on me. And often times has constrained me to be
ravished, and yet more in a trance by desire to speak to you, and to imagine
how I should come to the point where I now am, and not only in this, but
also to find mercy in you. And I pray and require you right humbly, that the
amourous gift of mercy ye will to me accord, and thus doing, ye shall do
mercy to your self, and have pity of your young days, which you have
consented to loose by the foolish fantasies of the king your father. Ye know
well that (his life during) he will not suffer you to be married to any man. It
is possible that your father shall live as long as you, for he is strong of
members, hard and boystrous. Also ye ought conceive if ye will believe me, that
your life has no wealth nor pleasance. Only the pleasances come unto the
people by the sight, and by beholding of diverse things. The women singularly
have their principal pleasures in their husbands, and in their generation and
lynages. Ye may come here to, but then ye must have mercy on your self. Is it
not in your conceyte and knowledge that no man has but his life in this world?
Forasmuch as ye obey and yield to the foolish commandment of your father the
King Acrisius, ye shall be a woman lost: being in this place, it is not
possible to take and have patience. This is too hard a thing unto a young heart
to be put in prison without demerite. I know the human affections, and
understand that natually every creature loves his profit before the profit
of another. This is against your prosperity and utility, from which ye be
shut here within. How may ye have love unto him which is cause of two evils?
The less evil is to be chosen, since that you feel you condemned here unto
the end of the days of your father. Doubt ye not but his end is often desired
to his death, for your sake: and his death may not be effected without great
charge of conscience. Me thinks that better it were for you in diverse
considerations to find way to issue and go out of this place, and to take to
husband some noble and puissant man, that would enterprise to carry you away
secretelie for to be his wife in his Country. By this mean ye shall be
delivered from the pain that ye be in: ye may eschew the death of your father,
and less evil ye should do in breaking his foolish commandment, then to
abide in the point where he has put you. Madame, alas think ye here on for
your honor and health: (as I have said unto you) I am your servant, and if
it please you to depart from this place, ye shall find no man readier then I
am: for to keep you, and to save you, I give my self unto your noble
commandments, for to furnish your will to my power, as he that bears always
the remembrance of you in the most deepest place of my mind: in sleeping I see
you, and waking I think on you. I have had never rest in my self, nor never
shall have, but if it please you. My fortune, my destiny, my hap and unhap
come of you. If ye take me unto your mercy, and that I find grace with you,
I shall be the most happiest of all happy. And if ye do otherwise, it may be
said that among all unhappy, none shall go before me. But if such fortune
shall come to me by your rigor, I will take it in patience, for the nobleness
that I see in you always, I require you that my heart be not deprived ne put
from your heart, for as much as it touches me nearely. All the tongues of men
can not say, nor express the quantity of the love that I have in you, no more
then they can pronounce by proper name, all the stars of heaven. By this love
I am always in thoughts, labors, in sighs, anguishes, and often times in great
fear and doubt. At this hour I wot not whether I live or not, because me
thinks I am here for to receive absolution, or a mortal sentence. These
things considered, alas will not ye have him in your grace, that for to deserve
your love and mercy, has abandoned and adventured his life, as ye may see,
leaving his royal estate, the better to keep his cause secret. Unto an heart
well understanding, few words suffice. For conclusion, I pray you to give your
heart unto him that has given his heart unto you: and that ye provide from
henceforth for the ill case ye now be in, after the common judgment.

With this, Jupiter held his peace, and kept silence, and lent his ears for to
hear what should be the answer of Danae. The right noble damsel, when she
had heard his talk, which she had sore noted: and when she saw that he had
given her space to speak, she was resolved, and changed color and said to
him. Sir king, alas know ye well, what would be the renown that would abide
with me, if I should and not only in this, but also to find mercy in you. And I
pray you right humbly, that out of the amorous gift of mercy, ye will to me
accord, and in this doing, ye shall do mercy to your self, and have pity of
your young days, which you have consented to lose, by the foolish fantasies of
the King your Father. Ye know well (that during his life) he will not suffer
you to be married to any man. It is possible that your Father may live as long
as you, for he is strong and boisterous. Also ye ought to conceive if ye will
believe me, that your life has no wealth nor pleasure. Only the pleasures
come unto the people by the sight, and by beholding of diverse things. The woman
singularly have their principal pleasures in their Husbands, and in their
generation and linages. Ye may come hitherto, but then you must have mercy on
your self. Is it not in your conceit and knowledge that no man has but his
life in this world. Forasmuch as ye obey the foolish commandment of your Father
the King Achrisius, ye shall be a woman lost: being in this place, it is not
possible to have patience. This is too hard a thing unto a young heart, to be
put in prison without demerit. I know the humane affections, and understand
that naturally every creature loves his profit before the profit of another.
This is against your prosperity and utility, from which ye be shut here within.
How may you have love unto him which is cause of two evils. The less evil is
to be chosen, since that you feel your self condemned here unto the end of the
days of your Father, doubt you not, but his end is often desired for your sake:
and his death may not be effected without great charge of conscience. Me
thinks that better it were for you to find way to issue out of this place,
and to take to husband some noble and puissant man, that would enterprise to
carry you away secretly for his wife into his Country. By this means you shall
be delivered from the pain that you be in: you may eschew the death of your
Father, and less evil you shall do in breaking his foolish commandment, then
to abide in the point where he has put you. (I have said unto you) I am your
servant, and if it please you to depart from this pla^e, you shall find no man
readier then I am, for to save you: I give my self unto your noble
commandments, to nourish your will to my power, as he that bears always in
remembrance of you in the most deepest place of my mind: in sleeping I see you,
and waking* I think on you. I have had no rest in my self, nor never shall
have, but if it please you. My fortune, my destiny, comes of you* If you take
me unto your mercy, and that I find grace with you* I shall be the most
happiest of all happy. And if ye do otherwise, it may be said, that among all
unhappie, none shall go before me. But if such Fortune shall come to me by
your rigor, I will take it in patience, for the nobleness that I see in you
always, I require you that my heart be not deprived, nor put from your heart,
forasmuch as it touches me nearly. All the tongues of men cannot express the
quantity of the love that I have in you, no more then they can pronounce by
proper name all the Stars of Heaven. By this love I am always in thoughts,
labors, in sighs, anguishes, and oftentimes in great fear. At this hour, I
know not whether I live or not, because me thinks I am here to receive
absolution, or a mortal sentence. These things considered, alas will not ye
have him in your grace, that for to deserve your love and mercy, has abandoned
and adventured his life as ye may see, leaving his Royal estate, the better to
keep his cause secret. Unto an heart well understanding, few words suffice. For
conclusion, I pray you to give your heart to him, that has given his heart
unto you: and that ye consider from henceforth for the ill conceit ye now be
in, after the common judgment.

With this Jupiter held his peace, and lent his ears for to hear what should be
the answer of Danae, The right noble Damosel: When she saw that he had given
her space to speak, she was resolved, and changed color and said to him. Sir
King, ^las know ye well, what would be the Renown that would abide with me, if
I (...)

believe your counsel? What would the people say? Madam, answered Jupiter, the
worst that they may say, shall be, that men will name you disobedient unto the
foolish commandment of your Father, which as all men knows, holds you
fondly in this Prison. And if ye will thus help your self, and convey your
self away, men would but laugh, for your youth would excuse your doing, and ye
should be reported to have done this deed by great wisdom. Ah, Sir, said
Danae, ye go about to deceive me by your fair words: I know the speeches of
the Argiens, and also know that I am bound to obey my Father: Furthermore, I am
not so ignorant, but that I would well have some nobleman to my Husband so as
mine honor were saved: and also, I confess that I am greatly beholden to him
that has sent so liberally and so largely of his treasures and Jewels, and in
likewise unto you, if it be truth, that ye be him that ye say that ye are. But
when I have considered, and understood, and seen visibly, that the Argiens
would defame me to perpetuity, and that my Father would send me where mine
honor should strongly be abased and put underfoot, by your proper declaration,
I will in no wise deal hardly with you, neither shall you have any disturbance
for my cause. But I pray you to think on the other side, of mine honor, and
that ye suffer me alone with my company and friends.

Dame (answered Jupiter) be ye in doubt of me that I am not Jupiter King of
Creet? If I be any other, all the Gods confound me, and the Thunder fall on
me, the swallow of the Sea receive me, and that I be given to be meat unto
the most venomous beasts of the world. O Madam, put no suspicion in my doing:
as I have said to you, I am come to you not in Royal estate, but in simple
array for to order my matters more secretly: then accord ye this request. Take
ye day of advise, and grant to morrow I may speak once to you, and counsel you
well this night.

The noble Maid Danae had then her blood so moved, that she durst not behold
Jupiter: for shame smote her in the eyes. This notwithstanding, her heart
commanded her to try what man he was, and whether he had the state of a
Nobleman or a King. At last she took day of advise, and accorded to him that
she would speak again to him on the morrow. After this, she commanded the
Tables to be covered by the Damsels, and said, that she would feast the
messenger of the King Jupiter. The Damsels hearing that, answered they were
all much bound to feast him, and showed to her the riches that they had, all
along in the Chamber, whereof the walls shone and were bright: The Damsels
arrayed with the Jewels of Jupiter, garnished the Tables with meat. Danae and
Jupiter were set the one against the other: the service was great and rich, and
they had enough to eat, yet Jupiter nor Danae gave little force of eating,
Jupiter eat less bodily, then spiritually, he was in trances, in doubts, and
fears: He had an answer by which he could not gather any thing to his profit,
save only that he hoped that Danae would discover it unto the Damsels, as the
young maidens be of custom to discover the one to the other, and as when any
requires them of love, that they should show favor to him, the more for his
gifts. In this estate was King Jupiter for his part. The Damsels beheld him
enough and said, that he had not the behavior of a yeoman or servant, but of a
man of very noble and great estate, and above all other, Danae, to whom Jupiter
had given cause to be pensive, cast her eyes upon Jupiter, upon his
countenance, his gesture, and beauty, and then it seemed that he had said
truth, as well then as the night before: she began to feel the sparkles of
Love, and seeing his riches that he had given in the house, she determined to
give him her heart and love. On this resolution, to which her heart concluded,
she was firmly settled, yet her mind was enterlaced with abundant thoughts. ^any
Noblemen had required her love before time, that she was shut in the Tower,
and could never turn her heart, nor cause ^er once to sigh or think on their
requests. The only words of ^upiter were so effectual and happy, that they
constrained her to ^ear them, and to become pens^ve, breaking all doubts and
contrary opinions.

CHAP. XXI. How Jupiter came from his Chamber by night, and lay in the Tower of
Dardan, with the Damosel Danae on whom he begat the noble Perseus.
SO long dured the feasting of Jupiter that it was time to withdraw from
thence. Then Danae took leave of Jupiter and did convey him into a secret
Chamber by her Damsels. When Jupiter was departed, she entered into her
Chamber, a^^ was enterlarded with abundant thoughts. Many noble men had
required her love, before time that she was shut in the Tower: and could
never turn her heart nor cause her once to sighe or think on their requests.
The only words of Jupiter were so effectual and happy, that they constrained
her to hear them and to become pensife, breaking all doubts and contrary
opinions.

CHAP. XXI. How Jupiter came from his chamber by night, and lay in the tower of
Dardane with the damsel Danae, on whom he engendered the noble Perseus.
SO long dured the feasting of Jupiter, that it was hour and time to withdraw
thence. Then Danae took leave of Jupiter, and did convey him into a secret
chamber by her damsels. When Jupiter was departed, she entered into her chamber,

accompanied only with the old woman that was her mistress, which had charge
on her above all other, and as soon as the old woman had her privily in her
chamber: as she that was suspicious said to her: my daughter, tell me of your
tidings, I must needs know what thing this messenger has said to you. Dame
answered Danae, will ye wit? yea said the old woman. Then answered Danae, he
must come himself, and make the re^ort, for he has said to me so many
things, that the tenth part is not in my mind. My daughter (said the old
woman) I think well he is not come hither without cause. What has he said? if
ye have not all in mind, tell me at least that abides and rests in your
mind. Dame (answered Danae) ye know well that never I mistrusted you, and that
the secretnes of mine heart to you has always bin open: I will now make no new
customs. For to short this matter, he that names himself servant of Jupiter,
is Jupiter himself (by report) and has made great oaths, that he has made
these presents and gifts for to speak to me. Indeed he has showed to me how I
loose here my time, and has required me to be his wife. To which I have not
yet consented, but have taken day for to give an answer to morrow, hoping to
take your counsel, and therefore I pray you that ye counsel me in that I have
to do, and what answer he shall have of me. Ye know how I have suffered his
gifts to be received: he must be therefore satisfied by some manner, either by
fair speech, or otherwise.

The old woman had been before time in the house of king Meliseus, and there
had seen Jupiter in the time of his return from his conquest of Archadie, and
had partly known him since the first day that he came thither. This
notwithstanding, she doubted of his person, for as much as men otherwhile be
like one to another, and she had always her eye on him. When then she had
understood by Danae, that had told her that he was Jupiter, she was sure that
it was he in his person, and had great joy, saying. My daughter, certainly I
know him that we speak of, and have talked with him of long time past. And for
his person I assure you, it is he that he has done you to understand of. But
for to persuade or counsel you, if ye take him unto your husband, I can say
none otherwise to you, but that he is one of the most valiantest men of the
world, and that his enterprises be right high. And if I had a daughter the
most best manered of the world, there is no man living that I would give her
sooner unto, then to him, if it pleased him to take her. Ye see that
notwithstanding his simple array, he is a goodly man, he is noble, he is
rich, he is wise, he is a king. Ye feel in your self your courage, if ye
will use and observe the commandment of your father, ye may not with him hold
consistory ne parliament. If ye will absent you from this place by good means,
there is no man but Jupiter that may help you. I counsel you neither the one
nor the other, choose ye and take ye the best way, etc.

Ah my mother (said Danae) how should I choose my self? there is in me
neither wit, nor reason to take that I should choose, ne for to discern the
good from the evil. And as for me, I shall put it all into your deliberation,
and will that ye know that out of this Tower would I feign be, (mine honor
saved, and the honor saved of my company.) With this came in to them all the
damoses of the house, and said to her, that they had made right good cheer to
their guest: and thus failed the secret conference of Danae, and of the aged
woman. The damsels went and set their jewels, newly presented to them, and
parted to each of the^ her portion, saying: that to king Jupiter was none like,
but that he was among al other the most bountiful, and most honorable king of
kings.

The maid Danae took great pleasure with all these things. When the damsels had
parted among them their jewels of gold with great joy, they brought Danae to
bed, and departed from her chamber, which they left open by forgetting, as they
that had set all their mind and thought on their riches, and so went to their
beds into their chambers. Jupiter lying in his bed at this hour, found
himself so surprised with covetousness of love, that he was constrained to
arise, and to look out at a window to behold if the day approached, lifting his
eyes again to the stars of heaven, and was ravished in his heart by the
remembrance of fair Danae, and said (...) noble Danae, that has more beautye
than the star ^ning, and that shines by sovereign clearness: alas, when be
ye this hour? the pain that I endure for your cause, ye know not, nor the
great ieopardie, and the perilous case that I have put me in, to attain your
love. Unkindness, may she have place in you, with disdain, rigor and
fierceness, which be mine enemies enuenomed with mortal venom? O Danae,
remember your self of me. And thou fortune that have succored me in all my
affairs, succor me in this present need.

With this word his complaint ceased, and he gave his mind so many sharp
thoughts that pierced his heart right pensiuely. This thought was great, and
touching a right aduenturous enterprise. When all was done he determined in
himself to assay if he might come to the end of his thought, and arrayed and
clothed himself, and went out of his chamber unto the tower, where he saw the
door open to his seeming, and finding it true that it was open, he went up as
softly as he could that he should not be heard, and came so far that he came to
the chamber of Danae, whereof the door was open: in which chamber was a lamp
burning. Jupiter all full of gladness put his head into the chamber, to behold
if the damsels had bin with Danae: and when he had beholden that there was
none, but that Danae was alone, in her bed: he adventured him to go unto her,
where he found her sleeping, and awooke her by kissing. etc.

Danae was so sore abashed, when she felt her self so kill, that she crept
within the bed. Jupiter drew nearer, so that he discovered her face for to
speak to her, whereof she being afraid, opened her eyes, and when she wist
that it was Jupiter, and that he was alone by her bed side, she made a right
great shrych and cry. When Jupiter heard this cry, he was much troubled:
nevertheless he purposed to adventure, turning her to him ward, and
comforting her by his sweet speaking, he declared to her in the end that it
must needs be that she must be his wife, promising to come and to fetch her in
short time. And so long he held her in such talk, that he unclothed himself,
and in speaking to her he sprang into the bed, and lay by her side,
notwithstanding that she with said and wit-stoode it with all her might. Then
said the maid, that she was betrayed. And weeping tenderly she wend to have
fled, and did her best to have gone away. But Jupiter took good heed, and
at the leap that she supposed to make, caught and held her by the arm, and
made her to lie down again, and he clypt her and kiste her again. And so
appeased her in such facion that she left her weeping. And on the morning when
he rose up from her, he left her with child with a young son. What shall I say
more, Jupiter by this hardiness achieved his purpose, and his will on fair
Danae, and made the peace for his offense. The night passed over, and the day
came, that Jupiter must needs arise and depart from her, and then by
necessity constrayning him to keep the honor of Danae, he arose, and took
his clothing trussed together, and returned into his Chamber, where he went to
bed, and slept so fast and surely, that he awooke not till the hour and time
to go to dinner.

At this hour Danae asked where was the Messenger of king Jupiter, and said
that she would eat with him, and that they should bring him up into the Tower
secretly. With the word of Danae, two Damsels went down out of the Tower
into the Chamber of Jupiter, and finding him asleep, awooke him, whereof he
was amazed and ashamed. For the Sun was that time mounted hie. And then he
arose, and arrayed him hastily, when he wist that Danae had sent for him to come
speak with her. And so came to her, which began to wax red, and to loose her
color, and countenance, when she saw him. And the reverence made, they went
and eat together, and made great cheer: yet Danae was ashamed, and was
strongly surprised for the case that was happened to her: and she might not
abstain to set her eyes on the beauty of Jupiter, which also failed not on
his side to behold her by so ardent desire, that the eyes of the one and the
other pierced each other oftentimes. In this beholding they passed part of the
time of the dinner. When they had taken their refection, Jupiter and Danae
drew them apart, and held a long parliament of their work. And it was
concluded between them, that Jupiter should go into the Country, and that he
should return thither with a certain number of people, for to take away the
fair Danae. And with this conclusion, Jupiter departed and returned into
Crete, leaving Danae in the Tower, of whom I will cease for this present, and
return to speak how Tantalus the king of Frigie fought against the Troyans,
and had battle against them, which was the first battle that ever was in
Troy.

CHAP. XXII. How the King Tantalus of Frygy assailed by battle the King Troos
of Troy: and how Ilion and Ganimedes his sons discomfited him in battle.
WHen the King Troos had named his city Troy, and was mounted, and enhaunced in
so hie renown that the kings his neighbors as to his regard were but in
little reverence, and less glory: many thus loosing their honors, by his
right great worship, began to murmr against him in deed and in thought,
and among all other, the King Tantalus of Frigie son of the Archadien Jupiter
king of Attique, took in right great despite the excellency of Troos, and
considered against him, and made a great assemblye of men of arms, and so
departed out of his Realm, with intencion to destroy and spil the King Troos
and his City of Troy. This Tantalus had a son in his company named
Pelops: and also left a son at home named Thiestes, for as much as he was
young. And this Thiestes had a son since named Philistines the father of
Menelaus that reigned in the time of the third destruction of Troy. For to
return to our purpose, then Tantalus behaved himself in such wise, that he
conducted, and brought an host upon the territory of Troy, and did smite down
and destroy all thing that was in their puissaunce, unto plain destruction.
Wherewith the cry and clamours of them that fled was so great, that in short
time the King Troos was advertised of it whereof he was not afraid for he had
the city well garnished with people. Also he made ready to resist his
adversaries, and that by such diligence, that when he had heard the tidings in
the morning, in four hours after he issued out of Troy with xxx. thousand
fighting men, and drew unto the place, where the Frygiens were entered.

This noble king Troos, had in his company two sons, of whom the eldest was
called Ilion to whom came down from heaven the Palladium. And the yoonger was
called Ganimedes. These two sons valiant and hardy came into the field, and
required their father Troos, to depart his army in two: and that he would
grant to them his vawarde, for to prove their might upon their enemies. Troos
considering that by separatyon of his people they that were beaten or put back
might be succored when it should come to strokes, granted the request of his
two sons, and took unto them twelve thousand of fighting men. Ilion and
Ganimedes thanked the King Troos their father, and took leave of him, and
went forth with their fighting men, in such wise that they were a mile before
the battle of the King. And so the King Troos followed the battle of his
two sons, Ilion and Ganimedes. And he had riders between both appointed for
to report to the king Troos, when his sons had found Tantalus their enemy:
and also the two noble sons had before them their diverse espyes, and
watchers that were sent out into diverse places, to see and to discover the
state, the puissaunce and the order of their enemies. which found them about
the evening, and anon after, they returned unto Ilion and Ganimedes, and bad
them to make cheer, and that they had seen the enemies of Troy, in a
certain place that they named, and that there they had seen them lodged: and
that they might well be numbered by estimation about xxx. thousand fighting men.

Of these tidings had the Troyans great joy, it was that time about midnight,
and they were lodged in the end of a valley: Ilion and Ganimedes anon the same
hour assembled all the noble men of their company, and told them what the
espies had reported, and demanded of them counsel. All were of opinion that
they should suffer their Host rest yet a good hour, and after that they
should break their fast a little and lightly, to the end to have the better
and longer their breath, and also to be the more courageous, and to cause them
to be the better awaked, and this done, they should depart for to go assail
their enemies. This opinion seemed good unto the five sons of the king. And
they signified their intencion by the riders, unto their father Troos. After
this they withdrew them to take a little their rest, and gave charge to them
that kept the watch, to awake them when they saw their time: and so they had
but little rested, when they were awaked and called, and that each man should
take his arms and follow on. The Troyans obeyed, and knew well it was time to
make ready speedily. They were never so joyous as they were when they knew
they should go to battle. They eat and drunk temperately all with one good
will. they garnished them with their arms: and showed the one to the other,
how they would fight in the battle and confound their enemies, and menaced
them of an evil conflict with them.

At this hour the Moon shone right clear: by which shining and light, Ilion
and Ganimedes put their people in array in fair order. When they had took the
short refection, they began to march toward them, and put themselves before
all other: they came so nigh by Moon light, and by their guides, that they
were heard of them that kept the watch of their enemies that they sought: the
which fled unto the tents of king Tantalus, and awoke him and told him the the
Troyans were come to assail him: and that they had seen them in great number.
But Tantalus believed not lightly his watch, and deferred his arising more then
need was. He had not long abiden, but the Troyans came upon his host, and
laid load upon the Frigiens so vnmeasurably, that the redounding of their
strokes, came and fell into the ears of Tantalus, which arose and sprang on
his feet terribly affraide. With this affraie were awaked all the Frigiens in
general: some by mortal wounds, and some by their cries, and some hurt
grievously. In coming on thus, the Troyans damaged greatly their enemies: and
the more, because many of them were not furnished with their arms, which were
smitten down by the swords of the Troyans, and they were beaten down maimed
mortally, and wallowing in their blood. This notwithstanding though that the
coming on of the Troyans was sharp, and that Ilion and Ganimedes approved
themselves sharply in their work, Tantalus and his son Pelops gathered their
people that withdrew them, about their tent, and there mustred them together,
and then when they found them in number sufficient for to enter into battle,
Tantalus cried, Frigie, Frigie: and after he did cause to march his people
against the Troyens, that beat down all before them in the place where they
were arrived, and then began the noise to be great: For, on all sides were
cries made, and at the joining the skirmish was horrible, that it seemed that
the world should end in the same place.

Ganimedes and Pelops encountered together, and full of great courages they
fought together, so sore and hard, that a great while, by the wounds that were
seen upon their heads and upon their arms, they were like the one to slay
the other, and the one had slain the other, had not Tantalus and Ilion have
been by. For, Tantalus smote upon Ganimedes, and Ilion smote Pelops: and the
Troyans and Frigiens meddled the one with the other. And there began the
slaughter and murder: and there was fighting as champions, showing each man
his virtue and his prowess so strongly, for as much as they saw the Moon go
down and decline. And yet was not the day come, when they found in the morning
the place all covered with bloody heads, arms, and of men dead: but the
number of the Frigiens that there were put to the worst, was much greater
number, ten against one, then of them of Troy. What shall I say? as long as the
moon gave his light, there was no fault on the one side, nor on the other,
each man did his part. The moon gat her into a dark cloud, and anon it was
dark, and then the middle began to cease fighting, and the retrait was cried.
The Frigiens withdrew them at the cry of Ta^talus. And the Trojans at the cry
of Ilion and Ganimedes. And there was none but would had gladly abiden the end
of this skirmish and fight.

CHAP. XXIII. How the king Troos chased in battle the king Tantalus: and how
the king Saturn came by sea sailing to the port of Troos: and how the king
Troos received him worshipfully.
AFter this foresaid battle, when Tantalus was withdrawn, he began to
cast his eyes upon his people, which were all on a hill, for to wit how they
were of number, and how they had borne themselves, and how much people he had
lost: and he went all about them with his son Pelops, and him seemed well that
his power was made less than he had thought, whereof he had in his heart a
right great and sharp displeasure, and visiting his host in this fashion, the
day began to arise: and in the dawning, two things appeared, and came to the
knowledge of the people of Tantalus: one was the great loss of his people, and
the other was, the battle with King Troos, that they saw from far
discovered and approach. Certes, when Tantalus considered his evident damage,
and saw that his enemies, because of the succors that came to them, were
stronger then he was, he found not in the resolution of his enterprise but
despair and shameful end, and all discomforted, he called his son and his
principal friends, and demanded them what was best to do. They counseled him
that he should labor to save himself, and said to him, if he abode, and
attended the Troyans, that would be cause of his destruction, and of all them
that were left of his people.

When Tantalus understood this, and knew that he was desperate, and nigh his
shameful end and flight, and above that, that he might not extinguish and put
down the name of Troy: he took himself by the beard that was long, and
impatiently said, smiting himself with his fist: O cursed envy, thou did
promise me of late to put Troy under my feet, and have made me to rise
presumptuously against her: Now see I well the contrary, and that by me Troy
shall flourish: and that more is, by my cause her name shall grow and shall be
enchaunsed, and that all kings shall tremble before her, in my sight and
beholding. O false traiterours fortune, accursed be thou, that I ever believed
on thee. These words finished, he said to his son and to other of his
council, that they should cause his people to withdraw a little and a little.
At last he commanded that each man should save himself, and then they put
them all to flight. Ilion and Ganimedes took heed and ran after, and chased
them out of the territories of Troy, with great occison, and slaughter of the
people of the Frigiens. And after that they had chased them, they said that
they had done them shame enough, and left work and returned, and came anon
and met the king Troos their father, that followed them: which had great joy,
when he saw that they had quit them so well upon his enemies, by the good
conduct of his two sons.

The joy then that Troos made Ilion and Ganimedes after the battle, was great
and of good love. Troos brought them again unto Troy with great worship. The
Troyans men and women received them worshipfully, and blessed the womb that had
borne them, and the breasts that gave them suck. These were two noble sons of
the King, of whom the names were borne into all the Marches there aboutes, with
so great a bruit and noise, that not only the neighbors of Troos came to
make alliance with King Troos and the Troyans: but there came also Kings of
many far Countries of the East, which could not magnify enough the puissance
of the king, and of the city of Troy, etc.

In these days when Troy showed the rays of her puissance and nobleness
through the universal world, Saturn late king of Crete, sailed by the seas
with little company, not as king and possessor of the realm, but as banished
and dispurueyed of all land and country, so poor that he had no place to
withdraw him to, nor wist not whither to go, but only by deserts, and by the
depth of the sea. When he had been in this point a great while, thinking
without end, how he might persecute his son Jupiter, fortune brought him into
the sea of Hellespont, and then beholding about him, he espied and saw Troy,
which was a City passing fair and rich, and of marvelous greatness. And
then what for to take him a little rest, as for to put away his melancholy,
and for to reuittaile his ship, and people, he sailed and rowed into the
City, and landed at the port. When the Troyans had seen the ship of
Saturn, that was better, and more of value then all the ships that they had
ever seen, the masters of the ships of Troy, went hastily unto the King
Troos, and said: Sir, be of good cheer, and make ready your house, I assure
you that there is come right now unto your port, the most rich ship that ever
was seen on the sea, and me seems this considered, that in so noble a ship,
must be some noble or great earthly Lord that comes unto you, etc.

Anon as king Troos heard these tidings of the master mariner, he desired to
see so fair a ship, and accompanied with his two sons, went for to see at
the port, and to feast them of the strange ship. This king Troos was
courteous and honorable. When he came unto the port, he found that Saturn
made ready his ship, and disposed him for to go unto the city. And seeing
the ship, he maruailed much: for the vtensils that were within were richly
made: furthermore, Saturn and his companions were armed, and had no mariners.
He beheld their behavior at his coming, and knew that they were men of war
right well in point: so he thought in himself at the beginning for to arm
himself, and to send for the Troyans: But afterward, when he had seen their
little number, and that no ship followed nor came after these strangers from
the coast, he changed his purpose, viewed and approached unto the ship, and
called Saturn that most best was arrayed above the other, and asked him what he
sought, both he and his fellows, and from what nation they were? and whence
they came from? And Saturn answered to him and said. Sir, albeit I know not
at what port I am arrived: for as much as my heart gives me that ye be
courteous of your nature, I will not hide nor cover any thing touching your
request, I was late king of Crete, named Saturn: now I am but Saturn, for my
son has put me out sorrowfully, so that of all the riches of all my people,
and all my goods temporal, there is nothing left me but this only ship that
ye may see. Wherefore I pray you, and require, that it please you to direct me
to some Lord of this country, to the end that I may require license and leave
to enter into his lordship, and to take that, that shall be necessary
competently to the life of me and of my company.

When king Troos heard the case of Saturn comprised in brief words, he said
to him by compassion. King Saturn, ye be welcome into the house of Troos: in
troth I have great grief in my self of your first anoyance, for your glorious
renown, and for the goodness that is in you, as often times I have heard it
recounted. But with this anoyance two things glad and joy my heart, the one
proceeding of the accomplishment of desire, for I have desired many days for
to see you, and this desire is now accomplished in me: and the other proceeds
of hope, and in this part I say to you, that I king of this country have
intention to comfort and to council you to my power, and also to give you so
good aid, that ye shall correct your son, and shall punish his person,
in such wise as it shall appertain for his offense. Saturn began to sighe,
and to take a little comfort of the great proffer and good cheer that the
King Troos made to him, and he thanked him of so hie and ample offers, and at
the coming out of his ship he b^ (...) him in his arms, and kissed his hand.
What shall I say? the King Troos brought him into his Palace with all his
men, and feasted them as it appertayned, for the love of Saturn. In likewise,
the people being advertised of Saturn, that it was he that found the manner of
laboring of the earth, of melting of metals, and of sailing, and rowing by
Sea, made so great and plentiful feast at his coming, that they could no
more do. At that time, during this feasting, when Saturn felt him in the
grace of the Troyans, on a day he called Troos and his two sons, and
addressed his words to them saying: Lords of Troy, ye have done so much for
me, that I may never deserve it: but as I have said to you, my son is
enhaunsed and lift up above me, and has taken from me my Realm. I entreat
you, as much as I may, that ye will council me what thing is most convenient
for me to do. And how I shall suffer and bear the injury done to me. etc.

My brother (answered the King Troos) this is against nature for a son
himself to rebel against his Father: the sin and crime is foul and worthy
of reprehension, for every son is bounden by all laws to serve, worship,
dread and obey his Father. And it is not reason that any man should approve or
hold with a son disobeysant. Your son is in this condition cursed and right
evil: and I am of the opinion yt ye shall not acquit you well, unless you do
to your power to master and overcome his evil manners. And to the end ye shall
not excuse your evident harms and losses, when ye will, I will deliver you my
son Ganimedes, accompanied with twenty thousand Troyans, that shall succor
you, unto the death. Or they shall set you again in your royal tribunal.
Saturn was all recomforted, when he knew the love that the King Troos showed
to him: and after many thanks, concluded, that he would return into Crete
with Ganimedes, and would begin again the pitious war of him and of his
son. And following this conclusion (from thenceforth on) he did cause (...)
^^^^int the shipping of Troy, and all things apperteyning, and gathered
together men of arms with great puissance, by the introduction of Ganimedes.
And when all the assembly had mustred and were gathered together, he took
leave of the king Troos and of Ilion, and went to the sea, and shipped all his
many, and knowing the situations of the countries by the seas, he directed his
host into the Sea Egee, where as was Egeus son of Titan the great pyrate,
which durst not have to do with them in no wise: and from this sea of Egee, he
travailed so much by diverse iourneys, that he came and arrived at the first
port and haven of Crete.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Saturn, by the aid of Ganimedes, and of the Troyans,
returned into Crete, to fight against Jupiter, where he was overcome and
vanquished, and Ganimedes taken.
AT that hour when Saturn arrived in Crete, the sun was turned into the
west, and on the heaven began to appear the stars. Saturn knew the port, and
took land hoping to enter ye country secretly, and went a little way, and
there lodged his people in a place convenient and made the^ rest, and eat and
drink by the space of four hours, and then he awooke the host, and made the
Trojans arm them, and enter into the Realm. But they were not far gone, but
anon after the sun rising, and approaching a straight passage, the espies and
scowrers came unto Saturn, and Ganimedes hastily, and told them that they had
seen the King Jupiter right strongly accompanied, which kept the passage. Upon
this place, it is to wit, that when Jupiter was departed from Danae, and from
the Tower of Dardan, and was come into Crete, desiring to accomplish his
promise to Danae, he did cause to assemble his men of war, concluding in
himself, that faithfully he would go fetch the fair Danae, and bring her into
his Country by force of arms. What shall I say more? His army was all
ready, and came the same night where on the morrow he hoped to have departed,
but as he was in his bed that night in his City of Parthenie, tidings came to
him, of the arryuing of the Troyans. Wherefore he was constrained by force to
change his purpose: of which he was right sorry and maruailous passing heavy.
This notwithstanding, suddenly as these tidings were freshly brought unto him,
he arose and took his men of arms that he had assembled, and hastily brought
them unto the straight whereof above is written, and there abode his enemies,
as wise and well advised. And it is not to be forgotten, that in this army
among his men, was the king of Molosse, which had late found the industry and
craft to tame and break horses, for to be ridden, and to ride them. And there
was come he and his men, to serve the king Jupiter for his good renown,
accompanied with an hundred men that ran as the wind. And for this cause they
were called Centaures: and these Centaures were so terrible, and cruel, that
they doubted not the puissance of King, nor of none other whatsoever they were.

For then to return to the matter already begun: when Saturn knew that the
passage was kept, and that Jupiter was then advertised of his coming, he
caused his host to stay, and said unto them: My children, it behooves that
this morning, ye so do in Crete your deuoir, not only in mustring and showing
your courages, but above all, that ye be redoubted and dread like the thunder,
Assure year selves of your quarrel, Jupiter mine enemy is here, where he
abides our coming to the battle ordained: if we will come to the end of
our enterprise, it is necessary that we draw thither. Let me hear what ye
will say. Then thus answered Ganimedes: we be come into Crete, for to correct
your son, and to set you again in your throne. We will do that we may do by
our power, and fight freely without doubting or fear. And unto the end that
no reproach be laid unto us, I will send and summon your son, first or any
swoorde be drawn or stroke smitten, to the end that he yield him unto your
obeysaunce: and that he come and amend his misdeedes. And then Ganimedes did
call forth his Trojans by consent of Saturn, and set them in order of
battle: and when he had so done, he sent one of his ancient knights, a noble
man unto Jupiter, and gave him charge to make the summons, such as is said
before. The Troyan departed from the host, at the commandment of Ganimedes,
and did so much that he was presented before Jupiter, and said to him,
Jupiter, thou ought to know that every son owes obeisance unto his
father: thou do contrary to these things, and show that thou art not son
of a king, but of perdition, for thou despisest thy father: In stead of
reverence, thou have him in hate: and thou make him war where thou
should hold him in love: and thou put him to great dishonor thy self,
where thou art hold and bounden to do him worship. O Jupiter, who shall give
thee absolution of thy life, dwelling in venom? Who shall excuse thy sin?
Thou art enemy of thy father. The case is so grievous, that there is no mercy
ne excusation, unless it proceed from the natural clementie of thy father.
Behold Jupiter, behold the end of thine insurrection. All law positive, and
all law written, condemn thee unto death, and curse and anathematise thee. It
is great pity, thou art a goodly young man. Know that thy reign may not long
dure: and that thou shall more sharply be punished then thou weenest
peradventure at this this time. For Ganimedes one of the sons of Troy is
hereby in the help of Saturn thy father, with twenty thousand sighting men,
which summoneth thee by me, that thou return into the mercy of thy father,
and yield him his realm, all excuses set apart.

Messenger (answered Jupiter) if I were such one as ye say, with just reason
ye and other might give sentence and condemnation upon me: I were then guilty
for both parties: And I trow if Ganimedes (of whom ye have spoken) had heard
my my excuse, he would not be mine enemy. I answer you, that I love my
father Saturn, in as much as he is my father. But I say to you on the other
part, that he has often times sought to put me to death, he showing himself my
mortal adversary and not father. (For every father naturally loves his
son) and for that regard I will keep me from him, as from mine enemy: And
will well that the Troyans know, that if they come and assail me, I will
defend me with all my puissance, etc.

With this answer, returned the said Trojan unto Saturn, and Ganimedes, and
said unto them what he had found. Saturn and Ganimedes swore then the death of
Jupiter, and approached so nigh the strait, that they came within a bow shot,
the one nigh unto the other: and from as far as they saw each one nigh unto
the other, they made great cries and showtes. Jupiter had set his puissaunce in
two wings, whereof he was chief in the foremost, and Ixion, and his Centaures
were governors of the second. When Jupiter had seen that there was no way but
for to skirmish, he said he would begin the battle: and after that he had
encouraged his people, he pricked his horse forth, and then happened and
befell a maruaylous thing, For from the high clouds above, came down an Eagle
upon his head, and after began to fly about him, making him joy and theere,
and departed not nor left him during the battle.

By the flying of this Eagle, Jupiter and the people took in them an hope of
good success. And Saturn and the Trojans fell in a fear and doubt that could
not come out of their conceits. What shall I say more? when Jupiter saw the
doing of the Eagle, he had a great joy in his heart, and as a man well assured
in his body, he entered among the Archers of the Troyans, that shot thick at
him, and running as a tempest, passed by their arrows, and tarried not for
resistance of shot, till he came among the men of arms, of the Troyans.

The Troyans had never seen man on horse back before, and when they saw
Jupiter, they had thought it had been half a man and half a horse: and there
were some that fled at his coming, and some abode and fought valliantly,
against him: thus began the battle of that day. They of Crete followed
Jupiter with a great noise of Tabors, and clarions, and began to skirmish with
the Troyans: they did their best on both sides, Jupiter bare to the ground many
Troyans, and well employed his horse on which he rode. Ganimedes and Saturn,
on the other side failed not. Always Jupiter proved himself in arms the most
expert above all other. And abandoned his body and life unto the fight of his
enemies, and there was no man that durst have to do with him or abide him, but
he was slain and put underfoot, by the cutting and smiting of his sword.

Cruel and fierce was this battle. The Troyans were without fear, and did
great prowesses, and manly by the the leading of Saturn, and of Ganimedes.
Saturn met Jupiter often times, as he that sought great strokes: but Jupiter
that knew him well, would never abide him, saying: that he would never set hand
on his person, but eschewed and fled his death unto his power. This
notwithstanding he sought the death of his helpers, and made no sparing, of
their harness, ne armor of leather, of their heads, ne of their lives, of
young, nor of old, of valiant, nor of hardy, it was to him all one: he yielded
neither to one side, nor to other, for stroke of sword, of mace, ne of
guisarme. Yet he had often remembrance of the fair Danae: and desiring to be
quit of his enemies, for to go about her deliverance, like as he had promised
unto her, he smote off heads and arms. Unto him was nothing impossible. At
every stroke he dyed his sword with new blood, and the Eagle did flee always
about him, now low, now hie. Wherefore ye Trojans had great despite in
themselves.

Ganimedes the noble Troyan was of little stature. Yet notwithstanding, he was
of more greater courage then any other, vigorouslie he fought against them of
Crete, as he that minded nothing but to get worship and honor. What shall I
say? they fought thus together in this point, from the morning till the
evening, without that any of both parties obtained any winning or loss, and
then Saturn withdrew his people on the one side, and Jupiter returned with the
King Ixion and the Centaures, and still followed him always the Eagle, and
sat upon his Tent, which was made of boughs, and green rushes. For at that
time Tents and Pauillions of cloth were not had nor used, howbeeit, the making
of linen cloth, and of cloth of Gold, and Silk was found before this time.
In this night they of Troy, and they of Crete, made great cheer in their
Tents and lodgings: and disposed them to begin again on the morrow the
labor of arms, hoping all to have the better and victory. The hurt men were
dressed, and the harness broken was made again and amended: they spoke largely
of the prowesses of one and other, but principally they held their speeches of
the Eagle, and spoke so much of him, that Jupiter that same night took a piece
of Crimson Satin, containing a yard and a half square, and made therein the
resemblaunce of an Eagle of Gold, and set it on a Spear, and made a banner,
saying, that he would bear that banner in all battles ever after. And said
further that he understood by the Eagle, that it was a token to him, that he
should abide victorious of his enemies. And that he should be sovereign king
of Crete, like as the Eagle is king of all fowls.

CHAP. XXV. How Jupiter discomfited again king Saturn in battle: and how
Saturn was put to flight by the sea.
SVch were the speeches of King Jupiter in this night, the which he passed the
most ioyously that he could: and he visited the hurt men, and comforted them,
and concluded with Ixion, that the day following the Centaures should have the
battle, and they that had foughten the day before should rest them. After
this he slept on the green, and rested him until the time that the Centaures
put them in array, and went to horseback. And so did Jupiter, for he had lever
have died, then to have been idle. At this time Saturn slept not, nor was
there no more slacknesse found in him and Ganimedes, then was in Jupiter, for
they were sure that they should be met withal, and assailed of their enemies
again. They doubted and arrayed them the best wise they could, and about the
Sun rising they trained and went unto the host of Jupiter, encouraging each
other, to smite and fight, and assail their mortal enemies hardily, for to
avenge the blood of their fellows, that were dead in the battle the day
before.

For to make short: then the Trojans were sore inflamed with appetite of
vengeance, and were the first in the field, wherefore they had great joy in
their hearts, and made a right great cry. But this joy was anon abated unto
them: for suddenly as Jupiter and the Centaures heard their cry, they took the
baner with the Eagle of gold, their spears and their shields, and with a joyous
sound of trumpets clarions and tabours, pricked forth their horses which ran
swiftly through the air, and running as they that held not of heaven ne of
earth, upon their enemies they began to fight. Certes, when the Troyans saw
the Centaures mounted on horseback, running as the wind, they were so amassed
and affraide, that they had weened, never to have seen light day.
Nevertheless they took courage and abode them, and the Centaures fought so
mightily among them, that each one of them bare to the earth a Troyan with the
point of his spear. And among other, Ganimedes was borne down to the earth
among them: and some were hurt and some relieved after hurting, and some
without hurt. When Ganimedes felt himself among the horse-feete, he was in
his heart terrible angry, and said that he would be shortly avenged. Anon he
arose suddenly and took his sword, and seeing the Centaure that had smitten
him down, doing marvelous feats of arms among a great many of his folk, that
mightily withstood his unmeasurable strokes, he gave unto him so great a
stroke, as he was leaning on the right side to have smitten a Troyan, that he
gave him a great wound, by which he was so astonyed that he drove him down of
his horse, and he himself leapt up into the saddle. This Centaure was named
Eson, and was young, and was afterward father of Jason that conquered the golden
fleece. When he had received the stroke that Ganimedes had given him, he made a
cry so great, that ten Centaures came running, and defended him from the
prease. And casting down one another, they beat the Troyans, and cast them
down and sparkeled their blood that all the place was dyed red: and as they
found Eson and Ganimedes the one nighe the other, and beholding Ganimedes that
he practiced to manage and govern his horse: and seeing their fellow put down
from his horse, they were passingly surprised with great ire, and by mortal
hate, they pursued Ganimedes unto death. The Troyans approached: they being
there fought manly against ye Centaures. And the Centaures casting and smyting
on Ganimedes: the Troyans did their utmost to defend him, and put themselves in
ieopardy of death for him. For many of them were slain and sore hurt.

These Centaures were strong, huge, great and lothly: the Troyans had more
courage then strength of body. In this place Ganimedes showed enough of
prowess, and of valor and well defended him a while: but in the end Fortune
was to him adverse, in such wise, that after he had suffered many assaults:
and that he had seen put and cast to ground, mo then a thousand Troyans, he
beheld on the otherside, and saw Saturn retire in plain discomfiture. After
he saw that his Troyans let them to be driven back, and to be put to death,
without turning or fighting again, and that al brake, and turned their back:
also he saw them that were about him, gave it up and fled: and then knowing in
this discomfiture that he had no remedy nor recouerance, and that he alone
might not bear nor abide the battle, he put himself to flight, and fled
after the other, and sustained as he might, the pursuit that the Centaurs made
upon his men, and in the end he guyded them unto the port where the shipping
was.

Saturn then all despaired entered into his ship, with great loss of Troyans,
and Ganimedes entered into an other, right angry and so displeasant that I
cannot rehearse. At the entry of the ships, one party of the Troyans that
were left were perished in the sea, another party perished by the sword, and
the other took shipping. Jupiter and Ixion thanked their gods greatly of
this victory, and concluded together, that they would yet pursue their
enemies by the sea, for as much as they were yet great in number. And Ixion
said, that it was expedient to bring them to utter destruction for as much as
they had fortune with them, and to the end that they should never rather
force more against them Jupiter yielded this pursuit, greatly gree^ed, for to
him seemed that he had tarried too long, and yet should tarry more if he entered
into the sea, that he might not be with Danae, at the day that he had promised
her. This notwithstanding, hoping always to excuse him unto her, he made him
ready hastily to go to the pursuit of his enemies, and sent for his mariners,
and after went into a temple that was thereby dedicated unto the god Mars.

CHAP. XXVI. How Jupiter, after he had sacrificed the Egle, pursued the
Troyans: and of the strong battle that he had against Ganimedes.
IVpiter was not so soon in the Temple, but the Egle entered also, an set him
on the altar. When Jupiter saw that, after many thoughts he took the Egle,
and made Sacrifice: and anon after came tidings that his mariners were ready.
So he went out of the temple, and recommended him unto Mars, and came to his
mariners that had made all things ready, and went to sea accompanied with
the Centaures, and two thousand of his men of Crete, and sailed after his
enemies, as he desired: For the Troyans fled apace, and made all the sail they
could. In these two days Jupiter oftentimes wished him with his fair Danae,
and thought that his long tarying would be irksome unto her.

When yt the two days were past, the day following at three of the clock, they
of Crete and they of Troy began to meet together upon the sea. They of Troy
were in great sorrow and they of Crete in great joy. At this time Saturn was
not with the Troyans, as he that durst not return with them for his shame that
was befallen, and was all discomfit in himself and in despair: and passed by
the waves of the sea, drawing into the East. When Ganimedes had espied the
ships of Crete from far, he supposed first, that it had bin Saturn, and
tarried a while at ancre, but in process of time, when Ganimedes saw the
ships coming by great force near, and saw the banner of the king Jupiter
appear, by which he understood verily that it was Jupiter and his enemies, and
not Saturn that he abode for.

Then was Ganimedes sore troubled, and called his companies, and showed them
the banner with the golden Egle, and asked them what was best to do? They
answered to him and said: that Saturn had abandoned them and given over, and
that they ought not to abide and tarry, but only every man to save himself.
Ganimedes would feign have abidden the battle, for to prove if they were as
fortunate, and happy on the sea as they were on land: but when he knew the
mind of the Troyans, that desired nothing but rest, he made to weigh up
ancres, and sail forth, fleeing and withdrawing from them of Crete, as much
as in them was possible. Jupiter and his Centaures then seeing the Troyans
lying at ancre, began to furnish and fit them with their harness: and when
they saw their enemies take up their ancres, they began to shoute and follow.
The pursuit was strong, and dure^ three days and three nights: and in the
morning of the fourth day Ganimedes and his company espying land (and that was
Troy that they saw) they drew to the port with great joy, but that soon
was entremedled with sorrow. For when they had taken land, they beheld and
saw that their enemies followed them, and came to the port all provided and
ready to battle. This shame and loss smote unto the heart of Ganimedes, in
such facion, that he cried and said in this wise unto his men.

My brethren, and my fellows, fortune has done to us a grace by which we be
brought and conducted hither, but this grace is to us little proffit as we may
plainly conceive. Lo hear is the King Jupiter, which has done to us great
shame, for to chase us into our own territorye: and what shame will it be to
him that will now fly? and more over, who is he that now will not hold the
bridle by the teeth? now behooves not to fly, but now it behooves for to
fight. It is meet and necessary for to revenge his losses and his blood, and
for to recover worship. We be in our own country, if we revenge us not, we
shall come into perpetual dishonor. Of succor we cannot fail: for now the
Troyans be upon the walls, and go upon the high Edifices of the City, that
behold our landing. And some there be that make them ready to welcome us. And
who that now is not well courageous, never fare he well: let every man enforce
the virtue of his strength. For as for me, for to be hewn in pieces, I will no
more flee: I pray you that ye take courage and abide with me.

Two things happened whiles he spoke and uttered these speeches unto his
people, the Troyans were advertised of the coming of their men, and of the
following and landing of their adversaries, and they disposed them to resist
and withstand them. And Jupiter and his men approached the port, and with that
Ganimedes left warning his fellows, and ran unto the port, holding in his hand
a strong spear, his company took example by his right high courage, and
followed him. Then began both the parties to make their cries, that went up
into the air. Jupiter and his Centaures enforced them to take land. Ganimedes
and the Troyans enforced them to defend and to put them from the land. Great
and sore strokes were given: many of them were perished in the sea. And many
there were that their blood was shed on the land. But Jupiter that had no
fellow in the place, gat land in a little space, and sustained the fierceness
of the skirmish, by help of some of the Centaures, so that he made Ganimedes
to retire back to his fellows, and so exployted by the hewing of his sharp
sword, that he made all his men to take land, and had lightly put Ganimedes and
his men to the foil, if out of Troy had not come the king Troos and Ilion,
with a great multitude of people, that ran unto the reskewe and help of the
hardy and valiant Ganimedes, who for to save his men, offered and put his
body to incredible travel and labor.

The King Troos and Ilion, then made a sallie out of Troy, in right fair
order, and exposed them to bear a part in the travail of their blood. Jupiter
with Ixion and the Centaures, left then them that he esteemed vanquished and
overcome, and directed their forces against king Troos and Ilion, and them that
followed them, notwithstanding, that they had been feebled by the air, and
being on the sea, which did them little good. The Centaures were great and
huge, and strong as oliphants, hardy as lions, and eager as Tigers. At this
time the weather was fair and clear, the sun shone fair, when they began
to skirmish: it was a fair thing to see the bickerings, and a great noise to
hear the cries: there was many a spear broken, and many an arrow shot, and
many a staff and guisarme shiuered, helms inogh frushed, and many skins of
Lions, Bears, and Horses, smitten and torn in pieces. Troos and Ilion were
right asper and fierce in the reskew of Ganimedes. Jupiter and Ixion, were
valiant and desirous to get honor, and so fought and laid on the Troyans, on
the right side, and on the left side, that before them was no resistance, nor
order holden, etc.

The Banner of the Eagle of Gold was always in the most strength of the
battle. The King Troos that had never seen Banner used in battle, was
greatly amaruayled what it should signify, and often times did what he could
to fight against them that held it, and would feign have put it down, and
smitten it into pieces, but always he found there so great strokes, and so well
laid on, that he was feign to go as far back as he came nigh. He was
valiant of his body, and well knew the Art of war. Jupiter approved him
many times and often, and fought with him in many places, and noted him in his
mind for a notable man: there was in him no fear ne dread, nor also in his
sons Ilion, and Ganimedes: they yielded unto arms their deuoirs. They did
worshipfully deal with their bodies, unto their puissance without end. They
wrought and fought with their enemies, making their swords red in the blood of
the Cretians. They followed with great force, in such wise, that they fought
all that day, otherwile before, and sometime behind. And it was so in the end,
that when the sun began to go down, Ganimedes thinking on his great loss,
and desiring to recover his worship, took a terrible and mighty axe, and
enflamed with right noble courage, fought about the baner of the Eagle of gold,
where was the most strength, and smote down on the one side and other, so
vnmeasurasurably, that his axe changed color, and he cried with an high voice,
Troy, Troy.

Jupiter had always an eye on the banner. When he heard the cry of Ganimedes,
and saw his behavior, he knew him, whereof he had great joy, for he sought no
man but him: he gave over the place where he was in, and ioyously adressed him
unto him and said. O valiant Troyan, thou have showed thy prowess all the
day, and now thou manifestest and show thy self by great feats of arms,
and of great shouts. Thou art only he that I seek among the valiants of Troy:
not only that I presume to be more valiant in arms then thou, but for as much
as thou art he that have assailed Crete, and that I have pursued thee hither.
Thou have assailed and fought with me, army against army, and now let us
fight body against body, and he take it that may get it.

Ganimedes with this word lifted up his axe, and casting his eyes on Jupiter,
and thinking of that he had heard, made him this answer: Happy and fortunate
king of Crete I know now that thou art worthy to have grace of fortune, and
that thou art more wise then strong. Thou see that fortune is with thee,
nevertheless now thou enhaunsest not thy self above me, I allow and praise
thee: in as much as thou do worship and honor to thine enemy, and
dispraisest him not, but imaginest that he has courage at his heart, know
thou that thou do thy self honor and worship. For, to disprayse and blame
another man, no man ought to advance himself. I would that it pleased the
gods, that thy father Saturn which is wandering on the sea, were now here, for
it is mine intent that by his help we would have reason of thee, and I will
come thereto, if it be for me possible, for I should be satisfied for all my
hurts and losses, if I might conquer and overcome thee. And without mo words,
Ganimedes let fly his axe, and smote on Jupiter. Jupiter covered him with his
shield, which was smitten in two pieces by the cutting of the axe, and then
Jupiter bestirred himself, who all that day had abstained and spared from
fight and the feats of arms: and commanded his folk that they should let him
alone with Ganimedes, for as much as he was alone. And now he defended
himself against the axe of Ganimedes, and be labored him with his sword, the
most best wise that to him was possible.

Thus began the battle of the two champions of Creed, and of Troy. They were
both right expert, to do the feats of arms: their cries were high and fierce:
they smote each other fiercely and eagerly: the fire sprang out of their
helmes, by the might of their strokes. But when fortune was on the part of
Jupiter, what might Ganimedes do? His strokes were great, and he gave unto
Ganimedes many wounds: and indeed took away his axe, by the mean of a great
wound that he had in the right arm, and might have put him to death, if he
would. But for to make short process: when he had taken his weapon from him,
he had pity on him, and saved his life, and caused him to be kept by four
Centaure^^ Anon after it began to wax dark, for the night took from the day
his light, wherefore it behooved them to take their rest, and leave off
fighting. And so the Troyans withdrew them into their City, and they of Crete
unto the port of the sea.

CHAP. XXVII. How the King Troos, and Ilion his son, made great sorrow for
Ganimedes for they wist not where he was become, And how Jupiter went to the
sea, for to go to Argos
WHen Troos and Ilion were withdrawn, they abode at the gate unto the time
that all the Troyans were come again into the City, as they that knew not
where Ganimedes was become, whom they sore desired to have found. All they
that were in the battle of the Troyans, were entered, and there was no man
that could tell the King Troos, where his son Ganimedes was: or whether he
was alive or dead. And when he saw, that he had no more men left in the
field, he returned into his Palace sorrowing and greatly vexed: and sent for
them that were come again from Crete, and enquired of them of all the tidings,
and what they had done with his son. As touching his son they answered:
that in the evening he was in the prease among his enemies, but they wist not
what was become of him. And as touching the tidings of Crete, they told him,
how they had spedde in their Journey against them: and how the Eagle appeared
unto Jupiter: and how they were overcome by the strength of the centaures. And
how they wist not where Saturn was become.

These tidings gave unto the king Troos sorrow upon sorrow, and to Ilion
also. And the tears fell down from their eyes: and in special Ilion wept
sore, bewayling his brother in this manner: Alas my brother, alas Ganimedes,
where is become the glory of Troy, by the unfortunate and unhappy Saturn,
which has failed there in thy need. At the least if thou had come again,
we together would have done our best to have bin aue^ged of this loss. We
would have assayed our bodies, by fraternall love, for to have recovered thine
honor. How is it, art thou perished by venturing? what hard grief and sorrow
is thee befallen? for to say all thy misaduenture and mishap is too prejudicial
unto the house of Troy. Ilion fair son, answered Troos, for one adversity
it behooves not to be abashed in the war, in any wise, but to have firm
courage. War gives this day victory to one, and on the morn, takes it away,
and gives it to another, and so puts each out. A virtuous and a manly man
unto his death, ought not to be afraid. If Ganimedes he dead in the battle,
or if he be taken, what remedy? it is then expedient, either to avenge his
death or to succor him: but our enemies be in little number, we will to morrow
fight with them again, and let the gods do their wills of us. And if I fail
herein, I shall be quite discouraged.

Ilion, and the nobles of Troy, comforted them with these words of king Troos,
and confirmed his resolution for to go on the morn, to assail their enemies.
Whilst these things were in parle in the city, Jupiter was in the field, and
made great cheer, with Ixion, and the Centaures: and being set at supper upon
the ground, al about a great stone, Jupiter sent for to fetch Ganimedes, and
made him to sup with them. Ganimedes was sore moved, and had in his heart
great trouble: yet he took a short refection with them, for he felt right
great ache and smarte in his wounds. And there Jupiter comma^ned with him,
saying, that he was the valiantest man that ever was seen among the most
valiantest of Troy: and for as much as he was in his mercy, and that it was
he, that late with his father, descended into Crete, where he had gladly
planted his name in worship, if fortune would have suffered him: therefore
(said he) I will no more war before Troy: but I will enter again to morn
into the Sea, and will go and put in execucion, a thing that lies me now
sore at heart: And will well that ye know, that I have intencion to go unto
the Realm of Argos, unto the Tower of Dardan, for to deliver, according to my
promise, out of the same Tower the fair Danae, whom the King Acrisius holds
fast shut in, without any reason. This conclusion pleased king Ixion, and the
Centaures, for as much as they had heard speak of the Tower of Dardain: and
they thought well that the Argiens might not hold against their strength. When
that they had eaten, they entered into their ships, and thought among other
things, on the wounds of them that were hurt, and also of Ganimedes. And after
they laid them down on the straw to sleep, and about two hours before day
they weighed anchor, and departed so secretly, that the Troyans had no
knowledge thereof. And on the morrow betimes, when king Troos and Ilion issued
out of Troy to battle, they ranged in good order, and found no man to have to
do withal, nor they could not see nor perceive their enemies on no coast of
the sea, for they had so far sailed from the port, that by that time they
were out of sight. Thus they had great sorrow maruailously, and came unto the
place where the battle had been, and buried the dead men. But now I will
leave speaking of them, and of Jupiter, and will turn unto the History of
Danae.

CHAP. XXVIII. How the king Arcrisus, when he saw his daughter with child,
sent her to exile: and put her in a little vessel into the sea, at the
adventure of fortune, etc.
THe noble Damsel Danae abode with child of the seed of Jupiter, as it is
said before. After that Jupiter was returned into his country, she abode
passing long in hope, that he would come to fetch her by strength of people,
and would lead her into his Realm, as he unto her had promised. In this hope
she mounted often times into high windows of the tower, and casting her eyes
now hither, now thither, upon the mountains, ways and streets, for to awarre
if he came, or that she might see his men of arms, and his people of war,
and without end, she had always her ears open, to hearken if she might hear
the Trumpets, Tabours and Clarions. This hope dured long, unto the last day
that Jupiter had promised: and sore she complained in this time of his abiding,
and said unto her self, that he would come. But certes, when evening was come
of the day that he had set, and he was not come, nor she heard no tidings of
him, when she saw that he came not, and that the fruit of her belly
appeared: she went down from the window of the hie Tower, and all surprised
with despair, to behold her belly, said: poor belly, I may no longer hide
thee, I have covered thee unto this time, hoping the coming of Jupiter: the
day is come and past that he should have come, and there is no tidings of him.
Alas, and has he also forgotten me? Where art thou Jupiter? Art thou dead or
alive? If thou be dead, speak to me in spirit, in excusing thee of thy
default. Tell me what I shall do with thy seed? And if thou be alive, what
right evil adventure holds thee? Art thou weary of me? Of Danae? of her
that thou enforcedst by raining gold? of her that thou so much desiredst?
Alas, thou promisedst me thy love, and gave it unto me: and I received the
gift in good part, and gave unto thee mine heart, in like case, and more then
thou weenest. And what shall this be, Jupiter, my love and friend? Art thou of
the nature of false men, as hypocrites that go about to deceive poor women,
and then leave them in dishonor? Alas thou art one verily, thou have brought
me into perpetual shame, and have abandoned and given me over. O mischievous
man, O false lier, be thou cursed with thy riches, and accursed be the hour
that ever I saw thee. I am for ever by thee put to shame: and by thee mine end
approaches. I may no longer hide thy works. Where shall my child become?
every man shall see and know my trespass. Alas my father shall put me to
death, I may not fail of it: and as for death it shall not grieve me, save for
the fruit that I bear: yet shall I keep it as well as myself, at all
aduenure come what may come thereof, etc.

In these and such like words, Danae passed over this night, without sleeping
or rest: from thenchforth she began to be all melancholious, and took this so
sore to heart, that she fell into a right grievous malady. When the maidens
that nothing knew of this case, saw her so evil disposed, they signified it
into the king Acrisius. And then came the king to visit his daughter, and
betook her to the cure of his Physicians and cunning men, and demanded of
them what malady she had. They answered him in the presence of Danae, that she
was great with child, and that in short time she should be delivered. Danae
answered, that they failed to say the truth, and that she had never known man:
and denied her fact as much as in her was possible, hoping always to live: for
she knew well that her father would condemn her to death, if he knew that
she were with child. And about this, all the maidens of the house striued with
the mistress, saying, that they had well and surely kept the tower, that no
man save the king had spoken to her, but if he were come invisible, since that
they had received her into their governance. Whereat the king was greatly
abashed, and sore wondered.

When the king heard these words, and saw the state of his daughter, he was
sore troubled. For by experience he saw well, and it appeared that Danae was
with child: he trusted and believed better the Physicians, then the
excusations of the maidens, and of his daughter. And for to know the truth, he
sent all the maidens of the place into prison to Argos, and betook Danae in
keeping to other women, and commanded them upon pain of death, that they
should tell him, if she were or happened to be delivered of child or no.
Within a certain time, when Danae saw her in this case, she began to fall
into weeping. The king Acrisius, from this day forth, came every day to know
how she did. She wept without ceasing: she spoke not but unto her heart: and
she bewailed her love, and complained on Fortune sorrowfully. But when she had
labored long in these weepings, and that her fair eyes were made great and
red, about fifteen days before the time of her childing, the began to
remember the cause why she was put into the Tower. And that the gods had
prognosticated, that she should have a son that should be king of Argos. In
this remembrance she was comforted a little: and when the time came that nine
months was expired, she brought forth a passing fair son, which the Ladies
and women received and named him Perseus: And after that signified it unto the
king. But at the birth of this child, she excused and put out of blame all the
damsels, and said that they were all innocents of her fact.

Anon then as the king Acrisius knew the verity of his Daughter, and that she
had a fair son, he had in his heart more of sorrow then of joy, and
condemned her to death indeed, and commanded two of his mariners, that they
should take the mother and her child, and put them in a little Boat, them
both alone, and that they should carry them far into the high sea, that
after should never man see them nor have knowledge of them. The mariners durst
not refuse the commandment of the King: but by his commandment, they went
unto the Tower Dardane, and took Danae, and her son Perseus, and said unto
the damsel all that that they had charge to do, praying her humbly that she
would pardon them. And this was about midnight, when Danae understood that she
should be cast into the sea, and her son with her. Yet she had hope to
escape this peril, by the mean of the fortune of her son. This
notwithstanding, the tears ran down from her eyes, and weeping tenderly, she
took her leave of the ladies and damsels that had her in keeping: and they
let her be carried upon the sea, making complaint and pitious bewailings.

When the mariners had brought her upon the sea, they left her in a little boat,
and put in her lap Perseus her fair son. And as hastily as they might they
conducted her into the deep sea without meat or drink, and without stern or
gouernaile, and gave her over to all winds. Then was there many a tear wept
among the mariners, and Danae, and Perseus the young child. The mariners
bewailed with great compassion that they had to see such a Damsel abandoned
to peril of death. Danae wept in considering the rigor of her father, and the
fault that Jupiter had done to her, and also for the peril which she might not
resist: and Perseus wept for the blowing of the wind, and for the gross air
of the sea, that his tenderness might not well suffer to endure. In this
fashion the Matrones returned to Argos, and the right discomforted Damsel
Danae went forth upon the waves of the sea, at the agreement and will of the
winds. The waves were right fearful, and lifted themselves into the air as
Mountains, the winds blewe by great storms, the little Boat was borne and
cast upon the waves, and oftentimes Danae looked, and supposed to have
perished: but she had always hope in Fortune. And so well it happened, that in
this adversity and trouble, she was cast into the Sea of Apulia or Naples.
And there she was found by adventure of a Fisher, that for pity and charity
took her into his Ship, and her son, and brought her on land, forasmuch
as he saw it was great need.

At this time the noble Danae was as a dead body, and half gone: when the
mariner had brought her a land, the took a ring of gold that she ware on her
finger, and gave it unto the good man, praying him, that he would bring her
into some house, where she might warm and cherish her, with her child, for
he was nigh dead for cold, and was all in a trance. The mariner took the
Gold Ring, and brought the Damsel, and the little child into his house, and
made them a good fire, and brought them meat and drink. As soon as Perseus
felt the air of the fire, his heart came to him again, and he began to laugh
on his mother. When she saw that, all her sorrows turned to naught, and she
took hope of good fortune. She then made ready and arrayed her son, and her
color came again: and she did eat, and drink. What shall I say? the fisher
beheld her, and then seeing in her so much beauty, that the like to her he
saw never none, he went unto the court of the king of Naples, and told him
his adventure, praising so certainly her beauty, that the King sent hastily
for to fetch her. This King was named Pilonus, and was son to the ancient
Jupiter. And when Danae was come before him, sodaynlye he waxed amorous of her,
and demanded her name, her country, and the cause why she was adventured on
the sea. At beginning she excused her self of al these things, unwilling to
tell all, and began to weep. When the King saw that, he comforted her and
said to her, that he would take her to his wife, for her beauty: and spoke so
fair to her, and so graciously, that she told him al her life, how she was
daughter of the king Acrisius, and how she was shut in the tower, and how
Jupiter had deceived her, and how her father had put her in the sea. What
shall I say more? when the King Pilonus heard all these fortunes of the
damsel, he had pity on her, and wedded her with great honor, and did put to
nurse Perseus, and gat on her a son, which was named Danaus: but of this
matter I will cease, and turn again to the history of Jupiter. etc.

CHAP. XXIX. How Jupiter returning from Troy by sea, encountered the great
thief Egeon, which he fought with, and overcame: and of the tidings that he
had of Danae, whereof he was passing sorrowful.
WHen Jupiter was departed from Troy, as before is said, he made his mariners to
sail and row with all diligence, for to withdraw from the port, and for to
approach Crete, for he knew well that the time of his promise made to Danae was
expired, and that displeased him greatly, that he might not amend it. His
mariners did all that they could do by the space of a day natural, but the day
being past, there rose a tempest in the sea, so terrible and out of measure,
that it bare many ships with their furniture under water, brake their sternes
and helmes, and drowned all the ships, saving only that ship where Jupiter was
in: wherefore he wept outragiously. The tempest dured two days and two nights.
They saw not that time in the haven, sun nor moon nor stars. Jupiter and
they that were with him thought never to have died other death, yet they
escaped the death, and took land on the third day when the tempest was ceased,
not in Crete, nor in the sea of Europe, but in the Ocean so far, that they knew
not the language of them that inhabited the port where they came to ancre.

When Jupiter and his people saw the strangeness of the people dwelling in
this port, and their manner of doing they knew that they were far from their
region, and then was Jupiter discomfited, in such wise, that he wished that he
had not been there, nor come on ye sea, forasmuch as he knew well that he might
not accomplish his promise made unto Danae his Love. He made many great
bewaylings touching this matter, and more then I can say: and also complained
for his men that he had lost in the storm and tempest, as well as he
complained for the default of his promise. But when his companions, that is to
wit, Ixion, and the Centaures, and Ganimedes, had refreshed them, and vittailed
them, and had well put all things in point, and had taken all things necessary
for their ship, they weighed anchor, and departed from the port, and took
their way into the East: and so labored day by day, and month upon month,
that they entered into the sea Egee. And they had not long sailed, when Egeon
the great thief and rouer, which held at his will all this sea: then they
disankred from the port of the I Will of Desert, and accompanied with six
galleys, and with a thousand men of arms, came before Jupiter, providing them
to battle, in purpose to have destroyed them.

When Jupiter and the Centaures saw the behavior of the thief, they knew
straightway that they might not fail of battle, and saying each to other they
would defend themselves unto the death: they had not long held parliament among
them, but they furnished them with their arms, and displayed the banner with
the Eagle of gold. And in the displaying, they made a great joy, as they had
been in paradise. At this time had Ganimedes his wounds healed. When he saw
that each man prepared him to fight, saving he, which was prisoner, he came
and kneeled down on his knees before Jupiter, and required him right humbly,
that he would command to deliver him his harness, for to help to maintain
his worship, and also to defend his life, promising to do his true deuoir.
Jupiter took up Ganimedes, when he saw him submit himself, and began to set
his love on him, in such wise, that it endured unto the death: and that more
is, he made that his harness and arms were yielded to him, saying, that from
thenceforth they would be brethren and fellows in arms. And Ganimedes
answered to him, that he would always abide and dwell his servant.

During these speeches, Egeon and his galleis borded the ship of Jupiter: and
fought with them hardly. Egeon was in the front before as captain. Jupiter
beheld him and knew him by his arms that he bare, and yet that any stroke was
smitten, he called to him and said. Thief and rouer and pyrate, how dare
thou pursue to death him that made thee tremble, and fly before him at the
battle of Crete, by seeing of his sword dyed and made red with the blood of
the unhappy Tytanoys? Behold and see me, I am Jupiter the mortal enemy of
all thy lineage. Thou in likewise art my enemy, and now art come to battle
against me. It may be well said, that we shall run each upon other, by great
force: and that this conflict shall be right damageable for thee or for me, and
let the gods do their pleasure.

When Egeon understood what Jupiter had said to him, and that he was the
destroyer of his lineage, he had his heart so incensed with ire and impacience,
that he could not answer one word: And grenning with his teeth, he began to
smite so hard toward Jupiter, that if the stroke of the axe, that he smit had
bin right, there had never bin remedy of his life. But Jupiter knew the feats
of war, and when he saw the stroke come, he avoided it: and lifted up his
sword, and charged it upon Egeon so surely, that he could not avoid the
stroke, which was so forcible, that he was so astonished as it made him fall
down upon the plankes of the galley. Then made the pirates and thieves a
great cry, and fell upon Jupiter, and his fellows. Ganimedes held his axe
in his hands, and was not then idle: he fought and wrought valyantlye, after
his power, and so did the Centaures. The skirmishe was great, and many were
dead, not of the party, of Jupiter, but of the party of the pirates, and
then labored the Centaures, so that they dyed their galleyes with the blood of
their enemies: And that the pirates, albeit they were ten against one,
could not, nor might not abide before them. etc.

Thus began the mortal battle of the pirates, and of the Centaures, when the
one Galley had fought as long as they might, an other came on. This Jupiter and
Ganimedes had enough to do to fight and they failed not what to do, for the
more they smote, the more displeasure had the pirates. Each of their strokes
was the death of a pyrate. In process of time Egeon came again into the
prease dismayed, and fulfilled with impatience, he put himself forth to fight,
in the most strength, all desperately, to win all, or to loose all. At this
time the battle was so terrible and so deadly, that all the Galleys closed the
Ship of Jupiter, and smote on it: but this was to their mishap and ilfare, for
the most part of them were slain: and then Ganimedes and Jupiter entered into
the galley of king Egeon, where he fought so sore, on the one side and the
other, for envy who should do best, that of all them that were within, there
was not left one man, but he was slain, or cast into the sea, excepting only
Egeon, which Jupiter took with his hands, and bound him with an hundred
chains of iron, etc.

With these chains of iron Egeon had a custom for to bind his prisoners,
until the time they had done his will. When the pirates saw the mischief that
came upon them, and that their master was overcome and bound with the chains
that he was wont to torment the prisoners withal, they intended to save
themselves, and withdrew them from the ship of Jupiter, saying, that those that
they had fought withal, were no men but devils: and that they were unhappy
that came unto their hands. Jupiter had but one ship, The pirates dispersed
abroad one here, another there. And when the Centaures saw that, they said to
Jupiter, that it ought to suffice to have this victory over his enemy, and that
it was no need to make pursuit after the unhappy thieves. Jupiter accorded to
the same, and entered again into his ship with Ganimedes and Egeon, and after
made his mariners to take their course again. And always he had in his memory
Danae. It needs not to make long talk of these travels and iourneyes, and
other adventures. He was a year long sailing by the sea: and in the end of
the year, he arrived in his Realm, and there found four hundred horses,
which they of Crete presented him to his welcome.

The Queen Juno his wife, made great cheer, for she loved him with all her
heart, wherefore she feasted him, and them that presented to him the horses.
And he put in prison Egeon, and let Ganimedes go free where he would: they
loved then together ever after as two brethren. When Jupiter had been there
three days, he took four hundred of his men of the most puissant, and made
them Gentlemen, and after made them Knights, giving to each of them one of his
Horses: and taught them, and infourmed them the feats of arms, after the
discipline of Ixion and the Centaures. And when they had done this, he
assembled a thousand Pietons, or foot men, and two hundred Archers, and with
the company of them and of the Centaures, and of the Knights, he departed
from Crete fifteen days after his return: and sent not for Pluto, nor for
Neptune, and took his way unto the City of Argos, meaning to have taken away
the fair Danae. But he had not far gone, when he encountered and met one of
the Citizens of Argos, a gentleman and worshipful, that recounted and told to
him all the life of Danae, for as much as he demanded of him tidings. And
assured him on his life, that the king Acrisius had set her on the sea, for as
much as she had brought forth a little son against his commandment.

When Jupiter heard the case and the misfortune of Danae, he began to sorrow
and sigh sore: the sweat came into his face, and tears into his eyes, he
called Ganimedes and Ixion, and told them, that his voyage was broken; and
that the king Acrisius had cast her into the sea, for whom he made this army.
Ganimedes and Ixion comforted him the best wise they could, and brought him
again to Crete: he held him there solitarily a while: and lay by his wife
Juno, and Juno and her Aunt Ceres made him good cheer oftentimes. And so often
came Seres, that once she asked the cause of his sorrow. He beheld the
beauty of her: and for that she was alone, he used the matter so that he had
to do with her, and knew her fleshly, and that she conceived of his seed a
daughter: and after he determined in his mind, that he would go into Sicill,
and conquer the country, delighting always to occupy himself in feats of
arms: and taking leave of the King Ixion, and of the Centaures, his shipping
was made ready, and he went to the sea, and came into Sicill, and conquered it
unto the I Will of Lemnos. And when he had so done he went into Italy, and came
into the house of King Ianus, which received him, and made him great cheer,
and told him that his father Saturn was come newly for to dwell there by, and
that he was singularly loved of all the people, for as much as he taught them to
labor the vines and to sow corn.

All the blood changed in Jupiter, when he heard that Ianus spoke to him of
his father Saturn: nevertheless he went for to see him, and saw him, and
found his Father making and founding a new City in the place where now
stand the Capitol of Room. And in such wise he submitted him to his Father,
that Saturn took him to his grace, and made peace with him: and also accorded
to him that he should enjoy from thenceforth his realm of Crete. At the
accord and making of this peace, were the King Ianus, and the King Euander, and
they dwelled the one nighe the other, that is to wete, Ianus in a City called
Laurence, and Euander in a City being nigh the mount Auentin: and so was
there the king Italus of Syracuse, that made in this time a new City named
Albe, upon the river of Tybre. All these kings made great cheer for the
agreement of the father and the son. And thus Jupiter abiding there, he
acquainted himself with the wife of king Euander, named Nicostrate, for as much
as she was right expert in the science of nigromancie, and in charms and
sorceries: And of her he learned this science. Jupiter after this, took leave
of her, and of his father Saturn, and of his neighbors, and left there
Saturn, that was married again unto a woman called Philiris, by whom he had a
son called Picus, that was father of king Famus, husband of the queen Fatua,
of whom Hercules was amorous (as it shall be said in the second book) and
returned into Crete, and there found that his wife was delivered of his son
Vulcan, and that his beloved Aunt Seres was delivered of a daughter, named
Proserpina. Whereof Juno was right evil pleased and content, and complained to
Jupiter of the dishonor that he had done to her. But Jupiter set naught
thereby, but laughed, and was more joyous of his daughter then of his son:
For his daughter was maruailous fair, and Vulcan his son was foul and
crooke-backed. Notwithstanding, for to live in peace with Juno, he married
Seres to another man named Siccam: and gave to them the Realm of Sicill, and
the City of Siracuse: and sent them to dwell there with Proserpina. And it was
not long after that, but he sent his son Vulcan into the I Will of Lemnos, whom
he betook to be governed by three men, named Berrotes, Seropes, and Pyragmon:
and kept him so well that he came to age, and that he was a man of right noble
mind, and learned all sciences, in especial Nigromancie, Geomancie, and
Pyromancie, and made many marvelous things, that be past credit to speak:
wherefore I will tarry now of him and of Jupiter. And will treat of his son
Perseus, for as much of him came Alcumena.

CHAP. XXX. How the Queen Medusa came to Athens, to worship in the temple of
the goddess Pallas. And how the king Neptunus waxed amorous of her, and how
she deceived him.
IN this time when Jupiter dwelled peaceably king of Crete, and that his son
Vulcan waxed great, and learned the craft of Nigromancie, in the land of
Hesperye there passed out of the world a king named Porcus, a man of right
great valor, which the Hesperiens called god of the sea of Spain, anciently
named Hesperie, as is said. This king left three daughters that had not but one
eye, as the Poets say: that is to say, their principal care was for the
vanities of the world, and therefore they were called Gorgons, that is to say,
studious or lovers of the earth, for as much as they intended unto vices, that
hold of earthly things. Of these daughters, one was named Medusa, the other
Euriale, and the third Senno. Medusa, that was the eldest of all the other,
succeeded in the Empire and in the Realm. And the Poets say that (...) had the
head of a Serpent: giving by this to understand, that she was wonderfully wife
and subtle. After the death of King Porcus, this Medusa governed mightly her
Realm, and maintained py^^es and men of war, and in her beginning she
occupied and haunted the sea of Europe at pleasure, and with right great
triumph. And landing on a day at the port of Athens, she sent unto king
Neptune, to require him that he would grant unto her, that she might enter into
his City, for to worship in the temple of the goddess Pallas, which was newly
made. Neptune did great honor unto the Messengers of Medusa, and accorded unto
her, that she should enter into his City, and into the Temple, upon condition
that she should have none with her save her damsels. When Medusa heard the
answer of king Neptune, she concluded that she would go into the temple:
where of was a great talk. And she was accompanied with many Damsels so
richly arrayed, that it was a gallant sight for to see. She entered into the
Temple and into the city, and there she turned into stones, not only the men
that beheld her, but also the women, and among all other especially a Queen
that was named Ida.

By this it is to be understood, that this Medusa was of so excellent beauty,
and was so passing rich, that all they that beheld her, gave themselves over
wholly to covet her beauty, and her riches. And therefore write the poets,
that they were turned into stones: For, they that dispose themselves and give
them to the delights of this world, be lykened and compared unto hard
stones, whereof may no good come. Thus then Medusa entering into Athens,
converted and turned many men into stones: in so much that Neptunus heard
these tidings, and desiring to see this Queen, he went into the Temple where
she was in contemplation. And he had not long beheld her, when he felt
himself so desirous of her, and of her love, that he said to himself, that
she should be his wife, and that she should never escape him.

This Medusa was long space in contemplation, during which Neptune desired her
beauty more and more, and his heart gave him, that he should obtain his
purpose. And anon after that his heart had thus cheered him, he a little
paused, considering the excellency of her grief and thought trauersed and
arose in his mind, that constrained him to say these words that follow: Alas,
in what matter, in what sorrow, and in what right great and enflaming pain be
they that be burning in love by long space of time, that I already begin to
find me in so many sighs and pains, that I wot not how I may in time
come unto this Lady, for to require her to be my wife She is shining in all
beauty, and in right aboundaunt riches. This is it that I lack. She beholds
me otherwhiles in her prayers: it may happen so well, that love may turn her
heart, for to make aliance betwixt her and me. And what is this? men say that
love hurts no man, but if it be by his eyes. If the eyes be not made for to
see, I will say that my desire shall hap well. Where am I? where I am: put me
out. Where is my heart? where is my desire? I know not what I think: my thought
may be abused, and my abuse may well be reuersed: mine eyes peradventure think
they see that they see not. Mine ears imagine to hear, and yet they be deaf.
I find my self in a great perplexity and very ataynder: and yet more, in a
superfluous error, more then any man may have. For, when I see this Lady more
excellent then all other in beauty and riches, reason tells me, that she is
not come hither for me: and when I behold, that she is alone without men in my
City, who shall again say my will? I will require her to be my wife, after
that she has done her devotion: and if she accord to my request, my labor
shall do well. And if she gainsay, and withstand it, then I must use force and
authority royal.

Thus, when Neptune came to this conclusion, Medus^ arose from her
contemplation, and looked right fair. Neptune went to her, and did her
reverence, and after prayed her, that she would go to his royal palace for to
refresh her. Medusa thanked him of his courtesy, and said, that she might not
well tarry there at that time. When Neptune understood that she was to
return, without staying longer in his house nor in his City: he was sore
displeased in his heart, yet he held her in parle, and drew her a part, and
said unto her (changing color) Madame, I am sorye that ye refuse to take
harbor in my house. I am king of this City, the gods have not given to me
so great hap, that I have yet any wife, any Lady or damosel: it is so now
happened, that the gods and fortune have enspired you to come hither. Certes,
it is so that your right high beauty has prepared the eye of my heart, and
has made me so desirous of you, that I give unto you heart, body, and goods,
and all that a lover may give unto his love and Lady, or any king may give.
Wherefore I pray you, that ye will go unto my palace, to the end that I may
have communication more secretly there, and tell you of the right great love
that I have to you.

Anon, as Medusa understood the requests of the king, she began to frown, and
not willing to be otherwise entreated, she answered to him. Sir king, if it
were so that mine heart desired acquaintance and communication with one man
more then with another, in truth, if I so found me disposed, I would hold my
self right happy, finding my self in the grace of your eyes: but the matter
goes with me far otherwise, I love men, as much one as another. I have a
purpose to abide and continue in my virginity. Ye be a king: you have given to
me safe conduct for to perform my pilgrimage. I desire you that ye hold you
content, and that ye bear your self in such wise, as if ye had never seen
me. Madame (said Neptune) how shall I do that ye say, when my heart is all
given unto you? Sir (answered Medusa) it behooves first to know, and after that
to love. I have told you here that I have a purpose to abide a virgin, what
may it profit you to say, that ye have given me your heart? these be but lost
words. Dame (said Neptune) the Diamond shines, not till it be polished: ye
were never peradventure desired nor requested of love before now: wherefore ye
have no more love to one man then to another. Therefore ye must understand,
that acquaintance breeds love: and if ye will come and abide with me, I make
no doubts but that your mind will change, and that ye will make a league with
me. Sir (answered Medusa) my will is unchangeable. Notwithstanding (said
Neptune) it must change, be not abashed. Sir (answered Medusa) I see nothing
that gives me cause of abashment: for I feel my heart firm and stable in his
operations. Ye be a King, and have given me safe conduct, for to finishe my
devotion at the Temple of the goddess of your City. Reason and honor should
govern your courage. Dame (said Neptune) if your beauty surmounted not the
beauty of other women, I would consent anon to your return: But when I
conceive in my mind you formed in so high a degree of nature, that nothing
lacks in you. And further, when I see that the great goddess Pallas has
enspyred you to come to this my City, reason may have no place: howsoever it
be by love or by force, ye shall be my wife: for I had lever die, and run into
all the dishonours of the world, then for to fail to have your love.

When Medusa that was wise had understood the words of Neptune, and saw well
that he was courageously inflamed with her amorous desire, and that she might
not escape his power, for her beauty, unless it were by an adventure: then
she changed her hair into colors: that is to say, that where force reigned,
she wrought by subtlety, and said unto the King. Sir, I know that ye be a
great and puissante Lord, and that love has moved you by force to take me to
your wife. Since your pleasure is such, I am content to do all what shall
please you in such wise as ye have demanded, and that this same day be made
the marriage between you and me: but, the more solemnly to halow the feast of
our wedding, I require you of two things: First, that I may return unto the
port, to my people, for to array and dress me with my costly Jewels, for I
may not employe them to more great glory then to use this day of my marriage:
And secondly, that ye will cause to array and adresse the ladies of this city,
for to receive me as it appertains: for I will that ye well know, that in
all the remnant of ladies of the world, ye shall not find any that have more
moveable goods nor riches then I have.

Neptune was then as one al ravished in joy, when he heard this answer of
Medusa: he thanked her for her sweet words, and agreed to her, to do in such
wise as she had devised. And anon he sent again this Medusa unto the galleys,
hoping that she would return again to be his wife: but when she, by the
subtlety of her wit, was delivered again at the port where Neptune had
nothing to do: in stead for to return to the city, she caused to weigh ancres
of al her ships, and hoist sail, and in all haste withdrew them from the port:
and in stead to array her investments nuptial, she took her arms, and made
all her men to arm them. And thus she escaped from Neptune, who was in great
sorrow maruailously, and in great anger said, that she had the head of a
serpent, and that her hairs were turned into colors, to the end to hide more
graciously the malice of her heart: he repeated the manner how she had deceived
and beguiled him, etc.

Thus then escaped Medusa the hands of Neptune, by the mean of her head
serpentine: and Neptune abode converted and turned into a stone: that is to
say, having his mind set on earthly affections, and on the riches of Medusa,
and went not after her, for as much as her power of men, surmounted much all
the power of Athens. Of this thing ran the renown through all Greece. And
the beauty of Medusa was so commended, that from those parts, went every day
many knights to see her, and many of them were turned into stones, and many
lost their treasours: innumemerable enforcing themselves by arms to conquer
this Lady, who withstood always their assaults and endeavors, and always abode
conqueror of them.

Medusa set naught by King nor Prince that would have her to wife. She was all
set to get and gather the treasures of the world. Whereas her father had been
very covetous, yet was she more covetous, and coming again from Athens into
her own Realm, after she had brought under subjection the Greeks that
rebelled against her, as is said, she was so plunged in the deep swallow of
covetousness and avarice, that she made war against al her neighbors, and
conquered them, constraining them to pay her yearly large tributes. Whereby her
estate and name arose, and was so great, that the fame thereof ran into many
far regions: and among other in the City of Naples, where reigned the king
Pilonus, as before is said.

In the time that the renown of Medusa was in this credit, Perseus son of
Danae and Jupiter was in the valor and prime of his strength: and he daily
required his mother and the king, that they would give him leave to seek his
adventure. When then Pilonus heard speak of the mightiness of Medusa, of her
rapines, and of her avarice, he thought that his son in law should do a
virtuous work, if he might correct her: so he told to Perseus that he would
send him thither. Perseus thanked him, and said, he would employ thereto all
his puissaunce. Then the king Pilonus sent for men of Arms, and made ready
thirty Gallyes for the army of Perseus, and dubbed him knight, for the order
of chivalry began that time to be used in all the world. And it was decreed
that that same day Perseus should go to the sea.

And when the king had accomplished all the ceremony to the case required in
the Painims wise, Perseus took leave of the King Pilonus, and of his mother
Danae, and of the damsels, and right ioyously entered into his Galley:
afterward they weighed ancres, and departed from the port of Naples, with a
great noise of Tabors and Trumpets, and with banner displayed, and sailed into
the deep sea. It was a good and fair sight to see his departing. There was
many a tear wept: every body loves Perseus, for so much as he was humble
and courteous. The Apuliens departed never as long as they might see him: and
then after they returned home, praying unto the gods, that good and right
happy might be the fortune of Perseus. And the noble knight went by the sea,
and the coasts at all adventure. What shall I say? he so hasted on his way that
he came to Affricke, that was named Libie at that time, and there would have
refreshed him at a port, beside the strayte of Gybaltar where as was King
Athlas, the great Astrologyen. But this King put him from landing at this
port, and came in arms against him, and showed by sign a far off, that he
would keep his country with his sword. Then Perseus, which would not there
employe his army, withdrewe him from the port meaning to avenge him an other
time, of that hard usage, if fortune would help him. He passed the strayte,
and sought so long the Realm of Medusa, that anon after he found it, and had
tidings by certain merchants that he found travailing on the Sea, who told him
that she and her sisters soiourned in a city which stood on the sea coast

Great was the joy of Perseus, when he understood these tidings: his folk
had great need of vittayle wherefore he called them all and bad that they
should make them ready and arm them, for they were nighe the place that they
sought: and then, as they sailed away forth, about three hours before the
evening they saw the city where Medusa was in, and moreover they saw Medusa
and her sisters with a great number of men of war that were trained on the
port, so richly arrayed and furnished so that it was marvel to see. When
Perseus saw this, he divided his army in three equal battles, each of ten
galeys, and ordained and put in captains of war: and wisely informed them how
they should come nigh and approach the port. And after he put himself in the
first battle: and the poets say, that the goddess Pallas gave to him then a
shield of crystal: that is to understand, that he approached right wisely the
port that was upon the great sea of Spain, and that he conducted himself by
such prudence which is likened to cristal, yt he came and fought hand to hand
against the puissance of Medusa: and that by the shining of ye right clear
shield of his prudence, in receiving and giuyng infinite strokes, he gat la^d,
and constrained Medusa to return to her city, by force of arms, and by
prowess and with a good ordering and fighting of his soldiers. At that time
the head serpent-like of Medusa might not withstand his first fortunes: for she
that was accustomed to put under foot, and overcome all them that exposed them
in arms against her, at this time was put to the same extremity, that she had
put other to.

CHAP. XXXI. How Perseus vanquished in battle the Queen Medusa: and how she
fled into her City.
SVch was the beginning of the war that was between Perseus and Medusa, where
the Gorgons so fortunate (which Medusa had cherished right dearly) fell down
from the wheel of Fortune, which wheel had consented that the prudence of
Perseus should be cause of their downefal, and humbling. This notwithstanding,
Medusa took courage in her self, and reentred into her City, and gave charge
to one of her men, to go unto her enemies, and to enquire of them, who was
chief and captain of them, and what thing he sought in her Country? The
Hesperiens, at commandment of Medusa departed from the City, and came to the
host of the Apuliens, that were busy for to lodge them that night: and he
hasted so much that he came to Perseus, who took his refection upon a table
that he had made of a great stone of Marble, and said to him in this wise: Sir,
the conqueresse of men has sent me to thee, for to enquire what thing thou will do in her country, to the end that she may know what she has to do?
Messenger (answered Perseus) I have a purpose to enfranchise and make free all
men from the servitude that thy mistress holds them in: and to make her that
has but one eye, that she convert and turn men no more into stones, and that
her riches shall be no more the causes of the loss and perdition of knights
which would have her in marriage. For, against her malice of the serpent, I will
be armed with prudence, and will well that she know, to morrow, without longer
delay, I will give assault unto the City, in case she come not against me in
battle,

With this answer, the Hesperien returned unto Medusa, and recounted unto her
all that he had heard. Medusa assembled then all her men of war, and said to
them: it is no marvel though I have mine heart sore troubled, when after yt I
have vanquished great companies of men of arms, I see that shamefully we be
driven back, and withdrawn into this City by the prowess of an handful of
men. O what grief is this to them that have been accustomed to overcome, and
to triumph in all manner of wars? Where be the high enterprises, by which we
made all the Western Seas to fear and dread? Where be the swords that have
been yielded to us, by the kings our tributaries? Where be the armies and
strengths that have made to tremble the mountains, and Rocks of Libia? Where
be they that this day have taken fear for prowess, dread for hardiness,
dishonor for honor? At least since this thing is so handled, it behooves to
deal the best wise we may: but now it behooves also, that every man encourage
and show himself valiant, and that to morrow it be recovered, that by us this
day is lost. The enemies of the City have done us to understand and know,
that to morrow they will give us assault, if we furnish not them with battle.
And for as much also as they be travailed on the air of the Sea, it is much
better that we furnish them with battle at this time, then that we should
abide longer. Our enemies be strangers, here lies our triumph or ever mortal
misaduenture. If we overcome them, it shall be a memory for us far and nigh
in all honor. If the case go contrary, we shall run with the loss of our
lives into derision, and mockery of all people. And what is this, shall the
blood be spread abroad of them, that have made the ground red with the blood of
other? Shall the honor be wasted and lost, and also the name that we have
gotten with so great labor? All the world take to them courage and hope:
these two things be as needful in war, as the arms, and without them shall
never man attain to the crown of victory. Ah then take heart to you, and
make ready your harness and arms: to morrow must be the day that ye must
needs make to shine your deeds the best wise ye may, and that for to keep
your renowmes, and your titles of honorable prowess.

Dame (answered one of the Captains) it is great pity, that ye were not a
man, for if it had been so, it is apparent that ye would have conquered and
put under all the monarchy of men. As ye say, we must needs keep our renown,
if fortune has been to us this day froward, to morrow she shall turn to
profit. The wounds and hurts that be made in our worshippes and blood, we must
bear it, and take it in good part. And our prowess and honor shall to morrow
put from us all notes and shame, we will so behave our selves. Can ye not
rise so early, that we might be on the front of them well arrayed, and proved
for to fight for the prosperity of your land? we will do your request. When
Medusa heard the good will of her captain, to whom consented all the other, she
was right joyous, and concluded with them, that she with all her puissance would
beset and assail their enemies at midnight, in hope to come upon them
unawares. This conclusion was thought good unto all: and each man withdrew for
to take their rest, and for to make ready his harness. Medusa slept not much
this night, as she that had the heart always great, and sore charged with
greedy desire of vengeance: and at midnight, then she sounded to arms, and
made them to be ready and furnished. She took her banners that were right
rich, and her men were diligent enough to arm the^, for in that art they were
well instructed. And when they were ready and assembled before the Palace
royal, Medusa and her Sisters issued out of the gate, in rich estate, and
giving good morrow to her folk, with as little noise as she could, she divided
them into two companies, whereof she made one company to depart by one of the
gates of the City, and she her self conducted the other by the gate that was
against the port or haven. etc.

At this time the air was pure and clear, and the stars twinckled: and anon
the Moon shone, and put away the darkness of the night according to her
celestial office. When Medusa was in the field, she went along by the sea
shore, and supposed to have taken Perseus and his folk, but she failed: for as
soon as she issued out of her City, it was perceived of the watchmen of the
host of Perseus, and they signified their coming, to Perseus and his men,
that slept in their harness. And thus, when she approached unto her enemies,
and had supposed to have distressed them, she found them ready furnished and
trained in good order of battle, wherewith there arose a right great cry of
both parties, and with this cry there grew a great skirmish, so eager and
fierce, that it was need unto all, to put forth their prowesses and their
strengths. There was many a man cast down dead upon the sand. There many a
sword died red with blood. Then began the second battle of Medusa, making a
great noise in joining of the battle, and then had they of Naples a strong
party for to master, etc.

In this tempest Perseus gave himself to no rest: he had always his eyes open,
his ears bent to hear, his arms ready to smite: he was quick in his green
youth, his sword flashed and cut desperately: he smote no man nor shield, but
he all to brake it, and slew all down right. Medusa, that always put her in
the most strength and affairs, and most prease, by mighty great courage for
to entertain and to hold together her men: seeing often times the practices,
and the noble feats of arms of her enemy Perseus, had great sorrow, for with
his only valor, he held the Apuliens in estate and ray, and there was none
that might resist his strength, or at least, that had might to resist him. This
thing turned to great displeasure unto Medusa, yet she corrected this
displeasure, and used her prowess the best wise she might. She did great hurt
to her enemies, and smote down here and there so valiantly, that she seemed
much better to be a man then a woman: and better became her to brandish a
sword, then to spinne or turn a spindle.

CHAP. XXXII. How Perseus in this battle, slew the mighty sister of
Medusa, and vanquished her in the battle.
THis skirmish then dured long, with great beating down of men of arms and
knights: the envy that Medusa had at the well doing of Perseus, gave to her
arms more force and strength, then nature had given her. She was full of
malice, and yet she could keep her well from the sword of Perseus. And always
she was environed with the best men she had. What should I make long talk:
they fought in this fashion unto the day, before that any wist to whom he
should ascribe the victory: but even as the sun began to spread and show his
beams and rays: in semplable wise, Perseus began to show the rays of his
prudence, and brandished his sword. And seeing on the one side the baner
royal, he thronged into the prease, and drew to that part, casting men down
dead on the sands, more then an hundred. This baner was square four foot, made
of crimsen satin: and in the mids was an image painted, whereof the body was
a figure and fashion of a woman, and the head was of a serpent.

Medusa was never far from this baner, for she drew her always thither for
reskew. When Perseus was come thither, with a great company of his folk, he
cried Perseus, Perseus. And lifting his sword that was tempered with blood from
one end to the other, it happened that the first stroke that he gave in this
place, fell upon one of the sisters of Medusa, so terribly, that she fell down
dead, with a great wound beginning on her head, and going down to her
stomach. Then they of Naples smote on the Hesperiens with all their force.
Then smote Perseus endlong and overthwart, on the right side, and on the left
side: his strokes were so mortal, that they afraid not only the most feeble
of his enemies, but all the most strongest, and also the most courageous Medusa.

Great was the slaughter: and being at that point, Medusa enforced her power to
withstand the great force of Perseus. This notwithstang, she that before times
had overcome many men, was then overcome: and having late the greatest courage,
and the heart more fierce than any man, she was vanquished with despair, by
the only chiualrous dealing of Perseus, that had broken her banner, that had
smitten her men in pieces, partly slain with his sword, and partly fled. And
he had not only made read his sword and right hand with her blood, but the
sea by small gutters was made red with warm blood: through which Medusa lost
her ferocitie, all her presumption, all her strength, and al her vigor: so
evil went the game on her side, that when she had seen her banner destroyed,
when she had seen the most victorious of her knights confounded by sight, and
when she saw her men of arms leave the battle, and fly before Perseus, as
before the image of death. Finally, she saw all her puissance turn into
destruction general, whereof the end was, that each man gave it over, and
every man that might save himself, saved him by caves, and bushes, here one,
and there another, so sore afraid, that it was a pitious thing to hear their
cries: and many saved them in the City, and many were slain in the flying, by
Perseus and his men.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Perseus conquered Medusa, and her City, and smote off her
head. And how he went to fight against the king Athlas of Septe, a mighty and
puissant Giant.
PErseus at this discomf^ture pursued Medusa, flying into her City, and entered
in with her, and the most part of his people with him, that failed him never to
put to death all the men defensable that they found, to the end that no
insurrection should be against them: but they spared the blood of women, and
little children, by the commandment of Perseus. And among the other, as
Perseus found Medusa that was hid in a Cisterne, he had pity of her: howbeit
he smote off her head. And of the blood that issued out, there ingendered
Pegasus the flying horse. By the head that Perseus smote off from Medusa, is
understood, that he took from her her Realm, and deprived her of it, and
banished her poor and naked. And by the flying horse that was ingendered of
the blood issued from her head, is understood, that of her riches issuing of
that Realm, he founded and made a ship named Pegase: that is as much to say,
as good renown: and this ship was likened unto an horse flying, forasmuch as
the good renown of Perseus was then borne from region to region, in such wise,
as upon an horse flying. And forasmuch as Perseus went in this ship, into
diverse Countries, where he gate him a great name.

By this fashion Perseus conquered the head of Medusa, and did make Pegase, the
most swift ship that was in all the world, and abode there a certain number of
days, seeking the treasures of Medusa, and the riches on which she and her
sister had set their delights, and their hearts.

There found Perseus stones precious, and things maruaylous. When his ship was
made, he filled it with precious ornaments and jewels, and leaving in this
City men for to govern and guide it, he went to the Sea, and took for his
arms the arms of Medusa, and rested not till he came to the port of the
City, where reigned Athlas, saying that he would put him under and subdue him,
before he returned into his Country.

This City had to name Septe. Athlas knew well the arms of Medusa, and from
as far as he saw Pegase the ship, he knew the arms that were therein: then
he thought that Medusa had been vanquished of these strangers, and doubted
sore their coming. This notwithstanding, he did put his men in arms, and be
wailed much Philotes his brother, otherwise named Hesperus, he that kept the
garden with Apples of gold, with his daughters. When his folk were armed, he
trained them upon the port in good order: and anon after came to the port, and
there he was assaulted with diverse and sharp conflicts. Athlas was young,
strong of body, and puissant of people: he defended him valiantly, and kept
the port with the point of his sword, so well, that by his assault, Perseus
conquered nothing on him in two days that the assault endured: but that was
more by the strong nature of the port, then by the strength of the sword of
the king Athlas.

Then when Perseus saw that he had not folk enough for to take this port, he
withdrew him into the deep sea, and sent into Naples, unto the king Pilonus,
half the treasures of Medusa, signifying to him his hie adventure, and
requiring him, that he would send him a thousand soldiers. The king and Danae
had great joy of these tidings: and at the request of Perseus, assembled
fifteen hundred fighting men, which they sent into Libie, with his own son
Danaus, whom they ordained chief and captain of the army. When Perseus saw
come these fifteen hundred fighting men, from as far as he had spied them in
the sea, he know that it was flying succors that came to him, and took his
flying horse, and went to meet them, and found there Danaus his brother, to
whom he made the most great cheer of the world, and entered into his ship,
and there abode all that day feasting him. And after when it came to be night,
he commanded his mariners, that they should row and sail toward Septe. And
they said to him, that on tho morrow they would deliver him at the port. With
that the Mariners labored to do their best cunning: so that after the night
was past, about the Sun rising they showed to Perseus the haven and port of
Septe.

Then was Perseus full of great gladness, and called Danaus, and said to him:
my brother, we be now come to the port, where thou shall get this day honor
and worship, if it please the gods: for if the good adventure help us, the
honor shall appertain unto thee before me, that durst not enterprise this
alone by my puissance. Oh then, in the name of all our gods, let us employ here
the head of Medusa: for my mind gives me advise at this time, that she shall
turn into stones all them of this Region: that is to understand, that by thee
and thy men, that by the mean of the riches of Medusa be come hither, they of
this City standing before us, will be constrained to abandon and give over
their port, and fly between the walls of stones of their City. My brother
(answered Danaus) I have good day and trust in fortune, that she will be
thy helper: but for the honor and worship of this (...) it shall not turn to
my profit, but unto thine that af^^^ (...) our of so honorable a work: and I
desire nothing in this part, but the name of a soldier: for as thy soldier,
moved only by the love of our fraternity, I come for to serve thee. And as
for the riches of Medusa had they not come into Naples with thy right good
fame, these warriors had not come into Libie. Then for conclusion, it is to be
said, if in this work be honor, that it must turn unto thy glory and
praise: but this notwithstanding, I will not fal^e thee: but for thy love and
worship, I will endeavor to the assault all that I may, and will serve and
obey thee as my lord, and natural brother. And I pray thee to tubbe, and make
me Knight.

With this word Perseus drew out his sword, and gave to Danaus the order of
knighthoode: and afterward commanded, that each man should furnish him with
his armours: and then made to display baners, standers, and penons, and other
cognisances, and ensigns of war. After he did cause to sound his trumpettes,
clarions and tabours, and then prepared all his galeis, and they set in right
fair and good order, and sailed so much that he came to the port, which was al
full, and enuyroned with Libiens that were ready to cast on them spears, darts
and stones: For they of that country were right expert in the war. And to
come a shore at this port there was a right great hurliburly, and a very
grievous conflict. Perseus was in Pegase, and assailed the Libiens at one end:
and Danaus was in the galley, and assailed them in likewise. And they put
them both in the most danger of the assault: they had great shieldes and
large, wherewith they covered them.

They dreaded no stroke of glayne ne sword, nor of stones: they put
themselves into the myddest of the port, and there they gave the assault:
where many were dead on the one part, and on the other there were plentye of
fighters, in such wise that at the entrye there were many Apuliens overthrown
and put back, for they were then hot and eager: but after this, when they
had gotten land, Perseus and Danaus began to smite so vnmeasurably upon
the Lybiens, that they beat them down without remedy, now here now there,
at the right side, and at the left side, all made red with their blood. Also
Perseus gave so great a stroke with his sword unto Athlas, that purposed to
have come and broken the ranks, that never after Athlas had no hope, nor durst
not come among the strokes, albeit that he was great, strong and puissant.

Too much covetous of victory were Perseus, and Danaus, and they of Naples:
the Libiens had not been accustomed to find so fierce and mortal arms, as
them of Perseus. The king Athlas wist not what to say: he encouraged his
people the best wise he could. This notwithstanding, he saw them beaten down
of his enemies without number and without measure, and saw further, that they
of Naples wan always. And when he had seen all this, and also beheld, that
these men had vanquished the Queen Medusa, he judged in himself that he was
not puissant enough to resist their strength, and that the hardines of this
battle should be to him more damageous then auailable: so sounded he the
retraite, and fled, not into his city, but into a right hie mountain that was
thereby: and therefore say the poets, that Athlas by the sight of ye head of
Medusa, was turned into a Mountain. And from thenceforth was this hill called
Athlas, and yet endures the name unto this day. And for as much as Athlas
saved him there among the stones he founded afterward a castele there, where he
dwelled until time of Hercules.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How Perseus turned the king Athlas into a stone: and how the
Queen Auria wife of king Pricus waxed amorous of the Knight Bellerophon that
refused her, wherefore after he had much pain.
WHen Perseus and Danaus, saw Athlas and all his folk put to flight, first
he chased them unto the Mountain, where they were turned into stones, dying
with their blood the caves, bushes ways and paths. And secondly, when they
had put them unto utter foil, as much as they could, they drew to the
City, whereof the gates were not shut nor kept with any man: and entering in,
they found none but a little number of matrones and young children, which made a
terrible great lamentation. All the young men and women were fled unto the
fields, and had abandoned the City with their folk and goods. When Perseus
and Dardanus were within, and saw that it was abandoned to them and their
people, they took all that they found, and passed that night with great joy
and gladness, making great cheer, and thanking their gods of their victory
that they had given to them. And on the morrow, Perseus made to be beaten down
the gates of this City: after he commanded that every man should take his
spoil, and when they were laden with all, Perseus and Danaus went to the sea
into their galleys, and sailed forth, leaving Athlas in the mountain, where he
gave him unto the study of Astronomy.

In this time Jupiter made aliance with king Troos, by the means of Ganimedes:
and in sign of love and friendship, he gave unto Ilion a picture of gold,
which was set in the palace of Ilion, as it shall be said in the third book.
And it was not long after that king Troos came to the course and end of his
reign: and his obsequie was hallowed, and kept solemnly at Troy in great
abundance of tears. And then Ilion was crowned king of the City, where he
lived in ampliation and increasing of his seigniorie and lordship, and wedded a
noble Lady of the city, of whom he received a son named Laomedon. And for as
much as I find not that Ilion did any thing after his coronation, nor made
other thing, save that he finished and made his palace, I will speak
henceforth of Laomedon his son that reigned after him. And here I will leave
the noble deeds of this Ili? on: and yet ere I write of Laomedon, I will pursue
my matter of Perseus. And for to come thereto, I will recount an historye that
fell after that Perseus had turned king Athlas into a mountain.

In this time then that Perseus began to give his life unto right worthy
deeds and works of noble fame: Acrisius Grandfather of this Perseus, and
natural father of Danae, was put out of his kingdom and Realm, and all the
seignorie of Argos, by a conspiration that Prycus his brother made against him.
And there was left unto Acrisius of all his Realm, no more but only the tower
of Dardain, whereto he fled for refuge. This Acrisius and Prycus, were natural
sons of Abas, lawful son of Linceus, that was only left alive, of the fifty
sons of Egistus, by the mercy of his wife Hypermnestra, daughter of Danaus.

Pricus then having usurped from his brother Acrisius the seignorie of the
Realm of Argos, had a wife named Aurea, yt was so brought up, that of custom
she had no delight, but to live in voluptuousness. And on a day she beheld
among her servants one so comely a knight, that nature had nothing forgotten in
him touching his body: of whom she was enamoured. She was young, and her
husband Pricus was ancient in his demeanure and conditions, and much less
desired carnal concupiscence then his wife did, though they were both right
near one age. This knight thus beloved, had to name Bellerophon. When Aurea
had begun to love this knight, she solicited him with her eyes, and with her
countenances, drawing him to delight and fleshly lust. But the true knight,
that had his heart firm and stable, which perceived well her countenance,
dissimuled, and fained that he was blind in this part. And in the end when
the Lady saw that by countenance nor sign amorous that she showed, he
employed him not once for to please her, but fled her company: in the most
evil wise that she might, she intended to turn her love into hate, and her
fair countenances into fierce malice, so enuenimed, that for to make him die,
she accused him before her husband the king Pricus, saying, that he would have
enforced her, wherefore she required justice instantly.

At this accusation made, Bellerophon was present, and being sore abashed, and
astonished at the beginning, but hearing the Lady speak, at length he cleared
himself, and excused him, saying: Madame never please it unto the gods, that
for to cover mine honor, I do discover the disworship and fault of another.
Let never man advance himself by defaming another: This knowing, I will say
the truth, and if there be any man that may worthily prove this against me,
and overcome me, no blessing to my heart. I will stand to the judgment of all
noble men that have known my behavior. Alas lady, from whence is come this
abusion, for to charge me that I should have willed to enforce you? when or in
what place was it done, or where be the witnesses of the cry that ye made at
the affray? where be the proves that shall say that ever in my life I was with
you alone? It gives me marvel from what heart departed this dishonor that
ye note in me? and for what cause it is imagined against me? for I will well
that all the world know, that I have served you truly and loyally, and that I
never thought dishonor unto you nor unto the king, to whom I pray that he will
take and make information upon my living, and to understand in like wise yours.
And if it can be proved and appear that I have trespassed, that I may be
punished: but I pray also, if I be found innocent, that I may have speedy
absolution.

Sir said the Lady, that strongly was obstinate in her error, I make me
party against him. If then I accuse him, it is truth, it ought not to demand
witnesses of his folly. In this case I am worth two witnesses: for all the
world knows, that when an ill man will dishonor a woman, he calls no
witnesses nor no proves thereto, but does his damnable will the most secretly
that in him is possible. And so weened Bellerophon to have done with me,
wherefore I require sentence and judgment of him. With these words, Pricus
assembled his Council, and it was judged that the lady should be believed,
and that Bellerophon should be culpable of death. Then spoke Pricus to
Bellerophon and said. Fair son, thou know and have found that I have
loved and nourished thee lovingly: thou understand the accusation of thy
Lady, the case is so foul, that it may not be purged by denying. For if it
were so, the evil boys and had fellows, would all day dishonor as many of
our women as they could find. In this case the Ladies have a prerogative for to
be believed, and need not to bring forth witnesses, And forasmuch as thy
mistres has vanquished thee, and required judgment of thy trespass, thou art
condemned to die. But forasmuch as before this time I have had great love unto
thee, and that I know thee a valiant man of thy body, I will mittigate and
attemper this sentence in this wise, that thou shall go fight against the
Chymere of Sicill, and if thou may overcome and master her, I give thee thy
life, and give thee plain absolution of all, upon condition that never after
thou renew nor rehearse this trespass.

Sir (answered Bellerophon) since that fortune consents, that I be attainted of
any infelicitie: and that the privilege of the Ladies take place, and go above
reason: I had much lever to be vanquished by wrong cause and evil, then by just
and good cause, and thank you of the moderation of your judgment, and make
vow here in your presence, that in all haste I will go into Sicil, to prove me
against the Chimere, and will see if fortune will help me to get again the
life, which she has made me lose by your judgment. Then the noble knight
departed, and took leave of the king, of the ladies and damsels, took also
his armours, and goods, and made covenant and bargained with certain
mariners, to bring him to Sicill. When they were agreed, he went to the sea
with little company, and was evil at ease at his heart, when he saw that
Fortune was to him so contrary: yet he comforted him self in his good
quarrel: and sailing on a day on the Sea of Hellesponte, his Marryners looked
into the West, and saw come a right great floate of Ships of war, which
discomforted them so sorrowfully, that it was wonder, and they awooke
Bellerophon that at that time slept, and said that they were but dead and cast
away.

Bellerophon comforted his mariners the best wise he could, and told them
that discomfort could not help them: and as he was thus speaking, a gallie of
advantage went out before his fellows, and flying on the sea like unto a bird
adressed her unto the ship, wherein was Bellerophon, and aborded it. And who
that will demand what the name was of the gallie, and what men were therein: I
will say to them, that this was Pegase, and that Perseus was within it. As soon
as he might speak to the mariners that carried Bellerophon to Sicyll, he
asked and demanded them, what they were, and into what region they would go?
When Bellerophon heard Perseus speak, he beheld his behavior and
countenance, and judged in himself that he was of a good house, and said to
him: Certes sir I have much great joy, for that I see the ship and mariners be
so well adressed, and in so good readiness as yours be, for ye seem well a
knight of a noble house, and therefore I tell you my case, afterthat ye have
made your asking. First then, where ye enquired what we be, know ye that in
Argos we have taken our birth: And as to the second, I answer you, that we
have a purpose to go straight into Sicill, to the which I am constrained by the
rigor of a mortal judgment, cast upon me at the instance of a Lady called
Aurea, that unjustly and untruly has complained upon me, saying that I
would have enforced her. This Lady that I speak of, is wife to king Prycus,
which newly and of late has banished and exiled his Brother Acrisius out of
his Realm, and this King, for to please and satisfy the accusations of his
wife, has condemned me to be put to death, yet for the good and the
acceptable service that I have done to him, he has granted me to live, if
so it please the gods, that I may by possibility vanquish and overcome a
Chimere that is in Sicill, unto the which I go for to assay me. So I pray you
that in our misfortune, we be not let by you, neither by none of your company.

Valiant knight (answered Perseus) as it is true that the heart of a noble man
takes pity, and compassion in the distress and passion of his equal: the
weighing of your case has pierced mine heart with a charitable mercy and
pity, by which ye may surely understand, not to have by us any hinderance
during your unfortunate life. And for as much as the hearts of them that would
be induced at calling to the deeds of Arms, singularly delight them in
adventures of great worth and weight to get credit by, I will accompany you,
for two causes. The first is, to expose my self to the disputation and
destruction of the Chimere, if it happen that you overcome her not, which I
suppose ye can not. And the second is, that after the Chimere be vanquished, I
may be guided by you unto the Realm of Argos. For from now forth, I will be
enemy unto the King Pricus, for the sake of the father of my mother the King
Acrisius. And for to let you have more greater knowledge of this matter, I tell
you that I am son to Danae: that very same son that was conceived in the
tower Dardan, of the seed of Jupiter, and that same in person, that king
Acrisius made cast into the sea. But this notwithstanding, I shall take no
vengeance on his demerites, but for the honor of the blood, and of the womb
of whom I am issued, I shall succor and aid him, and pray you that ye will be
my fellow and brother in arms, and that ye will come into my Galley, and send
home again your mariners into their countries, if it please you.

When Bellerophon heard the good words and answer of Perseus, he made
alliances with him, and entered into his Galley, and gave leave to his
mariners, and accompanied with him Perseus and Danaus, that for love of him
took their way into Sicil, where they arrived in space of time, and took land:
and that same day Bellerophon armed him, desiring to find the Chimer, and
took leave of Perseus, in such wise, as he that put him in peril of death.
The Ports write that this Chimere had the head of a Lion, the womb of a goat,
and the tail of a serpent, but for truth it was a mountain inhabitable, that
had in height above a passing great cave of Lions, and in the middle of the
hill it was full of goats, And at the foot beneath, it was environed and set
round about with serpents. These lions and serpents were passing damageable,
and noyous unto the country about and nigh. When Bellerophon then saw the
mountain, he went thither, and Perseus and Danaus followed him. They had not
long marched, when they saw and beheld more then a thousand little Serpents
with many great Dragons, of whom some came about Bellerophon and cast out
their venime, and the other passed forth, and came running upon Perseus and
Danaus, which had promised to Bellerophon, that they would there do no deeds
nor enterprise of arms, but if it were by constraint, and in defending their
bodies.

Anon as these three valiant knights saw these cursed beasts, they took their
swords and smote upon them, and be headed many of them, but with this they had
great pain and travail, for these beasts were cruel and full of pride, and
hardened them eagerly to them, and if they had not been well provided with
abillements of war, they had there sooner have found death then life.
Bellerophon went always before, and smote down right, and headed, and smote into
pieces many. Perseus nor his Brother Danaus fought not, but with the beasts
only that came upon them. When Bellerophon had a little ceased the fight and
battle against this vermin, and had found it more sharp and more biting,
(for the point of his sword was made terribly blunt, with smiting against their
hard scales and skins) then there leapt down and out of their holes the
goats and the lions, and came down for to assail the the knight, in so great
number, that he was all environed with them, etc.

Some of these beasts escaped from him and came to Perseus, and gave him his
hands full to employ his strength and prowess: the Lions leapt about the neck
of Bellerophon, sometime in such number, that in no part he might be seen. Yet
by his ability he could well save himself, but he had never escaped, there
came so much venom upon him there, and beasts, and on Perseus and Danaus,
which so fiercely assailed them, and if he had not woonne a rock, upon which
he gat up with great pain, and right great sweat of his body. For to go upon
this rock, there was but one straight way. Then compassed him the Lions, and
with them the other beasts, which stayed on the way of the rock, and at the
foot, roaring and making great noise about him, so that Perseus and Danaus had
none other hope for the knight, but that it had been his last day: for he had
so many beasts about him that it was likely, that the edge and cutting of his
sword might not long endure, without it had been worn or broken. Then the
Lions when they might not touch his body, bote the stones, and did tear them
with their claws, the serpents flew up into the air, and lifted up their
bodies upon their tails, and cast fire and smoke out of their throtes unto the
rock. And the most hardest of the Lions, one after another trained themselves
in battle against him, and showed their teeth, receiving his strokes sore set.
And they fled not, but abode as beasts familiar and sore covetous of man's
blood, in who^ reigned exceeding great fiercenes, as much as in any wild beast
of the world at that time.

Hard and maruailous was the battle, as Perseus and Danaus beheld, and
thought in what fashion they might succor Bellerophon. The noble knight
defended him to his power, and seeking how he might save him from this peril,
he cast his eyes upon a great stone that hanged over the way of the rock,
whereupon he was mounted, and then he thought if he might make that stone to
fall down, that he should flea the most part of the beasts. Then he began a
little and a little to wag the stone, and to seek the ioyntures that held it,
and so much labored, that in the end he made it fall upon the lions, serpents,
and goats, in such wise as in the falling he made all the rock to tremble,
and feared in general these unhappy beasts, so that they were there all
bruised, like as the thunder had come upon them, and yet that more is, with the
tumbling down, it made the rock that Bellorophon stood on so shake, that he
tumbled down thereon, and was so astonished, that he wist not whether it was
day or night.

The stone was great, and brought down many stones with him, Perseus and
Danaus thought at the beginning, that all the mountains had tumbled down, and
were not well assured in themselves. This notwithstanding, they beheld plainly
the end, and seeing after the noise of the tempest, that their fellow lay
upright all along upon the rock, they supposed that he had been dead. Then
they made great sorrow, and were displeasant, and approached the rock, where
they found the beasts lying under the stones dead, and they went upon the
mountain, and then knew that Bellerophon was not dead: whereof they recovered
great joy, and ceasing their sorrow, they took the knight between their
arms, and Perseus demanded him how it stood with him, and how he felt
himself.

CHAP. XXXV. How Perseus vanquished the monster of the sea, and exposed himself
against him for the love of Andromeda. etc.
PErseus and Danaus awaited gladly the answer of Belloropho^, and they held
him for the most best accomplished knight that ever they saw. What shall I
make long process of this matter? Perseus and Danaus searched this mountain,
and went into the caves of the beasts, but they found none. And still sat
Bellorophon upon the rock, for he might not go for the hurt and brusing of his
foot. And then as the two Knights had fetched a compass and gone about the
hill, they returned to Bellorophon, and then Perseus said to him. My brother,
O how well art thou worthy to have of me praising and commentation? thou have
this day done a good and holy work, by thy worthy behavior, thou have
gotten unto thy name the crown of glorious fame. Thou have passed the strayte
way and passage of infortune, from whence thou art issued clear as the sun.
And not only thou haste labored for thy weal and utility, but for the weal
and proffit of this region. For thou haste flayne the warders of the serpents
and the porters of the Lions that kept this country inhabitable, which shall
from henceforward be inhabyted and occupied with people. Bellorophon was all
abashed when he heard the glory that Perseus gave unto him, by meekenes and
humility that was in him. And answered, if there be any worship in this work,
that it shall turn as well unto them as unto him, and they began to praise
each one another, and they eat upon this hill ye same night, after they had
made sacrifice unto their gods. And thither came all the Apulyens, where they
made great cheer. Afterward they took all the skins of the Lions, and the
heads of the serpents that were dead, in sign of victory, and laded them in
their galies, and they bare them with them into their galey with Bellorophon
which might not go, and finally they went unto the sea, and sailed and rowed
toward the port of Athames which was nigh by, but when they thought to have
drawn unto this port, suddenly there arose a tempest on the sea so great and
hydeous^, that they were constrained to abandon them unto the wind, and passed
forth by the haven, and their fortune was such that they were brought into
Sirie, upon the sea of Palestine. And they came into the port and haven of
Ioppe, where reigned Amon, and in Palestine reigned Cepheus and Phineus. etc.

The same time that Perseus arrived there by means of this tempest, the port
was full of men and women and children, that it seemed that all the world had
bin assembled. Perseus came thither alone, for his folk were dispersed upon
the sea, some here and some there in the galeis. When the Siriens saw him
ariue by force of the wind, they assembled in a great number about his flying
horse. And ye king Amon seeing that it was laden with the heads of lions, he
was sore abashed. And for to know from whence was that galey come, he enquired
who was the master? At which inquisition answered Perseus, and demanded of
the king courteously, in what Country he was arrived: The King told him that
he was in Sirie: and that the Realm appertayned to him. When Perseus knew
that he spoke to the king: he said. Sir I am descended unto this port by the
disposition of fortune, also my men be sore travailed by the tempest of the
sea, that has been long troublous unto them, I require and pray thee that
thou be content, that I and they may come a land here for to refreshe us. And
if it happen in time coming that thou or any of thine have ^eede of like
courtesy in Naples, which is the place of our dominion, I promise thee, by the
promise and word of a noble man, that the like merit and thank shall be re^dred
unto thee. The king answered: noble knight there be so many spies now adays
sailing by realms and countries, that a man may not well know to whom he
may a^^y and trust. This notwithstanding, I see well by your behavior, that I
trow that ye will not give us to understand any other thing then truth. I
abandone to you all my country: and pray you that ye will come and take
patience in my house, and furthermore I council you, that ye depayte and come
out of your ship: for if ye abide there long ye shall be in great peril, For
as much as we know certaynlye, that into this port will come anon a monster of
the sea that shall devour a right fair virgin and maid, which is here by,
bound upon a stone, for the crime of her mother, and by my sentence. And if ye
tarry here till his coming, it is to doubt, that it shall be the worse for you.
Boccace in the genealogy of the gods touches not otherwise the cause why
this maid was thus exposed to the monstre. Wherefore I pass it over: and who
demands the name of this maid, Boccace says, that she was named
Andromeda.

When Perseus had understood that there was bound this maid, he desired to
see her, for the marvelous judgment that was given upon her, and arrayed him
with rich vestiments and clothes and then issued out of the galey, and took
out also Bellerophon which might not yet help himself, and after he went unto
Andromeda. There were her parents and cousins in great number, which labored
in sorrow and great plentye of tears. When Perseus saw this maid that was
passing fair in her degree, which never saw her like or match, he had
pity of her, and said to himself, that if he might he would deliver her
from this peril. Then he called her friends, and said unto them in the
presence of Amon: I have certainly great pity and compassion of this so fair
a damosel: and also am amassed how the gods suffer and endure that she is so
fortuned in her tender years. If it so happened yt she might have any knight
or noble man, that would unbind her, and for charity expose his body against
the monster for the love of her, should she be quite? They answered yea: Ah
then said Perseus, if I would for her sake adventure my self in this work: and
if it so fortuned that I had the grace to overcome and surmount the monster and
for to put him to the foil, will ye be content that the maid be my wife? They
answered yea, yea. And I promise you, said Perseus, and swear, that she has
found me, a knight that shall put his body and life in ieopardye for her. etc.

With this word Perseus sent to fetch his arms: and after went to the
Damsel and unbound her from the stone, and delivered her to her friends and
kinsmen. Saint Augustine in the book of the city of God, rehearses, that yet
in the same port is the stone that Andromeda was bound upon, that they of
Ioppe kept for a sign and memory of the victory that Perseus had of the
monster. All they that were there, meruailed greatly at the enterprise of the
knight, and knowing the monster, they judged him to be but dead, alowing his
hardines that to them seemed was too great. One and other spoke of this matter.
Perseus armed him ioyously. When he was armed, he came to Andromeda and kiss
her, taking leave of her, and said, fair maid, pray ye unto the gods for
your champion, that for your love submits himself unto the peril of death,
to the end that by your only mean I may come unto the enjoying of love, and
that we together may be joined in marriage, which I buy at the price of my
life. Noble Knight, answered the maid, I am more beholding to you then to all
my kinsmen and friends. Know ye, that if my prayers may obtain of the
gods, ye shall return safe from this enterprise. Then Perseus went before
the stone, and Andromeda kneeled with great humility, with both her knees upon
the earth, in calling on her gods to help her champion, and there were many
matrones upon the bank of the Sea, that for compassion put them in
contemplation, and by this example of them all, the Siriens began to pray for
the prosperity of the Knight, excepting only the king Phineus, which prayed
for his death. And that for this cause, for as much as before the judgment
given on Andromeda, he had fianced and betrothed him to her. So had he wished,
that the monster had devoured Perseus. to the end that the marriage of him and
of her might have been ended. What shall I say more? When Perseus had so put
himself forth by the stone, he looked toward the sea, and held in his hand
a good and passing strong sword, and he had not long beheld the situation,
and taken leisure to see the place, when there sprang out of a swalow or depth
of the sea, a monster so great and so horrible, and so dreadful, that it
seemed that he had been made for to destroy all the world: he was rough and
went on four feet like a beast, and his form was so disfigured, that none
wist whereto he might be likened.

When then the Syriens saw him put his head out of the deep, there was none
so well assured, but he trembled for fear. And many were so afraid, that they
fled into their houses, and reentred into their City. This notwithstanding,
Perseus as soon as he saw him rise up, he came to him as hardy and right
well assured, and smote him with the point of his sword, so full upon the
right eye, that on that side he made him blind, whereof the monster felt so
great pain, that he came out of the Sea with open mouth, and thought to have
swallowed Perseus. And Perseus went back a little, and put his sword between
his jaws into his throat, so far forth, that he could not draw it out
again, and so of force it abode in his throat more then four foot.

At the second stroke the monster made a maruaslous cry, lifting up his head,
and weening to have cast out the piece of the sword which abode in his
throat, but it would not be. Always the monster assailed Perseus and weend to
have swalowed him into his throat: and Perseus always stroke at him with his
sword, and put him at defense, and smote always at his throat, and about nigh
his other eye, and so well intended the work, that after he had given him many
wounds he made him blind on the left eye, like as he did on the right eye.
And then as the monster went here and there, and made many walks without
seeing or knowing where he went, pursuing his enemy, Perseus gave him many
wounds, searching his heart, and at the last he found it. And finallye he
bestirred him so that he pearsed the heart, with which stroke he made him to
fall down dead.

CHAP. XXXVI. How Phineus would have had Andromeda: and how Perseus answered
him that she should be his wife.
PAssing joyous and astonished were the Syryens when they saw the good fortun of
Perseus, and said one to an other, that such a knight ought to be praised above
al other men. The king Amon took great pleasure to see his dealing: and seeing
the monster laboring in his death, he went down to him, embracing him and
said. Sir, the gods govern thy fortune, and since they have received thee in
their favor and grace, there is none that may anoy thee: in a good hour were
thou here arrived: demand what thou will, and I will cause thee to have it.
Sir, answered Perseus, I have preserved from death the Damosel: I desire none
other thing but her. O valiant Knight, said Phineus, that was there
awaighting, thou do much gloryfye thy self, for thou have gotten in a half
day more honor, then an other knight shall get in an hundred year. And greatly
thou ought to be commended. But beware that the beauty of this maid deceive
thee not: know thou that I have betrothed her, and by right she ought to be my
wife. Many days be gone and expyred since, that in the presence of our bishop
we promised to take each other in marriage. This misfortune is after come to
her, thou haste relieved her, and would therefore have her. The beginning is
fair, but the end is foul. And if it so hap that thou do me wrong, I let
thee know that I will not suffer it: for in this country I am a King, and have
great puissance: all the glory that thou have gotten, shall be here quenched.
Wherefore I pray thee, that thou forbear in this case: and that thou suffer
me to take that is mine, and take thou that that belongs to thee.

During these words, Perseus looked toward the Sea, and saw from far his
galyes coming the one after the other directing them toward this port.
Whereof he had right great joy, and said unto Phyneus. King I make no doubt
that thy power is great in this country, but know thou right well that I
know no man living that shall cause me to leave that belongs to me. When I
came hither I found this maid condemned unto death. At that time she was all
abandoned to the death. I have saved her: and I say to thee that she is mine,
and thou ought to have no regard to any promise that she has made to thee,
or to any other. And so I have intention that she shall be my wife. And if thou will Combat and fight for her, assemble thy power, and make thee ready in thy
battle. Lo here come my galies ready for to receive thee: and although I
have not people enough, yet I have in my cofers the most part of the treasors
of Medusa, for to send for men of arms in all places where I may get them.

When Phineus considered this answer, and knew that he was the Knight that
had vanquished Medusa, whereof the renoume was great and ran through out the
whole world, he could none otherwise answer to Perseus, but that he might
do his pleasure. All the kinsmen of Andromeda were angry with Phineus for his
folly, and made him so ashamed, that he departed thence, and went into the
City. After they went to behold the monster, and then came sailing and rowing
the Apuliens unto the port, and being come, they brought Perseus and Andromeda
into Ioppe with great triumph: and yet that more is, Perseus and Andromeda
espoused each other that same day, and lay together. And the solemnity of
their wedding endured fifteen days. During this time, the Syriens came to the
port daily, for to see and behold this monster. Plinius rehearses, that of
this monster was borne to Rome a bone of forty foot long, so great as an
Oliphant. Let them then that read this history, search how great and huge this
monster was, when only one of his bones was so great. The Romans for a great
marvel have and keep that bone. What shall I say more? At the end and
expiration of this feast of the wedding of Perseus and Andromeda, Perseus took
leave of the Syriens, and furnished his Galleys with vittailes, and departed
from Ioppe, and went to the sea, leading with him his wife Andromeda. And
fortune was to him so good, that in a little time he passed the seas of Syrie,
and came to land at the port and haven of Thebes. Where he was received
courteously of King Creon, that then reigned a young child.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Perseus reestablished in his Realm the king Acrisius: and
how he slew the King by evil adventure.
IN Thebes there refreshed them these Apuliens, and made alliance with the
king, after they departed from thence, and took their way by land toward
Argos, under and by the conduct of Bellerephon, that then was whole, and healed
of his foot, who knew well the country. When Bellerophon had guided them so
nigh Argos, that in an hour they might run before the gates, he signified it
unto Perseus, and then Perseus made his host to tarry in a Valley, and sent
Danaus unto the King Pricus, to summon him that he should yield the Realm
unto the King Acrisius. Danaus went to Argos, and accomplished the summons. The
king Pricus answered to him, that he was king, and that he would hold that
he held: and menaced Perseus unto the death, if he departed not the Country
hastily. Danaus returned unto the host of Perseus with this answer, and made
to him the report. Perseus then hoped that king Pricus would come to him, and
give him battle, and had thereof right great joy and pleasure: for he
desired nothing in the world more, then to be in arms: and for to be the
better able to withstand his fo, he ordained that night, that he would depart
his battle in three: whereof he gave charge of the first battle to
Bellerophon, which require and desired of him the ^award with right great
instance: and he himself held the second battle. And to Danaus he betook
the third: and thus when he began to set forth Bellerophon on his way, he had
not far gone, when he saw from far the king Pricus, that knew of their coming
by his espyes, and had set his battle in good order.

Belleropho^ had with him but two thousand fighting men. When the king Pricus
saw him come with so little a company, he supposed that it had bin Perseus,
and thought to have had all won before hand by advantage, and made his people
to set against them, by which within short space began a cruel and hard
battle. And of this battle was Pricus right joyous at the assembly, and
well employed his arms and his sword, and did meruails, but at that time he
supposed by force to have abidden victoryous and conqueror of his enemies, he
cast his eyes toward Thebes, and saw Perseus and his battle, that
discovered and showed himself: wherein his fortune was such, that in the
beholding the head of Medusa, which he bare painted in his sheelde of cristall,
he and all his folk, in a momente, were turned all into stones. That is to
say, that he and all his meanie had lost their strengthes and courages, and
that they might no more lift their swords then might the statues or images.
And that Prycus fled, and all they that could, fled some into the city, and
some into the fields at all adventure. Perseus daigned not to follow the
chase, because of their poor case. And thus Prycus escaped the death, and
abandoned and gave over the country, and went with them that fled into
Calidonie, where he was afterward put to death by Hercules. And Perseus went
into the city of Argos, whereof the gates were open and without any men that
made any defense. When he was in the city, he made an edict charging upon
pain of death, that none be so hardy to use any force nor violence there.
After that he sent to seek his grandfather Acrisius, and told him who he was,
and so delivered to him again his city and his realm.

Of this courtesy Acrisius held himself greatly beholden unto Perseus, and
asked him, and enquired of his daughter Danae, and of their adventures. Perseus
told him all that he knew; and then Acrisius was right sore displeasante at
that hard usage that he had done: and for to amend all, he adopted Perseus
to his son, and gave him the full power to govern the city, and himself
with drew him into the tower of Dardane and then sent again unto Naples,
Dardanus his brother, with whom went Bellerophon: and he gave unto them and
to their company, great treasors at their departing. Perseus sent many
Arigiens into Licie? and made them to inhabit the country. And thus abode
Perseus in Argos with his wife Andromeda, of whom he gat many children, That
is to weete, Sthelenus, Blache Demon, Erictreus and Gorgophon, which all became
men, and took wives, yet reigning the King Acrisius. And among all other
Gorgophon, had one wife, of whom he had two sons Alceus, and Electrion,
Alceus engendered Amphitrion, and Electrion, engendered Alcumena, of whom came
Hercules. What shall I make long process of the factes and of the generations
of this Perseus. He governed passing well the realm, and loved much the King
Acrisius: But there fell an hard fortune unto him in the end, for as he went
on a night alone unto the tower of Dardane to visit the king, the garders and
keepers of the Tower knew him not, and fell upon him and hurt him. When he
felt him smitten he put himself to defense. The noise waxed great, the king
heard the noise, he came running down for to part the fray, thrusted into the
prease, in such wise that Perseus knew him not, and with his sword he so
smote him, that he slew him and all the people with him: and anon after, when
he came in, and found him dead, he remembered and thought he had put him to
death after the prognostication of the gods, and made great sorrow, and did
ordeyne his obsequie right solemnlye. And at this obsequy happened for to be
there, Jupiter and his son Vulcan, which at that time practysed together the
science of magike and nigromancye. etc.

At this time Vulcan forged and wrought the thunders unto Jupiter. That is to
say, that he busied himself with smiting and troubling by fire and sword, the
Realms of his neighbors, and the Poets say and make many fables of him,
whereof needs to make no mention at this time. Perseus then did great honor
and worship unto his father Jupiter, and in likewise did Jupiter unto Perseus.
And each told other, and rehearsed their adventures. But when the obsequie was
done of King Acrisius, and Jupiter beheld and saw Perseus so heavy that he
could have no joy, he returned into Crete unto his wife Juno, and there he
exercised himself in the science of Magic. And then when Perseus found
himself alone in Argos, and saw that he might recover there no joy, he
departed from thence, and went unto the city of Misene, but he reigned there
not long, forasmuch as the death of Acrisius renewed always, and he could not put
it out of his mind, and so he departed thence, and withdrewe him with a great
host into the Orient, where he gat and conquered by arms, a great Country,
which he named Persia, after his name, and there founded the City called
Persepolis, after that he had vanquished and put to death Liberpater, which
made him war. And then when he had so done, he purueied for his children in
such wise, that his two sons, Alceus and Electrion, with Amphitrion and
Alcumena, dwelled in Thebes, and Brachman reigned in Persia, Erictreus upon the
red sea, and Stelenus in Misene. But to speak of them all I will cease at this
time, and will tell only of Amphitrion, and Alcumena, that loved so well
together, that they took day the one to wed the other. And the cause that
moved me to write of these two, is forasmuch as of Alcumena came Hercules, who
first destroyed Troy, etc.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Jupiter lay with Alcumena: and how Queen Juno sent two
serpents for to slay Hercules: and how Hercules strangled the two serpents.
IN this time when Jupiter came again into Crete, and that he with Vulcan his
son and Juno practiced by their study, the science of Magike: after that,
that Vulcan had forged the thunders of Jupiter, Amphitrion wedded the fair
Alcumena, in the City of Thebes, with great honor, and also with great
company of Kings, Queens and of Ladies. The feast of this wedding was great.
Jupiter the King of Crete, and the Queen Juno were there. During the feast,
Jupiter continually beheld Alcumena, for her great beauty (for Alcumena was
the most fair woman that ever was seen) all his delight, and all his busy
care was in the beholding the ladies. He desired nothing but for to be always
among the ladies, and always had the eye upon them. But in the end he beheld
Alcumena most in especial, in whom he had a singular pleasure. In the great
abundance of his sight, he so sore fixed his eye on her excellency, that his
heart began to be troubled, in such wise that he was amorous and covetous of
her love. In this his so greedye covetousness and desiring, he let pass the
solemnity of the wedding, and returned into Crete: but he had not long
soiourned when the said covetousness so wrought vehemently in him, that on a
day he began to speak of Alcumena, in the presence of Juno. And said unto
Ganimedes his Esquire: Ganimedes, what seems you of the beauty of Alcumena?
Sir, said the Esquire, me thinks, she shines in all manner excellency of a
Lady, and for that to comprise all her virtues, there is no king so great, but
that he might well seem to be of alliance with one that is of less beauty
then she is.

When the Queen Juno understood that Jupiter talked so much of Alcumena, at
that same time she was sore moved with new jealousy: For she had often times
been ielous of Jupiter, and thought in her self, that if she might, she would
cause to fly and put to death Alcumena. After these speeches, Jupiter found
himself sore entangled and overcome with love, and for to ouermaister it, and
to let it pass, he took his bow and arrows, in purpose to go to the wood
for to slay some wild beast. And went forth accompanied only with Ganimedes,
but as soon as he was issued out of the gate, there came and met him one of
the knights of Thebes, and did reverence unto the king, and said unto him,
that the king Creon of Thebes sent him unto him, and required him that he would
aid and help him to war against the king of Thelipoly, that had trespassed
against him. When the king Jupiter had heard the message of the king, he was
right joyous of the request of the king of Thebes, and took the knight by the
hand, and brought him to his palace, and there feasted him, and made him right
good cheer, and after he said, that with right good heart and will, he would
succor and help the king Creon in his war. The knight of Thebes with this
answer took leave of king Jupiter, and returned unto Thebes. Where preparation
and ordinance was made to go unto Thelipoly. It was not long after that the
King Jupiter made his army, and hasted him as much as he might, that shortly
she might come to the house of Thebes, where he hoped to find Alcumena. When
all thing was ready he took his way, and sped him in his journey, that he came
to Thebes, where he was right honorably and worthily received of the King, the
Queen, and of the lady. The king Jupiter at his coming forgot not to look,
if he might see Alcumena: but he saw her not, wherefore he was in great
grief, and wist not what to do. And he looked after Amphitrion, but he could
no where see him, whereat he was more abashed then he was before. In this
abashement he approached to King Creon, and demanded of him, where Amphitrion
was? The King Creon, answered him, that he would shortly come, and that he
assembled his men of arms at the Castle of Arciancie, which he had given
him. This Castle stood between Thebes and Athens upon the river, and was a
passing fair place and strong. Anon as Jupiter had understood, that king
Creon had given Arciancie to Amphitrion, he imagined soon that Alcumena was in
that place. and was in will to have gone to that place if it had not been that
he dreaded the talking of the people, and also he feared to make Amphitrion
ielous. This considered, the king Jupiter abode in Thebes not well pleased, for
as much as he might not see Alcumena, and passed there that time the best wise
he could, till Amphitrion and other were come. Then they departed from Thebes
from the king Creon, and went for to lay siege to the city of Thellipolye,
accompanied with the king Jupiter, and many other. During the siege, they of
the city assailed often time by battle again their enemies, but they of
Thebes had always so good fortune, that in the end they of Thellipolye yielded
them in all points to the will of king Creon: and thus when the king of Thebes
had overcome and subdued the city, he returned unto his country with great
joy. etc.

When Amphitrion saw that their enemies were overcome, and that there was no
more peril, he had great desire to go see his wife Alcumena: and for to have
him the more sooner to be with her, he departed from the host, with leave of
the king, accompanied with an Esquire only. When king Jupiter saw Amphitrion
so depart upon his way, he began to think and advise him of a great
subtilty, for to come to his intent. And he departed from the host with
Ganimedes only: and as soon as he was in the field on the way they two
being together, Jupiter entered into conference with Ganimedes, and said to him:
Ganimedes, I have great affiance in you, and more then in any man that lives,
wherefore I will tell you privily a thing secret, which I shall accomplish as
I hope: And ye must hold and keep it secret. Truth it is that I am amorous
terribly of dame Alcumena. By no mean in the world I may yet forget her, nor
put her from my desire. She knows not the pain that for her love abounds
in me, for I never was so hardy to discover to her my case, nor never durst
show it to her, for as much as I know her wise, chaste and virtuous. This
considered, thinking on this thing, I feel and find me full of troubles, and
confess my follye, for I am in a manner in despair now: inasmuch as I had
supposed to have found the like answer of love in Alcumena. But the sudden
departing of Amphitrion yet gives me in a manner an hope, for at the time that
I saw him depart from the host, for to go see his wife accompanied with his
Esquire, I imagined that in all haste I would go unto Arciancie, by a more
near and shorter way: For I know the passage long since, and that I would
transfigure my self into the form of Amphitrion, and you into the form of
his Esquire, for to go unto Alcumena, and to make her understand that I were
Amphitrion. Ganimedes, upon this intention and purpose, I am come on the way,
to go thither with you, we must needs win upon Amphitrion this way a night
and day, and therefore let us go now merylye. Me thinks that love shall
help me, and when Alcumena shall see me transformed into the shape of
Amphitrio^, and you as his Esquire, she shall not be so wise to perceive mine
enchauntment.

Ganimedes hearkened right diligently to the will and purpose of Jupiter, and
promised that he would employ him in this affair as much as in him was
possible, and so they rode with good will and great desire the readiest way,
and in riding and going, Jupiter went about his enchauntments, and sped him so,
that he arrived in an evening at the Castle of Arciancie. When he was there
arrived, he transfigured himself, and Ganimedes, in such wise as he had before
purposed, and then at the same hour that Alcumena slept, and that each man was
a bed, they came to the Castle, and so knocked at the gate, that they awooke
the porter. The porter came to the window, and looked down beneath, and saw
Jupiter and Ganimedes by the moon light, him thought and seemed that it was
Amphitrion, and his esquire, wherefore he opened the gate, and received him, in
such wise as he would have done his Lord Amphitrion. After he brought him unto
the door of the chamber where Alcumena slept, and awooke her, saying that her
lord was come. After he returned to keep the gate, by commandment of
Jupiter, and Alcumena opened her Chamber unto Jupiter, which entered in with
great joy, and at the entry into this chamber, Jupiter and Alcumena took each
other in arms, and kissed, Alcumena thinking that it had been Amphrition: and
when they were so beclipt each in others arms, Alcumena demanded him from
whence he came? Jupiter answered and said, he came from Thellepolys: and that
after the giving over of the town, and yielding of their enemies, he departed
from the host, for the love of her, accompanied only with his esquier, to come
hastily to her. Then Alcumena was well content at the words of Jupiter, and
asked him, if he would eat or drink? Jupiter answered, that he would
nothing, but go to bed with her. What shall I say more? he lay with her, and
had that he desired: the King Jupiter had never so great joy in himself. And
going to bedward, he had Ganimedes, that he should go to the Chamber door, and
abide there without. And so Ganimedes departed from the Chamber, and Jupiter
approached to Alcumena, with great love, and so co^plaised her in love as much
as his power might extend. In this wise, and by this fashion, came Jupiter unto
the secrets and joy of love, so that to acquaynt himself with this lady, him
seemed expedient for to enchant all them that dwell in the place. And then he
slept with Alcumena, and after he arose, and came to Ganimedes which kept the
watch at the door, and told him, that for to do this matter secretly he must
enchant all them of that place, in such wise that they should not awake until
the coming of Amphitrion. And he willed that he should go to the gate, to
wait if Amphitrion came. And if it happen (he said) that he came by the day
light, I shall deliver to you a powder that ye shall cast in the air against
him, and this powder has such virtue, that it shall keep Amphitrion from
approaching this place as long as the day endures. And then when it is night,
and he knock at the gate, ye shall come to me, and we will open the gate, and
bring him to his wife, and after that we will return from hence,

The King Jupiter, with these words wrought in his science, and made his
charms and sorceries, in such wise, that all they that were in the place might
not awake without a remedy against his enchantment. When he had so done, he
transformed Ganimedes, into the likeness of a Porter, and appointed him to
keep the gate. After he returned into the Chamber of Alcumena, and shut fast
the windows that no light might come in. And after he went to bed, and lay
with the Lady, and awooke her, and there spent all the residue of the night,
and all the day following, taking his pleasure with her, so long that he begat
on her a right fair son, conceived under the reign of the best
constellation of heaven. In the end when king Jupiter had been with her a
night and a day, about the hour when the Sun goes down into the West, and
that him seemed that Amphitrion should come, he made by his science Alcumena
for to sleep. After he rose up, and made himself in the form of one of the
servants of the place, and he had not long tarried after, but Amphitrion and his
esquire came knocking at the gate, for it was then night. When Ganimedes heard
him knock, he came to the gate, and opened it. Amphitrion weend that it had
been his porter: so he saluted him, and demanded him where his wife was? The
valiant porter said to him, that she slept, and so brought him into her
chamber: and Jupiter so going, charmed him that he had no desire to eat, nor
to drink. When he was come into the Chamber, he awooke Alcumena, that was all
abashed when she saw Amphitrion, for she supposed for truth, that she had
seen him a good while before, and she groped about her in the bed, and thought
she had dreamed. And when she had groped in the bed, and that she found no
person there, then she was more amazed then before. Notwithstanding she arose,
and came to Amphitrion, saying to her self that she had supposed to have seen
him before: notwithstanding she made cheer to her husband, saying to him that
she had all the night dreamed of his coming. After they talked of many
things. Finally, he went to bed with her, and lay with her that same hour, and
then Alcumena conceived yet a son of Amphitrion. Jupiter and Ganimedes
departed then from the Castle, and there left all sleeping that were within
the place, that none awooke till it was in the morning, and they had weend that
they had slept but one night, but they slept a day and two nights. And this
matter was handled so secretly, that never person could epsy it. By this
mean the fair Alcumena conceived two sons, the one of Jupiter, and the
other of Amphitrion.

By space of time the fruits of her womb began to appear: the tidings were
borne all about, and also into Crete, and came to the ears of King Jupiter,
and Queen Juno. The King Jupiter this hearing, was passing joyous and glad in
the presence of Queen Juno. He beheld Ganimedes, and began to wax read,
and after showed a right good countenance, and gave praises to the gods, for
the conception of Alcumena, and spoke much good of her, so that the jealousy
of this old Queen, renewed and refreshed, and she planted in her heart, a
right great enu^e, and deadly hatred against Alcumena.

With the renewing of this envy, the Queen Juno concluded in her mind that
was meddled with the multipliance of ielosie, that she would slay and cause to
die Alcumena by enchauntment of sorcerie: For in that craft she was an
experienced mistress. O old cursed woman? She held musing in her heart her
cursed ielous thought, and laid her ears to hear Jupiter speak of Alcumena,
without any thing replying again.

But finally, when she knew that the time of childing of Alcumena approached,
she departed from Crete secretly al alone, and said to Jupiter, and did him to
understand, that she would go disguised on certain secret pilgrimages, and
went forth unto Arciancie, where was a temple standing right nigh the castle,
and was made in remembrance of the goddess Diana. This old queen then entered
into this Temple, nothing for devotion that was in her, but for to epsy if any
person came from the castle, for to inquire the state of Alcumena. She was
disfigured by her craft. This craft used afterward Simon Magus in the time of
Saint Peter, and of the Emperor Nero. When she had been there a little,
Galantis that governed Alcumena, was there long in orisons, and prayers before
the representation of the goddess. At the end, when she had done, she arose
from her contemplation, and thought to have returned. But this old queen came
against her, and saluted her, and for to come unto her purpose, she said unto
her faintly: dame I am all abashed. Wherefore answered Galantis? For as much
(said she) as I am not in certain where I am. Love (said Galantis) ye be
at the Castle of Arciancie, for this Temple is of the appertenances of the
Castle, and stands between Thebes and Athens. Dame (said the old Juno) I
trow that this is the place, that Amphitrion and Dame Alcumena dwell in? Ye say
truth, said Galantis, and how fare they (said Juno?) Right well (said
Galantis) my Lord Amphitrion is in good health, and my Lady Alcumena is
ready to bring forth a child, she expects nor waits for longer day nor
term, and therefore I may no longer tarry: it is time that I return to her.
To the gods I commit you.

Galantis with this word went to Alcumena, which began to travail and feel
the pain of childing, and the false old queen abode in the temple, in
intention to cause to die and slay Alcumena, in such wise as she had purposed.
Then, in steed of saying of orisons, she began to make certain fiendly and
devilish works. This done, she laid her legs to cross one over the other,
and sat in that wise, and then the same moment and time that she had so
done, Alcumena by the strength of sorcerie began in the same wise, her legs
to cross one over the other, and sat in the same manner as the old Juno did.
In such wise, as there was no man nor woman that might make her do otherwise.
The poor Alcumena felt then the most grievous and sharp pains of the world,
for her fruit would come out, and it might not in no wise, for as much as her
legs and thighs were so cross one over the other: she cried and complained
pittiously, and was in right grievous martyrdom. The midwiues could find no
remedy: she was three days holden in this point, always her legs crossed
one over another. During these three days, Galantis and the ladies and women,
one after another came to the temple of Diana, for to pray for the deliverance
of Alcumena, and always they found the old queen sit with her legs crossed,
and one over another. But they found her never in one semblance and likeness.
For at each time she transformed her into diverse likenesses and figures, of
beasts or of women, to the end that they should not perceive her, nor her
craft. Nevertheless, she could not so transform her self, but that Galantis
that often came into the temple, took heed of her, which found always there a
beast or a woman, sit in the manner that Alcumena sat in her chamber. Alcumena
had been then three days in pain. At the fourth day, then Galantis waxed
melancholy and angry at that she saw in the temple: so she assembled the
women, and said to them. Certainly fair dames, it must needs be that the
pain that my lady Alcumena suffers, comes of some sorcerie and witchcraft,
for all the pain that she has comes of that, that she may not depart her
legs and unfold them. This is mine imagination, and I am of advice to puruey
soon for it: For I have seen in the Temple, at all times that I have been
there, more then three days, a woman or a beast, with legs crossed or
folden, as my Lady has hers: me seems for truth, that it is some evil
creature, which wills evil will to my Lady, and that by her sorceryes,
constrains her to sit as she does. If it be so, I will deceive her: For one
of you and I will go into the Temple, fayning right joyous and glad cheer, and
will thank the goddess Diana, saying all on high, that my Lady is delivered
of a fair son. And then when that creature that always is there, and changes
her into diverse forms, have heard our praising, if it be so that she will any
ill to my lady, I doubt not but she shall loose countenance, and that all
troubled she shall depart, thinking to have failed of her enchauntment. And
then if it be truth that I suppose, my lady may have some manner of deliverance
from her pain. etc.

The women during these words, remembered them that they had seen in the
Temple, the woman and beasts that Galantis spoke of, and were of opinion, that
Galantis should do like as she had supposed. Then Galantis and one of the women
departed from the chamber, and went to the temple, and entering therein, they
saw on the one side where the false old queen sat, as she was wont to do, and
had transformed herself into the guise and form of a Cow. They passed forth
by confidently, without making any show of sorrow, or other thing, save only
of joy: and when they were come before the alter, they kneeled down and joined
their hands together, and said: Diana, sovereign goddess, thy name be
praised in heaven and in earth, for thou have given this hour to my Lady
Alcumena, and helped her to bring forth into this world, the most, the most
fairest child of the world. With these words, they rose up and returned
again: and as they went, they saw the cow suddenly depart out of the Temple,
and ran upon the fields, and in the same time and instance, Alcumena arose, and
was delivered of two fair sons, before Galantis and her fellow were come
into the Chamber.

When Galantis were come unto Alcumena, and found there two fair sons which
she had brought forth, she was full of joy, for that she had be guyled and
deceived the false old Juno. She told then unto the Ladies, and to Alcumena,
how she had seen the Cow, and how she was departed from the Temple, and
assured them that it was some evil person, and that she had hold Alcumena in
this danger by sorcerie. The Ladies sent after to seek the Cow, but they
heard never after tidings of her: and greatly always they ioyed in the nativity
of these two sons. Of these twain, the one of them was great and right
fair, and of exceeding excellency, and the other was little and feeble. The
great child was the first that was borne, and was named Hercules, and the
other had to name Ypecleus. Hercules (as some say) was the son of Jupiter,
and well resembled, and was like unto him, and Ypecleus was the son of
Amphitrion. The tidings of this nativity anon ran all about, and all they that
heard speak thereof, made joy and were glad thereof, save only Juno. For she
had never joy in her heart after that she had heard in the temple, that
Alcumena was delivered, and had brought forth a son. She departed from the
temple, as is said, in the form of a Cow, despising in her heart the goddess
Diana, and was so troubled that she had neither wit nor understanding, and thus
sorrowing, when she was a little withdrawn from the Temple, she took again
her own form of a woman, and went upon the mountain of Olympus, there she
waxed pensive, and began to think what she might do: after she smote her self
on the breast with her fist, and said: what avails me to be borne of the
royal blood of Saturn? What avails me my patrimony of the world of gold?
what avails me the diadem of Crete? and what avails me the sciences of
the world, that I have learned by great study and labor, when the gods be
against and contrary to me in all things? The king my husband cares not for
me, nor sets naught by me, no more in mine old days, then he did in my
youth. O what destiny, Fortune will thou never turn thy wheel? Shall I always
suffer still tribulations and this pain? Certes, seeing thou fauourest me not,
and that I be hold that of all my desires there is not one that may attain to
effect, all shame and vexation redoubleth in me, and I am so put in despair,
that my misfortune must needs be cause of shortning and lessning the natural
course of my days. With these words she beheld the earth, and not the heaven,
and pawsed a while, and after that said: And am I not well unfortunate and borne
in an evil hour? My craft and sorcerie avails not against mine enemy
Alcumena. I have failed against her, but certes I will prove my self against
her son, to the end that his mother may be my fellow, and hold me company to
make sorrow. For I will slay her son: and by this mean, for that she is a
woman and a mother, I shall give her cause of anger, grief, and displeasance.

O cursed old Vyrago, conspyring then against the poor innocent: then she
imagined that she would take two serpents charmed and coniured, to work the
death of the son of her enemy, and that she would some night put them into his
chamber, to the end that they should strangle him. With this conclusion, she
departed from the mountain, and returned into Crete. There being, she so
labored by her science, that she did assemble on a day secretly, all the
serpents of the country. She was alone, and well understood, and knew this
merchandise. When she had assembled them all, she chose two of the most
felonous, and most enuenimed, and put them in her lap, and bare them home, and
after waited a day, when king Jupiter had gone into a far voyage: and then,
fayning that she would go on some pilgrimage, she departed alone from Crete,
and did so much, that in disguised shape she came into the Castle of Arciancie.
The king Egeus of th ens, and the king Euristens of Attique were at that time
come into the castle to make good cheer: and it was in the evening when Juno
entered. When she was within, she made her self invisible by her craft, and
sought all about to find the chamber, wherein was the son of Alcumena. She
sought so long till she came to the door of the chamber, where there was a
window open. She went to the window, and looked in: and in the beholding, she
saw two nourses, and two sons, whereof she was all abashed, and began to
muse much. Thus as she was pensife, Alcumena came for to see her sons, and
feasted them in such fashion, that the old Juno perceived and knew, that both
the two were her sons, whereof she had great joy. For she concluded in her
false and evil mind, that she would strangle both two by the Serpents, etc.

Alcumena departed from the chamber, by the space of time, and Juno let the
night wax dark. The nourses laid the children in their cradles to sleep,
and they slept. And after they laid themselves down and slept, leaving a
Lamp burning in their Chamber. Then when they were asleep, at that time that
Juno would accomplish her work, she opened her lap, and made to leap out the
two serpenis, charmed and enchaunted, to work the death of the two children,
and put them by an hole into the chamber. When they were within, they lifted up
their heads, and smelling the two children, made unto them, giving the first
assault unto Ypecleus, in such wise that they strangled him, and there
murdered him. After the death of Ypecleus, these two serpents came unto the
cradle of Hercules, that was awake the same time. When the Serpents were come
to the cradle, they went the one on the one side, and the other on the other
side, and mounted on the Cradle, but this was to their evil ease: For as
soon, as they came up, Hercules perceived them, and was afraied: because
they were fierce and dreadful, he then bestirred himself, and his arms with
such might and force, that he brake the bonds in which he was wrapped and
swadled, and so labored that he had his arms and his hands at large, and
then when the serpents ran upon him, he put them back by natural strength
and force many times, and fought with them with his fists right long: but at
last, when Hercules saw that the serpents oppressed him more and more, and
ceased not to assail him, he took in each hand one, making a great cry, and
held them so fast and sore, that he strangled both two.

The nourses awoke at the cry that Hercules made, and arose up hastily, and
went to the cradles for to see their children, and they found Ypecleus dead,
and they found that Hercules held yet the two serpents in his hands. Suddenly
as they saw that marvel, they cried pitiously. With that Juno the false witch
and sorceresse, that had seen all, fled her way sore troubled and terribly
angry at that, that the serpents had not wrought and achieved her purpose, as
well in Hercules, as they had done in Ypecleus. And Amphitrion with Alcumena
awoke, and came into the chamber where the two nurses were, which made
sorrowful and pitious cries: and entering therein, they saw Hercules at the one
side yet holding the Serpents, and at the other side they beheld Ypecleus all
swolen with venim and dead: then deep and grievous sorrows came and entered
into the bottom of their hearts. Alcumena began to cry and weep by natural
pity, and Amphitrion was al afraid. Many damsels and other folk came to the
chamber, which all were afeard to take away the Serpents, for fear of hurt:
and there was none so hardy that durst approach to Hercules, for the serpents
that he held in his hands which were swolen with the venim. Always Hercules made
no heavy nor worse cheer, but laughed to one and other, and was there in that
case so long, that physicians and surgions came, and by their science, took
from his hands these venomous beasts. When Amphitrion saw Hercules delivered
from the Serpents, he recomforted Alcumena, that was nigh dead for sorrow, and
made to burn and bury Ypecleus. All they that were there had passing great
marvel of the power and strength of Hercules, that was so young a child, and
that he had soughten against the serpents, and by excessive strength and might
had strangled them.

The night passed in the fashion and manner that I have rehearsed. On the
morrow betime, Amphitrion would show and manifest this maruailous and glorious
victory, wherefore he did cause to take Hercules, and made him to be borne to
Athens, into the temple of the god Mars, with the two serpents: and he in
person went accompanied with King Euristeus. The false old witch Juno followed
a far after in a dissembled form and shape. When Amphitrion was come into
the Temple, he sent for King Egeus, and assembled the people, and after took
Hercules, presenting him unto the god Mars, thanking him of the victory that
he had sent to Hercules against the Serpents. After this he lifted him up, and
showed Hercules unto the people, recounting and telling to them his maruaylous
adventure. And thus when Hercules was showed and put into the common view and
sight of the people, and that every man gave him laud and praise: the false
old Juno, being in the prease, with other, after that she had long beholden
the noble child, that in all his members he resembled and was like to king
Jupiter, for to put Amphitrion in jealousy of his wife, and for to make him to
have Hercules in suspicion, she sayds unto them that were about her: Certes,
Amphitrion is a very fool, if he weeneth and thinks that Hercules is his
Son: Behold the members of King Jupiter, and the members of this Child, ye
shall find no difference. This Child and Jupiter, be both of one semblaunce,
and have like favors and shape. And every man says, that this Child is the
Son of Jupiter, and none other. When this old Juno had sown these cursed
words, she withdrew her apart out of the prease, and took another shape, to
the end that she should not be known. And then these words were sown abroad,
and told forth of them that heard them in such wise, that a great murmuring
grew and arose touching Amphitrion. And it was reported to him, that men said
so by advertisement of the old Juno. When Amphitrion heard these new tidings,
he began to behold the child, and in the beholding him, thought verily that
this child had wholly the very semblance and likeness of king Jupiter. And
then began to enter into his heart a right great grief and sorrow, and thus
after he entered into jealousy. Yet he kept silence, and made as good
countenance as he might, and could, for to eschew the slander. And anon, after
that the people were withdrawn, he called the king Euristeus, and prayed him,
that he would bring up Hercules, saying, that never after he would see him, and
that he believed verily that he was the son of Jupiter. Euristeus comforted
Amphitrion the best wise he could, meaning to have put this jealousy out of
his mind, but he could not. What shall I make long rehearsal? Euristeus
enterprised to keep and nourish Hercules, and made him to be borne into his
house. Amphitrion returned unto Arciancie, where he found Alcumena sore
discomforted for these tidings which she had received: and for to excuse
herself to Amphitrion, and the false old Queen Juno, she went unto Crete.
Of which matter I will stay now, and will come to speak of the first
adventures of Hercules.

CHAP. XXXIX. How Hercules began the Olimpiades: and how he waxed amorous of
Megara, the Daughter of the king of Thebes: and how he showed his strength in
all manner of games and exercises.
THese tidings of this first adventure of Hercules were anon spread through all
the provinces of Greece. Some said he was a bastard and the son of Jupiter:
and so recounted Plautus in his first comedye, and other held that he was the
very son of Amphitrion, and so recounteth Boccace in his book of the
genealogy of gods. But whose son so ever he was, Euristeus had him in
keeping, and did him to be nourished hardly, and not tenderly, without the
city of Attique: For the kings and the citizens and dwellers in towns, in
this time, made their children for to be nourished out of good towns, and
made them for to lie upon the bare earth, and naked, for to be more strong,
without entering into cities, until the time they had power, and strength to
exercise arms. Lycurgus had ordained this law and many other that follow.
First he ordained that the people should obey their Prince, and that the
Prince should be firm in justice and live soberly, and that merchauntes
should do their merchaundise, giving one ware for an other, without any
money, and that each man should aduenge him openly, and that a young man should
have in a year but one gown, and that one man should not be more gallant nor
quaint then another, and that no man should renew the memory of wrong passed:
and that men of arms should have no wives, to the end that they might be more
eager and fierce, in the war: and to content the fragilitie of men, he
ordained, that nigh the hosts should be certain women common, in places
called Fornices, whereof comes fornication. These were the laws that the
Greeks used in the time of the beginning, and coming up of Hercules. And for
to come again to my purpose: Hercules was nourished in an house, that stood
in the plain fields, and was oftentimes put out into the rain and wind, and
lay the most part of that time upon the earth, wit^out any other bed: he lay
oftener so then upon hay or dried straw. With this nourishment he waxed and
grew in all beauty, strength, and prudence: he was humble, courteous, and
gentle. All good manners began to grow and shine in him: he was sober in
eating, and in drinking: he slept gladly on the fields: he shot and drew the
bow daily. When the king Egeus of Athens had heard speak of him, he made to be
nourished with him his son, that was named Theseus. Hercules and Theseus were
both of one age, and loved right well together. Theseus was strong and mighty,
and a fair child, and he had wit enough. But Hercules passed him, and
shone as far above him as the Sun shines above the stars. When he was
seven years old, he exercised wrestling, and ouerthrewe and cast the greatest
and the strongest that came to him. Not one and one at once, but five or six,
or as many as he might set his hands on, and did so great feats of strength,
that out of Thebes, of Athens, and of Atticque, daily came men, women, and
children, for to see him. The more and elder he grew, the more enforced he his
strength. When he was ten year old, there might no man stand nor abide in
his hand. At thirteen years of his age, he began to handle and use arms,
and of his proper motion, he thought that he would go up unto the mount
Olympus, and there he would abide and answer all manner men thither coming by
the space of fifteen days, and to receive them in arms, or in wrestling, or
at any other proof or assay of strength: and for to come to the effect of this
enterprise, he awayted a day when Euristeus came for to see him, and said to
him. Sir, ye have nourished me unto this time, like as I were your own son,
if fortune were to me as contrary as nature, I knowledge that I should be the
most unfortunate child that ever was borne. Some say that I am son to
Jupiter, and other say of Amphitrion, howbeit I have no father but you only,
that have nourished me with your substance. Wherefore I yield unto you as to
my father, and advertise you, how that I am purposed for to be on the mount of
Olympus, in as short time as I well may, and there I will abide all them that
thither shall come, fifteen days fully together: and for to deal with them
at the spear, at swoorde, at wrestling, and at running: always foreseen, that
it be by your license and leave, and that it please you of your courtesse to
give to him that shall do best some prise, to the end for to encourage the
hearts of noble men unto valiancie, that they might attain to renown.
Euristeus answered and said: Hercules, fair son, ye can require me of
nothing that is honest and worshipful, but I will he thereto agreeable. Ye
be young, and yet ye be strong and puissaunt, and I wot well there is no man
that may endure against you. Since it is so, that ye have the will so to do, I
am right well content, that ye make the proof, and show the strength of your
youth: and for to effect and bring this enterprise unto your credit, I will
array you as richly as if ye were my proper son. My father (answered
Hercules) I thank you of this grace and kindness, and since it is so your
pleasure, it behooves you to choose a man of great understanding and
authority, that shall go unto all the Realms of these Coasts, for to show
unto the Kings, Princes, and Gentlemen, the purpose and enterprise that I have
taken in hand. Fair son (said Euristeus) ye say truth, ye shall make your
letters containing your intention, and send them to me, and then when I have
received them, I will use so good diligence, that ye of reason shall be content.

After these speeches and many other, the king Euristeus went home, and
Hercules took ink and parchment, and set him to write in letters ye form of
a proclamation, which he made, that contained in this wise. Greeting be to all
kings, Princes, Knights, Gentlemen, Ladies and Gentlewomen, from the esquire
unknown, and well fortuned. We let you have knowledge, that the first day of
the month of May next following, the esquire unknown will be on the mount
Olympus, for to show himself in habilliments convenient unto arms, at the
pleasure of the gods and fortune, and for to receive all them that be of noble
houses and name, that will and shall come thither to try maisteries in the
manner that follows. In the beginning of the first three days, he will hold
exercise of wrestling, and he that shall do best, by the judgment of the
judges thereto commised, shall win an Elephant of fine gold. The fourth day he
will run a furlong or more against all them that will run, and he that
best runs shall win a fair Courser. At the fifth and sixth days, he will
shoot with the hand bow, first at the most straight and nigh marks, and after
at the most long marks, and he that shoots most straight and nigh at short
marks, shall win a glove of gold: and he that is best at long marks, shall
have a bow and a sheafe of arrows. At the seventh, he will cast a stone
against all men, and he that does best thereat, shall have a right good
diamond. At the eight day, and other following to the fifteenth, he will
exercise arms: and if any will prove himself one alone against him, he shall
be received (fore seen that during the first six days he shall come and
present himself unto the judges) and he that so does best, shall have a rich
sword. And if it happen that they that shall come to this feast will tourney
together in manner of a battle, in iousting with lances or spears, and
fighting with swords or baryers, the judges shall ordain captains, such as
shall seem convenient, and who that best does in this exercise or fight shall
win a garla^d of laurel. All these things before written, the said esquire
unknown promises to accomplish, and prays unto all noble men, Ladies, and
Gentlewomen, that they will vouchsafe to come and see this meeting of Nobles,
which shall be performed by the pleasure of the immortal gods, who will give to
the acceptors of this worthy challenge, multipliance of honor and increasing
of good fortune, etc.

When Hercules had written this proclamation, and engrossed it, he sent it to
Euristeus, who read it, and him seemed that the invention of the author and
maker was good and right worthy to be put in memory, and called one of his
knights, and gave him the charge and office to go publish this proclamation in
the courts of all the kings of Greece. The knight enterprised with right good
heart to do the said office: (and this was the first officer of arms that ever
was) He went to Athens, Thebes, Argos, Lacedemonia, Archadia, Perelye,
Magnesie, Crete, Ephese, Pepos, Tripoly, and Thessaly, and all about he
published the proclamation, without declaring who he was that should keep the
exercise. They that heard speak of the squire unknown, and understood his
high enterprise, judged him, that this came of a noble courage, and that he
might not fail to get honor and fame. The knight, for to finish this
voyage, had four Months term for to accomplish it.

During this time, Hercules disposed him for to furnish his provision for the
excercises, and so did the kings and noble men, for to come thither. What shall
I make long process? When the even before the first day of the exercise was
come, the King Euristeus brought Hercules upon the mount Olympus, and from all
parts came thither so many Noble men, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, that the number
might not be esteemed, the Mount was full on all sides. All this night there
was great adoo, and noise of one and other, for to make their tents and lodges
of bows and leaves, and to pitch their pauilions. And it ought not to be
forgotten, when the even was come, how the knight that had published the
challenge, assembled in a common tent all the knights that were come thither,
and required them in the name and on the behalf of the Esquire unknown, that
they would choose among them, such as should be judges, and give the prise.
When the kings that were there, heard and understood the request of the noble
Esquire, they thanked him, and they choose three kings to be their judges, that
is to weete, the king of Thebes called Creon, the king of Argos named
Gorgophon, and the king of Myrmidon, named Eson, which was father of Jason.
They were wise and discreet: they enterprised the office with a good will. And
that night they passed over with great joy, for they assembled in a tent, which
was made for to dance in, and the kings with the knights young and old went
together: and thus began the feast, which endured till midnight in daunses
and songs.

The king Jupiter and Amphitrion were not at this assembly, by the counsel of
king Euristeus, which let him have knowledge secretly, that Hercules was he
that should hold and keep this sport or exercise, for to eschew all words and
languages, that might grow or arise up, by cause of the nativity of Hercules:
for Amphitrion on the one side believed not that he was his son, and Jupiter
on the other side said, that he appertained not to him. He sent them word
therefore, that they could do no better, then not for to come to this
solemnity, which was a most special thing, and the most strange that ever was
spoken of before that time. The first day of May, at the hour what time the
sun cast his heat upon the earth, Hercules did cause to sownde a trumpet,
for to make the Ladies to go up into the scaffolds and places appointed: and
anon after they being mounted and set, Hercules leapt out of the tent
apparelled to wrestle, and came into the mids of the place or field, making
reverence unto the judges, kings, and to the ladies. He was then xiiii. year
old full accomplished. Anon as he had done the reverence, the knight that was
officer of arms, made a cry and said: High and excellent iu^ges, we let you
have knowledge, with all kings, knights, and gentlemen of arms, Ladies and
Gentlewomen, that here is the Squire unknown, ready present in his person,
upon the mount Olympus, and offers himself to fulfill the contents of his
challenge, by order, and after the manner that the particulars thereof make
mention. Wherefore, if there be any man that will prove and assaie him at
wrestling, let him come, and he shall be received.

Theseus of Athens, at the end of this proclamation, and at the commandment of
king Egeus his father, entered then into the field: he was a passing fair child
and a gentle, at his coming he saluted Hercules, and said to him: Master of
all bodily exercises, I am come hither, not of presumption, but for to learn
those things that I have need of, and therefore I recommend me unto your
grace. My Brother Theseus, answered Hercules, I may more learn of you, then
you of me: wherefore let us endeavor to win the prise, it must be begun
by some body. These words accomplished, the two noble Esquires approached and
seized each other. Theseus employed his puissance, and Hercules suffered him to
do as much as he would or could, without showing and putting out his force
and might again to him. And so they shook and lugged each other, but in the
end Hercules cast Theseus, the most softly and favorably that he could.
Whereat the laughter was great among the ladies and gentlewomen. Theseus then
departed from the place, and went among the ladies and Gentlewomen, praying
them that they would take it in good part that he had done. Then came unto the
place, many young squires of whom I know not the names, and they endeavored and
traveled all that they might for to get honor and worship, but their labor
profited little unto them, in regard of getting the prise: for Hercules cast
and foiled all them that came, and the wrestling dured four hours
continually. At the last, at the request of the Ladies, the Judges made the
wrestling to cease for that day, because that they saw that Hercules was
young, and that he had done a great work, etc.

When Hercules had understood that the Judges had made cease the wrestling, he
was right sorrowful, for in his wrestling, he had a singular pleasure. The
Judges the^ with Eusteus came to him, and made him do on his clothes, and array
him. After they brought him into the common hal, where as the Ladies were
dancing and singing ioyously: and it was said to him, that he must dance and
sing like as other did. Hercules excused him much, but his excuse might not
avail. He was set on to dance in hand with Megara, a right fair Gentlewoman,
of young age, but she was right well furnished with wit and understanding: and
she was daughter of king Creon.

When Hercules saw him in the hand of one so noble a Gentlewoman, he was sore
abashed and ashamed. The Gentlewoman on the other side was also shamefast, for
as soon as she had seen Hercules wrestle, she had set all her love on him.
And they wist none of them both what to say: howbeit, in stead of words, they
used privy and covert countenances. Hercules took a singular pleasure to
behold and see the Gentlewoman, and the more near the Gentlewoman was to
Hercules, the more she set her heart on him. What shall I say? love in this
night enforced and constrained them to love each other, without speaking, and
their beauty was cause thereof. Men should not have found in all Greece two so
fair children, nor of better qualities. They were enough beholden and looked
on, and in especially Hercules, for his prowess: and every man maruailed of
him, and of his behavior.

By space of time, then Hercules was brought from the feast into his tent. His
tent nor the tent of the kings, and of the ladies, were not made but of
branches, with leaves and herbs giving good odor and savor. It was not
known how to make tents of cloth nor of silk then. Hercules passed this
night, more intending to think on the beauty of Megara, then for to sleep.
The day following, at hour convenient she came unto the sport, and there were
many young men strong and active, the strongest of all Greece, but Herculus with
one arm threw and cast them, and that day and the day following he cast and
flang to the earth mo then three hundred, and there could not so many come to
him but he cast them down, and put them to foil, without any chasing himself
ne greeuing, and at that time he gat a right great glory and honor there.
Megara oftentimes beheld him, and in likewise did the ladies and gentlewomen,
and many there were that set their love on him. And thus he passed the exercise
of wrestling to his worship all three days. At the fourth day he assembled all
them that were come thither for to run, and he made them that were most feeble
to ride upon the best coursers that were in Greece, and after he showed them the
furlong or stade, and made the^ to take their way and run, and he ran after
the horse and men, but he passed all them that ran, and without taking once his
breath he ran the furlong, and came thereto before all the ryders, and runners:
wherefore he was greatly praised, and had a great laud. And some say, that he
ran all as swiftlye as a heart. Of this course that Hercules made, all the world
wondered, and held it for a merueilous thing, and wrote it in books, among
other things worthy to be put in memory.

At the fifth and sixth days following, Hercules took his bow and his arowes,
and went into the place that was ordained for to shoot in with the bow, and
the Ladies and the gentlewomen were there. Hercules and many other, shot at a
most strait, and near the mark, but shot by shot he exceeded all the nighest:
for he shot always wtin a little ring of gold. And as for shooting at a long
mark, he passed the furthest in the field four and twenty strides: his how
was so great that it was the load and burden of a man. No man could bend it
but himself. It was a pleasure to see him, for he gat great praise and fame
the two days, and yet gat he more the day following, which was the seventh
day of the sports: for when it came to the casting of the stone a far, one
after an other, then he cast it, employing his strength in such wise that he
passed six pases further then any man that at that time employed himself in
that exercise.

Then they that were come to this feast cried with a high voice, the Esquire
unknown is neither the son of Amphitrion, nor the son of Jupiter, but he
is the son of the god of nature, which has garnished him with double force,
and redoubled it an hundred fold.: in his infancy he vanquished the
serpents, and in his youth he surmounteth in wit force and valiance all the
world. Blessed be the womb that conceived him and bare him, for to glorify
Greece: For certes the time shall come once that he shall be the glory of the
Greeks, and their tryumphe, and well shall help them if they have need.

Such were the words of the Kings, of the Ladies, and of the Damsels, of the
nobles and of the valiant, each man praised him in his guise. The fair Megara
heard gladlye the commendation and praising that men gave him: but yet she saw
him more gladly do his feats and valiances, and it is no marvel though she
saw him gladlye, and gave her to behold him: for in Hercules was, that was
not in other: his beauty surmounted the measure and the great portion and
quantity of his force and strength. What shall I lay? After that each man
that would cast the stone, had done, he went into the common tente, where
many an amorous man was with his Lady, and there he began to put himself
forth a little, and his speech with one and other well became him: for he had
a right high and a clear understanding. Megara and Hercules in this evening
oftentimes beheld each other secretly, and their countenaunces were fixed each
on other often, and then of force they changed color. In this changing of
color, there was not a vein in them but was moved. And by this moving grew
amorous desires in abundance, with deep sighs, which were nourished in the
abismes and bottomes of their hearts.

Among al other things, for to speed the matter, the kings and the ancient
knights assembled them in council, for as much as they had many young knights
that were come, and had abidden from the beginning of the feast, for to do
feats of arms against Hercules. The puissance and strength of Hercules was
well considered of in this council: and for as much as it was very likelye
that no man might stand against him, it was ordained that he should do no
deeds of arms hand to hand: and that the days that were yet to come of the
residue of the feast from two days to two days, they should turnoy in manner
of battle: whereof should be captains two Kings that were there, that is to
wit Tandarus that was father of Menelaus husband of the fair Helene, and Ixion
that was King of Thessaly. These two Kings took on them with a good will this
charge, and it was ordained, that Hercules should let them turnoye until
the time, that the one party were at worse, and that then he might help that
party so suffering the worse, unto the time that he had brought the^ to match
their betters. This ordinance was showed in the tent, by the officer of arms.
What shall I make long count? they that were before named for to fight, and to
do deeds of arms man for man against Hercules, were right joyous of the new
ordinance. The feast then ceased, and one and other withdrewe them unto their
tents on the morning they came to the fields for to begin the first turnoy,
and there were five hundred Esquires, and three hundred knights, all armed as
for to go into battle, saving that their swords were rebetues and not
sharp, and that their spears had rochettes o^ tree or of wood. The king
Tandarus and the King Ixion was richlye arrayed, and well horsed, and armed well
with bossed curets, and ran in the most hardest place of this assembly. There
were no more but an hundred knights on horseback, for horses at that time were
but little known nor used. All they on horseback and they on foot were
parted into two companies. The one of these companies, was delivered to
Tandarus, and the other to Ixion. And when Tandarus and Ixion had all that they
ought to have, they that had horses, at the sound of the trumpet were ready to
ioust, and ran one against another, so courageously, that they troubled all
the air with dust and powder that rose by their horse feet. At the bickering
each met with other oftentimes, and there were some overthrown under the
horse, and tumbled vpside down at joining: and some there were that brake
their spears knightly and cheualrously, for there were plenty of valiant
knights. But in the end, when the knights on horseback had done their
endeavors, and that they set their hands on their swords, the pietons or
footmen began to renew the turnoye, with so great a stir and noise, that all
the mount redounded, on the one side, and on the other: there were many spears
broken, and shields vniointed, they foyned with their spears eagerly, their
strokes and foines were great: each man showed the quantity of his force, it
was joyous to see the spears fly in the air by pieces: there were great
cries, none spared other, ancient nor young. The ancient beat and fought with
the young: the young men by great courage learned and showed the old men. When
their spears were broken they took their swords, where with began a new ado,
joyous and pleasant: they cutting their helmes and hewing on their shieldes so
courageously, and in special they of the part of Ixion, that they of the part
of king Tandarus, were constrained to call for Hercules unto the reskew.

When Hercules heard that they cried after him, he was passing joyous, for it
was a grief to him to be idle, and to see other labor. He was nigh by the
turnoye, beholding them that did best: he had also his sword in his fist. At
the cry that they that were put to the worse made, he went unto their aid and
help, and began to turney on the side where were the greatest strokes given,
so pleasantly that it was joy to behold. The king Ixion came against him for
to maintain his prowess, and to hold together his folk. But certes, for his
welcome, Hercules smote him on the sheeld, in such wise, that all astonished he
bare him to the earth, and down from his horse. Then began there a great
shoute and laughter, and as well one as the other began to apply them to the
reskue of Ixion. Hercules put himself into the prease, and made heaps on all
sides, so great, that Tandarus and his folk recovered, and entered into the
battle with their counterpartie. At that time began again the turnoy strong
and sharp: they that right now fled, took heart, force and virtue to them
again by the well doing of Hercules, and recovered vigor and strength.
Hercules, of all them that were there was taken heed of, his strokes surmounted
all other without all measure, and he brought again Tandarus to match his
better with little labor. Finally, he did show so great pr^wesse that day,
and in the days following, that he was commended above all the men of the
world. What shall I make long process of the turnoy, and of the pleasant
sports of this feast? There were three great turnoyes and notable: at each
turnoy, as soon as it happened that one party was put back, and to the worse,
Hercules by his well doing recovered them, and put them up above again. No man
took heed but to his glory: every man said well of him: at daunces, and at
feasts, every man loved him, every man worshipped him: there was no tongue of
noble, nor of base, but that gave him laud and praise, whereof the conclusion
was such, that all the prises abode with him, and also there were given to him
many gifts of the kings that were there. The days of this solemnity drew
over, and the last night, the kings and the ladies, and nobles assembled in the
common tent, and of one common accord they would that from year to year they
and their heirs should hold and renew the feast that Hercules had begun and
stablished, for they saw that it was the most honorable pastime that ever was
made in Greece, and named the feast Olimpiade, because of the mount Olimpus.
And they had it so recommended, that from thence forth they dated their edicts,
and their letters of continuance with ye year of the first Olimpiade, etc. In
such wise as we say the year of the incarnation. These things ordained, given
and promised, the officer of arms of Hercules, thanked all them that were come
to this Olimpiade: after that each took leave of other, and departed on the
morrow, and thus finished and ended this feast.

CHAP. XL. How Hercules sailed by the sea into Hesperie: and how he vanquished
the I Will with the muttons or sheep, and vanquished Philotes, and slew his
fellow.
AT the departing, Hercules passed not greatly for the withdrawing and
departing of all them that were there, saving for the departing of Megara: he
knew not the malady of love, until the time he saw her depart into the
country. Megara went unto Thebes, and Hercules drew him to Athens, right
pensife, and thinking much on his Lady: and sore desiring to see her, he went
in the company of Euristeus unto Athens, where they feasted them four days
long. At the fourth day tidings came, that unto the Port and Haven were come
strange folk by fortune, which were clothed in right pleasant robes and
garments. When the King Euristeus heard these tidings, he sent anon to fetch
these strangers to him, and asked them from whence they were? they answered
him, that they were of the West, and of the region of Hesperie. Where is the
region of Hesperie, said Euristeus, and what manner Country is it? Verily
answered one of them, I trow that in all the world is no better Country,
for there is abundance of all things that be necessary to man's life, and I
can tell to you, that in the places of our dwelling, and where we have our
haunt, there be many Isles lying about the furthest parts of Mauree, beyond
Ampolesie, where grow all the best things that men can think, and there is a
king named Philotes, son in law to a King named Athlas, which be the
generation of Greeks: and it is not to be unremembered, how that the King
Philotes accompanied with the daughters of king Aihlas, found late an I Will right
pleasant, as was his adventure. This I Will is all plain without mountain or
valley, it is in such wise as is a Garden, all green, and there be therein so
many sheep and muttons, that it is marvel, which be kept and cheerished
there as diligently as if they were of fine Gold. Of these muttons that I
speak of, we have our robes and gowns made: we and they that may have them,
must buy them at a great price of Gold. We eat the flesh, and cloth us with
the skins. And know ye for certain, that into this I Will is but one entry, and
he enters not therein that would, for the King Philotes and an other Giant
which be wise, and subtle, and maruaylously strong, always keep the entry of
the I Will, and always the one waketh while the other sleeps. Certes (said
Euristeus) by that, that I understood of you, the I Will that ye speak of, is
of great excellency. This Philotes that ye make mention of: what man is this
King Philotes? The stranger answered and said, that he is the most redoubted
and dread king of the West parts: he is a Giant that by his force and
strength has conquered the I Will with the sheep, and has put out them that
dwelled and inhabited there before. He is so strong, that it is but late ago,
that he said, if he might find a man more strong and puissant then he is, he
would never after bear arms to fight in battle, during the life of that
other.

The king Egeus then gave leave to the strangers to depart from his presence,
and commanded that no man should let them in their returning toward their
Country, and they went and departed. Euristeus abode with Egeus, and Euristeus
came to Hercules, and Theseus, and wished by a great desire to have of those
muttons, saying to them, that he would that it had cost him as much Gold as a
pair of muttons weigh: and that he had a Ram, and an Ewe, for to engender in
his Country. In that time were no sheep in Greece. When Hercules had heard the
desire of King Euristeus, suddenly he said to him. Sir, ye have a desire to
have a pair of muttons, appertayning to the daughters of Athlas, by the
conquest and arms of the strong Giant Philotes. I promise you here for truth,
upon my gentleness, that by this day three weeks, I will depart by water, or
by land, for to fetch and get them: and that I will never return into Greece,
until the time that I have found the I Will, and that I shall oppose my self
against the Giants that keep it, and will assay if I can get the I Will from
them, like as Philotes has gotten it from other. When the king Euristeus had
understood the enterprise that Hercules made, he was passing sorry, for he
loved Hercules as much as he had been his own son. He dissuaded him from
that enterprise, weening to have broken it: but Hercules answered so wisely,
and so discreetly, that Euristeus was content to suffer him to go unto this
adventure, and Theseus with him.

The renown of this voyage was spread anon in all the Country. Egeus and
Euristeus made ready for their two sons a right good Gally, and well
furnished it with all manner thing. The Galley and all other habiliments were
all ready in good time. At the end of three weeks they went to the sea, and
with them right many noble Greeks, and rowed so forth till they came into the
deep Sea, where they sailed and rowed many days, without finding of any
adventure to speak of. For at that time the Sea was but little used, neither
of thieves, nor yet of merchants. What shall I say? their master or pilot, in
process of time brought them to Hespery, that afterward was named Spain, and
there sought so long the I Will with the sheep, that at last they arrived there
at the place. The Giant that was appointed to keep the entry, and the ward of
the I Will, slept not at that time when the Greeks landed. He then issued out of
his house, and came all armed unto the strayte passage, where might no man go
up but one at once, and he cried to the Greeks, saying: Sirs, what seek ye
here. Hercules answered: we seek the muttons that be in this I Will, for to
carry some of them into Greece. The Giant answered, have ye money enough? if
ye have so, ye shall have enough. How (said Hercules) shall we not have them
otherwise? No, said the Giant. Then said Hercules, at the least let us have
them at the price that ye have gotten them for. How said the Giant? The King
Philotes has conquered with his sword the I Will and the muttons. Hercules
answered, mine intention is in likewise to conquer the I Will from him. If ye
will defend it, haste you: ye shall have the battle against me, or else let me
have the I Will, that I may do therein in my will.

Anon as the Giant had understood the conclusion of Hercules, he made him
ready to defend the place, and blewe a great Horn that was there hanging on a
tree. At sownding of the Horn, the daughters of Athlas awaked Philotes, and
told him that some were there to get the place, and that the Giant had blown
the horn. Philotes with those words rose up, and found that Hercules by force
had put back his Giant, (that excepting Philotes was the most subtle man of
arms in all Hesperie,) he was so sore abashed that he began to sigh and be
sorry: but this notwithstanding, he had not long abode there, when Hercules
smote the giant on the right shoulder with such strength and force, that the
shield of the giant was fallen from him, and his arms all to bruised, and his
sword entered so far into his body near unto his heart, that he smote him
down dead at his feet.

When Philotes saw his giant dead: he came unto Hercules, for to defend the
place, saying, that he would avenge his giant if he might. Hercules had great
joy, when he saw Philotes come to the place, and said to him: king thou art
welcome, I have now joy in my heart, since I shall prove my self against thee.
Men say, there is no stroke but of the master: now let us see how we shall
work together. Well and happy be he, that well shall do and prove
himself. Philotes in the hearing of these words, came unto the place, and
held a great Polaxe, with which he smote sore upon the shield of Hercules,
and made him to stagger a little. Whereat Philotes began to laugh, and
thought to have smitten again Hercules with that Polaxe, who was ashamed of
the other stroke. And he then kept him well, and waited so, that in the smiting
he caught it, and plucked it out of his fists, and cast it into the sea. Then
was Philotes all abashed of the force of Hercules: and when he had lost his
Poleaxe, he took his sword, and came for to fight with Hercules. Philotes had
the advantage, for Hercules was under him. They assailed the one the other
right fiercely, and well they kept them both two. All this day they fought
without ceasing, so long as the day endured: the night came on that they must
cease, then they lay there both two upon the place. They slept nothing, for it
was no time, both two kept the watch, and they endured it well, for they were
accustomed for to wake. Thus waking Philotes had many words unto Hercules,
and demanded from whence he was: and Hercules told him the truth. After they
spoke of their battle: and at the desire and request of Philotes, they
promised each to other, that if any of them were vanquished and overcome, for
to save his life, he should be holden to serve truly the vanquisher all his
life after, etc.

During these speeches and promises, the day star that the Poets call Aurora,
began to arise in his reign. The air was clear and fair, the stars shone.
At this hour Hercules cast his eyes among the stars, and seeing there Aurora
shine above all other, he began to remember his lady. Megara saying. Alas,
Madam where be ye now? I would it pleased the gods, that ye remembered as well
me, as I remember you. In truth the light of this same star inflameth the
amourous fire wherewith I was late seized by the administration of your
beauty. Ye be as far shining in beauty above the maidens of Greece, as
this Aurora shines above all the other stars, of whom the number is so great
that no man can tell. O noble Megara, the right clear star, your remembrance
illumineth mine heart, like as this star illumineth the heaven, and me
thinks that by this remembrance when I come to the battle, I shall prevail
the better. Wherefore I promise you, if fortune help me, like as I desire, ye
shall have your part of all that I shall conquer, etc.

The night drew over, and the day began, and at the point of the sun rising
Hercules was all glad of the thinking and remembrance that he had of his Lady,
and took his sword, and said to Philotes: we have pawsed long enough, ^o it
is day, and the sun ryseth, it is better that we exercise deeds of arms
now, then when the rays of the sun be greater: let us take the time ere the
great heat come, and let each of us do his best. Philotes that was all ready,
was right joyous when he heard Hercules, for he thought in his mind that he
should soon and in little space speed this matter, and said to him. Hercules
I am ready, and was since yesterday to atchieue this battle: keep you as
well as ye can, ye have slain my Giant the most stout and hardiest man that
was in all the West, Wherefore I have great displeasure, but at the least, since
his death may not be recovered by death of a man, I will do my best and
deuoir, to have a new soldier, and that shall be you, or else my sword and
fortune shall fail me. Shall I so said Hercules? and if your sword and
fortune shall fail you, what tidings? By my gentleness said Philotes, that
befell me never. And if any ill fortune and misaduenture run upon me, that I
must needs be your servant, let it be upon condition, yt I shall never go
after into battle at mine own adventure or none other during your life:
neither for you, nor for other I shall never fight, but if it be my self
defendaunt. Without other words the two champions assailed each other, and
smote together so sadlye, and sore, that the place redounded with their
strokes. In a little while they had their shields vnfastened by great blows.
Philotes did not fail to smite on Hercules: but his strokes were nothing so
great, but that Hercules might bear them well enough without grief or
suffering great damage.

Thus began the battle again of the two Giants. Hercules was as high as a
giant: he was right fierce in arms, he did much to get the standing, but yet
he might never attain to smite Philotes a full stroke, for as much as Philotes
was above on the passage, which contained well two cubits of height. When
Hercules saw and knew that Philotes kept his standing without abashing or
aduenturing to come down, he thought subtillye that he would feign himself
weary, and by little and little after he began to smite more feeblye then he
did before: after that he reculed himself, and smote from far, as if he had
failed and been wearye. The Greeks were afraid and weend he might no more:
and then Philotes sprang down from the standing, weening to have put him to
the foil: but then when Hercules saw him before him, and that one was no more
higher then an other, Hercules came to his place again, and gave so great a
stroke to Philotes, that he made him recule and go back more then four foot.
Philotes was then all abashed, and repented him that he descended from the
standing: but that was for naught, for the repenting might not avail. Then he
took courage, and enhaunced his sword, and smote Hercules on the left arm,
so hard that he gave him a wound that the blood sprang out.

When Hercules saw the arms of Philotes besprinckled with his blood, he made
none other countenance, but that he would suddenly be avenged of the stroke.
In giving to Philotes three strokes, with the first he brake his helm, and
smote him on the head, and with the second he gave him a great wound on the
right shoulder, and with the third stroke, he made his sword to fly out of his
fistes: and then he caught him in his arms, and after long wrestling he cast
him to the earth, in such wise that Philotes yielded him servant unto
Hercules, and promised him to serve him truly all the residue of his life, and
that he would bear his arms after him in all places where he should go.
Hercules received to mercy Philotes. And then called Theseus and his company,
who came and were right glad and joyous of the victory that he had obtained.
Then Hercules, Philotes and all the other went into the isle where they found
the daughters of Athlas greatly discomforted for the death of the giant. And
for as much as Hercules had also conquered Philotes their keeper, Hercules
and Philotes comforted the daughters the best wise they could: and there the
Greeks refreshed themselves the space of three days.

The fourth day he took xxx. rams and xxx. ewes, and brought them into
their ship, after that they went to the sea, without any harm doing in the
I Will, for the love of the gentle women: they departed thence, and went to the
sea, accompanied with Philotes, which was conquered by Hercules, as is said,
and after loved Hercules well and truly and served him ever after. But of their
iourneys, I will cease for this time, and will speak of a monster of the sea
that the gods sent to Troy for to devour the fair Exione daughter to king
Laomedon.

CHAP. XLI. How Hercules fought at the Port of Troy against a monster, of the
sea, for the daughter of king Laomedon.
IN that time, as Boccace rehearses in his genealogy of goods, in the third
chapter of the sixth book, Laomedon the King of Troy was busy to wall and
fortify his city with walls and towers, to the end to make it more strong.
He was not well furnished with treasures nor with money. For to accomplish his
desire, he went unto the temple of the gods of the sun and of the sea, that
were passing rich, and took all the money that he could find, promising to pay
it again all at a certain day and time set. By the mean of this money, he
closed and fortified the city of Troy with walls and towers. The work was
costlye, howbeit in little time he finished it: and it was not long after that
the work was finished, but the day came, in which Laomedon should pay and
render unto the temples of the gods the money that he had taken and borrowed, At
which day, the priests of the temples came unto Laomedon and demanded him, if
he would tender the oblations and offerings, that he had taken out of the
temple? Laomedon daigned not to speak to the priests, but sent them word
shamefully, that they should return and keep their temples. Wherefore he was
afterward sore punished, for in the same night after that he would not hear
the priests, the great winds began to rise and beat the one against the
other, and caused the sea to rise in such wise that it entered and went into the
town so far that it held the streets full of water, and drowned a great part
of the town. Besides this, in eight days following, the sun shone so
ardently, and gave so great heat, that the people durst not go into the air
by day time, and that dried the superfluity of the abou^dance of the water of
the sea that was left: whereof rose a corrupt and a mortal vapor, that
infected all the city. Whereof engendered so great a pestilence, that the most
part of the Troyans were smitten to death by the great influence of the
corrupt air.

By this pestilence they of Troy fell in great desolation, the Citizens men
and women, young and old dyed (without speaking) sodainlye. The father could
not, nor might not help his child in necessity, nor the child the father.
At this time reigned in Troy neither love nor charity: for each man that might
save himself fled away for fear of this mortalitye, and gave over, and left
the City, and went to dwell in the fields, and among all other, the king
Laomedon seeing the destruction of his realm, went into the I Will of Delphos,
unto the temple of the god Apollo, for to have the council of the god,
touching the health of his City. With Laomedon went the most noble and the
most puissant men of Troy: when they were come into the temple, they put them
in contemplation and devotion before the idol, and the devil that was therein
answered them and said. The money which was taken out of the temples, and not
rendered and paid again, is cause of the malady and vengeance of Troy. And
I do all the Trojans to wit, that never shall Troy be quit of this maladye,
unto the time that the said city provide to appease the gods, in this wise:
that it is to wit, that every month they must choose one of the virgins and
maidens, which must be set on the sea side, for to be devoured by a monster yt
the gods shall send thither: and the said virgin shall be chosen by lot or
adventure. And in this wise must the city do, for to appease the gods
perpetually until the time that they find one man, that by his arms and by
his might shall overcome the said monster.

After these words and answers, Laomedon and the Troyans assembled to
counsel upon this matter, and concluded, that for the common weal and health
of Troy, they would put their virgins in that ieopardie and adventure, to the
spoiling of the monster, without any exception or reserving. Then they returned
unto Troy, and took their virgins, and cast lots among them: and on her that
the lot fell, she was taken and brought to the sea side, and anon after was
seen to come out of the deepes or swallow of the sea, so great a tempest, that
the sea rose and was troubled. The sea wrought and a right great flood of water
lifted up the monster by times out of the sea: he was as great as a whale or a
hulk, and then he took the virgin, and swalowed her in, and went away again
into the sea, and from thence forth the pestilence ceased. Thus was Troy
delivered from their sickness and malady by the oblation of their virgins, that
were offered unto the monster, from month to month: and thus (as is said)
their virgins were delivered. It happened in the end of the month, that the
sort or lot fell on one of the daughters of king Laomedon, named Exiona: this
daughter was young and fair, and well beloved of all people. When this lot was
fallen on her, she was not only bewailed and sorrowed of king Laomedon her
father, and of his son Pryamus, and her sister Antigona, and of her cofins and
allies: but of all the people, men, women, and children: notwithstanding, their
weepings, nor the good renoume of her, could not save her, she was put to the
disposing of the monster. The noble virgin was ready to obey the king Laomedon,
and brought hereupon to the sea side, accompanied with nobles, ladies, and
gentle women, with a great train of Troyans, citizens, and merchants, all
which made sorrow for her. What shall I say? at the instant that she was thus
brought thither, Hercules at adventure arrived at the port of Troy, with his
muttons: and he willing to refresh him there, made to cast his ancres out, and
going out, and taking land, he beheld on the one side, and saw the Trojans
weeping and bewailing Exiona, in casting abroad their arms and wringing their
hands, that he had pity to see it. And he desiring to know what them ailed,
put himself into the prease, and saw there where they bound the fair Exiona
in the rout, attired with royal attire, all discolored and full of tears, as
she that expected nothing but the death. Hercules moved with compassion to
the damsel, adressed his language unto king Laomedon, for as much as it
seemed, that above all them that were in the place, he was a man of
authority: and demanded him, wherefore that the damosel was there bound?
Laomedon cast his eyes al be wept on him, and was all abashed to see his
greatness, and his beauty* nevertheless he answered him, what art thou that
art so hardy to demand me of my misfortune, which is to all common in Troy?
Sir (said Hercules) I am a stranger, and I love the worship and honor of
Ladies, and there is no thing that I might do for them, but I would do it unto
my power: and for as much as I see this Gentlewoman thus entreated, in the
favor of all Ladies, I have asked of you the cause, and I will know it, or put
my self in adventure for to die with her. And therefore I demand yet again,
what trespass or sin has she done, that these men thus bind her? My son
(answered Laomedon) I see well that ye he ignorant, and know not the reasons
and the cause, wherefore my daughter is here abandoned: there is no man but he
may well know it, for she shall die for the safety and health of Troy, and I
will tell you how we be come thereto. The gods of the sea and of the sun have
plagued and grieved Troy with a right great pestilence, that took his
beginning with a superaboundance of the sea, whereby the streets of Troy were
full in every place of water. After this deluge and flood, the time was
maruailously and outragiously hot, by the great heat of the sun, whereby
this sea was dried up. Of this dryness or drouth engendered a vapor infected,
and of this vapor insued a pestilence. And, for to resist this pestilence, I
have been at the oracle of the god Apollo, where I have had answer, for to
appease the gods, and to cease the pestilence, the gods of the sun and of
the sea will, that from month to month, be taken in Troy, one of the virgins
by sort or lottte, for to be exposed and offered, in this place, unto a monster
of the sea. The Troyans were content to fulfill the will of the gods, and I
with them. We have cast our lottes upon our virgins, whereof many be swalowed,
and devoured by the monster, and now the sort or lotte is fallen on my
daughter, will she or not, she must needs obey, and appease the goods.

After her shall come an other, there is no remedy: and this shall endure upon
the virgins of Troy perpetually: for it is the desteny that Troy shall never
be quite of this right hard servitude and thraldom, until the time that they
have found a man that alone shall vanquish and overcome the foresaid monster,
by his puissance and prowess: which will be impossible, for because that it is
true, that all the men of the greatest city of the world, can not find any
way to vanquish him, he is so great and dreadful. And these things considered,
demand me no more, my daughter shall dye for the common weal of the place of
her nativity. She was borne in a good hour, when the gods will, that by
lotte, and this fortune she be to them offered. Sir (answered Hercules) truly I
think under heaven is no city so bond and thrall as yours is: howbeit, it
ought to be understood that the gods will not suffer that this malediction
shall hold and endure continually. Ye must live in hope. If fortune and the
gods will do me that grace, that I might vanquishe and overcome the monster,
and make Troy free from this servitude, what reward would ye give me? Truly
said Laomedon, I think not that it be possible that ye should vanquishe the
monster. Who is he that will expose him to so great a follye? Hercules
answered, unto a valiant heart is nothing impossible. If I tryumphe upon the
monster, and save thy daughter, what reward shall I have? Laomedon answered. If
thou may do that thou say, I have two horses the best that be in all the
world, which I love as well as half my realm, I will give them to thee as to
the best knight of knights, and as to the most hardiest of hardye. Sir (said
Hercules) it is enough to me, and it suffiseth me to have the two horses. Let
me alone with your daughter. I have a trust and hope that this day I shall
labor for the weal of Troy, and that I shall fraunchise and make free the
virgins and maidens of this city. But I pray you, if there be in your city
any great bar of iron, or of metal, that ye will send for to fetch it to me,
for to defend me with all.

The King Laomedon, and the Troyans, were all abashed, when they saw the
enterprise that Hercules had made: and at the words of Hercules, the King
remembered him of a great club of iron that lay at the entry of his palace of
Ilion, that was so heavy, that the strongest man of Troy had enough to do to
lay it on his shoulder. He sent for it, and presented it to Hercules, and
Hercules lifted it up as it had been a little glayue. Philotes and Theseus
were present at all these things. Hercules took leave of them, and at the
prease, and recommended him unto their prayers, and forth with all the Sea
began to rore terribly. Laomedon and the Ladies, and they that were there took
leave of Exione, and of Hercules, and recommended them unto the mercy of the
gods, and went upon the downs, for to see the end. Thus abode Exione alone
and all dispayred upon the gravel with Hercules: who kneeled down on his
knees upon the gravel, turning his face unto the East, and made his prayers
unto the God that made the monsters and terrible beasts, requyring him that he
would give him force, strength and virtue of power, for to deliver Exione from
her misfortune of the monster, This oryson accomplished, Hercules entered into a
little boat, that Exione was in, and anon after, the Sea roaring, more and
more, grew and arose in such wise that the boat floted, and was lifted up and
borne by diverse waves. After this, in great troubling of wind, when the sea
was risen in great abundance of waters, Hercules and the Troyans saw coming
the great horrible and unmeasurable monster, bringing with him a tempest so
terrible, that it seemed that all the monsters of hell had been with him. He
made the waves to redouble h^deously, he lift him up above the water, and put
out his mosell unto his shoulders, so that by the swallowing of the water,
sprang out of his mouth great floods of the sea, and mounted so high, that it
seemed that it had been a gulte that had pearsed the clouds. For to say the
very truth of this monster, he was so horrible and fearful, that only for to
look and behold it, the most hardy and resolute of Troy, trembled for fear
as a leaf on a tree. This notwithstanding, Hercules was nothing afearde, but
always he comfor- Exiona, that fell down as dead. He took his club, the
monster came by the boat, and cast his mosell unto Exiona, weening to have
swallowed her in, as he had done the other virgins before. Hercules kept her,
for he smote him so vehemently upon the mosell, that he gave him a right
great wound, so sore and heavy to bear, that he made him to go back and
recule into the bottom of the sea. Then in the falling of the monster into the
sea, the waves arose high into the air, whereby Hercules and Exiona were all
wet with the washing and sprinckling of the waves: and their boat was borne
with the waves upon a bancke of sand, where the sea was so low, that the
monster might not well swim with his ease unto them. The monster always swam
after them, and coming nigh to them lifted up his head, and in the lifting up,
there issued out of his throat so great abundance of the water of the sea,
that the boat was full of water and sunk, in such wise that Hercules was in
the sea unto the great of his thighs, and Exiona stood in the water unto the
middle.

Anon as Hercules saw him in this case, he had great displeasure in himself,
more for the pain and grief that Exione had, then for the dread that he
himself had. The king Laomedon, Theseus, and Philotes, and all other, supposed
then that Hercules and the damsel, without redemption had been devoured of
the monster. The monster then seeking his pray, leapt against Exione, with a
terrible wave. Hercules had his club ready on his neck, and awayted nothing
but the monster, desiring to avenge him of the displeasure that he had, and
that he would have done to him: he then discharged his club on his head so
mightily, that the bar entered therein, and the blood sprang out. Then was the
monster more wood upon Hercules: so he ceased the assault of the damosel, and
assailed Hercules, and always as he lifted his head out of the water, he
disgorged upon the valiant champion great floods of the sea. But this
notwithstanding, he could not do so much harm unto Hercules, but that Hercules
did much worse to him. Hercules followed him with his club, and made him to
sink again into the bottom of the sea, by the huge weight of his strokes.

The battle endured long between Hercules and the monster. If the monster
might once have touched Hercules, he would at one mouthfull have devoured or
swallowed him in. He had a wide and a great throat, out of measure: he made a
great noise and cry: he was fierce in exercising his fury. But Hercules fought
with him boystrously, and held the virgin by him: and for what thing that ever
the monster did, he could not so suddenly lift up his head out of the water,
but that with one stroke of his club he was driven back always unto the bottom
of the sea. What shall I say? Hercules was often times in peril for to be
drowned. The peril was great, and more then I can rehearse. Fortune was with
him and the damsel, so that he fought and beat the monster valiantly, and so
endeavored in smiting continually on his mozell and on his head, that the sea
withdrew, and took from him the spirit of life, and then he all to bruised his
brain, and so vanquished him, and slew him. And after when the Sea was
withdrawn and far ebbed, he took Exiona by the hand, and brought her upon
the ditch, and delivered her unto her father the king Laomedon.

CHAP. XLII. How Laomedon shut Hercules out of Troy: and how Hercules swear
that he would avenge him.
WHen the king Laomedon saw his daughter thus delivered from the monster, and
Troy made quit from ye dangers, he bowed and thanked greatly Hercules: after he
came to the sea side, accompanied with Hercules, Theseus, Philotes, and with
the Troyans. And went for to see and behold the monster that was so great, that
three hundred horses might not move him from the place where he was. One and
other looked for to see the strokes that Hercules gave him, and they could not
see all. But at that they saw they maruailed: for Hercules had broken bones
that it seemed not possible to break, and they had found the head hurt in so
many places, that with great pain they could know whether he had a head or
none. Of this high and incredible victory, the Troyans reioysed maruailously,
and had Hercules more in grace, then any man in the world. When they had seen
and beheld the monster enough, they departed thence, and brought Hercules into
Troy. They came not so soon unto the palace, but they found Exiona clothed
with new array and vestements. And as for Hercules, all that he had upon him
was wet and nothing dry. The king Laomedon would have had him to have changed
his habites, and would have given him new. But the valiant Esquire refused it
all, saying that he had been accustomed not to be always well a^ (...) ease.
In this estate then Laomedon brought Hercules (...) Troy, unto the castle of
Ilion, and his Greeks with hi^ and feasted them as it appertained. Hercules
and his Greeks were four days triumphant in Ilion. During these four days,
the Troyans went out in great routs, for to see the monster, and gave so great
saud and praise to Hercules, that Laomedon had envy thereat, doubting that the
people would love better Hercules then him. He thereupon sent Hercules and his
folk out of the town for to hunt: and as soon as they were out of Troy, he
drew up the bridge, and shut the gates against him. When Hercules thought for
to have entered, Laomedon spoke to him, and said to him from far, that he
had moved by conspiration the City against him, and that he would no more
receive him into the Town. Hercules was passing wroth, when he understood the
accusation of Laomedon: and answered him, that never in his life he had
thought any villainy to him, whereof he charged and offered himself to prove
himself clear by battle in the field, and to adventure his body against
thirty other, that would say or maintain the contrary, which offer Laomedon
would not receive. Then Hercules required him, that at the least he would
deliver him his horses, that he had promised him for the victory of the
monster. Laomedon answered him, that he would deliver him none. Wherefore, said
Hercules? Laomedon answered, for as much as it is my will and pleasure so to
do. Ha false and untrue king (said Hercules) thou withholdest me the prise
and reward of my labor, and thou yeeldest me evil for good, I swear to thee
by the puissance of all my gods, that as I have delivered Troy perpetually by
my club, from the monster of the sea, and consequently from the sword of
pestilence: in like sort, and even so, by the same clubbe, I will yield and
render unto Troy the pestilence, or death, and war, if the gods give me
the grace: and I have intention for to make the Troyans say, that they were
happy that died in the time of the pestilence that is past.

Hercules (full of great ire) departed with these words, and left there the
king Laomedon, that set little store by that he had said to him: for he trusted
and put all his affiance in the strength of the walls of his City, and he
thought that no man might anoy nor grieve him. And then Hercules went again to
his ship, and mounted on the sea with his club, and his sheep, and with his
fellow Theseus. Philotes held himself well happy for to have been vanquished
of one so valiant a man as Hercules was, and he took on him the office for to
bear his harness in all places where he went. What shall I say? from Troy
unto Thebes fell nothing worthy to be put in memory, that is of record. In
the end he arrived in Greece, and knew by some certain man there, that the
king Euristeus was in Thebes: whereof he had great joy, for he thought he saw
the lady Megara, which he deesired to see by great desire. He went then unto
Thebes, where he was solemnly received of the king Creon, which had him in
great good account for his valiance. One and other came and welcomed him: he
sent his sheep and muttons unto the king Euristeus by Philotes. Philotes
himself told and recounted, how Hercules had conquered them and him also, and
how he had slain his giant at the passage. Of these tidings was the king
Euristeus passing joyous, and so were all they that were there, or heard speak
of it. Every man glorified Hercules: Ladies and Gentlewomen came and welcomed
him. Among all other Megara failed not, she came to Hercules and welcomed him,
and well became her to welcome and make him cheer: For, she was wise and of
good manners, and certes her coming gave more solace unto Hercules, then all
the louings and praysings that were then given unto him, albeit that all the
world praised and exalted him, for this voyage, above all the Greeks. And the
sheep were so desired, that kings bought them for the weight of gold:
wherefore the Historiographers and Poets put this conquest in perpetual
memory, writing among his deeds in this wise. Substulit mala aurea, that is
as much to say, that he bare away the muttons of gold, for as much as they
were esteemed at prise of the weight of gold. For Mala in Greek is as much to
say as sheep in English, or muttons in French, and so recounteth Boccace in
his genealogy of gods: and so approves Varro, which writes likewise in his
Book de Agricultura.

By this conquest, the name of Hercules began to fly in height and
excellency. The Poets have fained upon this History, that the daughter of
Athlas had a garden kept night and day by a serpent waking, wherein grew Apples
of gold, and that Hercules slew this serpent, and gathered and bare away the
Apples. By this garden is understood the I Will: by the serpent waking, the
subtle giant commised to keep it, that always awooke at the passage. And by
the apples of gold be understood the sheep, esteemed to the valor of the
weight of fine gold. After then this presentation made to Euristeus of the
sheep or muttons, as each man maruailed of the prowess of Hercules, Philotes
added and gave to his ouercomer Hercules praises upon praises, and lauds upon
lauds, and honor upon honor: For hearing kings and princes, ladies and
gentlewomen, and seeing that Hercules held his peace at things, whereof he
might have embraced honor and worship, he declared from point to point his
adventure, not credible of the monster of Troy, and showed the club wherewith
he had put him to death: but after that he rehearsed the honor and grace that
he had gotten in Troy, and the wrong that Laomedon had done to him: he said so
much thereof, that they enterprised all to go to war upon the king Laomedon,
for to take vengeance of the wrong that he had done to Hercules.

CHAP. XLIII. How Hercules had battle against the king Laomedon: and how he
vanquished and destroyed Troy the first time.
IT is not possible that my pen can write the grace and excellent renoume that
Hercules gat in Greece at his coming from Troy. The kings and the princes
reputed themselves happy and fortunate for to have their reign in his time.
Amphitrio^ his father putatiue, began to have him in grace, and came into
Thebes to him. His mother Alcumena came also; and certes she failed not to have
abundance of joy, when she might set her eyes to see her son, which was so
greatly renowned. The noble Lady had not seen him in long time before she saw
him tryumphe in honor, in valiaunce and in prowess: annoyes, griefs, and
displeasures, that she had for him, because that he was named the son of
Jupiter, whereof she held her self innocent, were then all forgotten and
put in oblyuion. The feast was great in Thebes for the love of Hercules: men
spoke not of any thing but of him and of his prowess. Creon, Euristeus, Egeus,
Amphitrion and many other, assembled them together, and made their musters and
assemblies for to go unto Troy. By space of time their army was ready: and then
they took their leave, and Hercules was made captain of this army. He went
to the sea accompanied with the kings above said, and ten thousand men all
chosen for the nonce. At the time convenient the mariners disancred, and went
to sail: They sailed so long by their course without stay or letting that (yet
during their victualles) they came on a day into Frigie, unto a port of a
City named Laryse being nigh to Tenadon. This city was of the demean of
Troy: for which cause the Greeks assailed it, and took it by force of arms,
and after that ryfled it and took all that was therein. And when they had
spoiled it, they went to Tenadon, which was a gentlemanly Cittye: they
assailed it, and took it as they did the city of Larise, and they put therein
the fire, and burned it, so that the air was enflamed in such wise, that it
was seen in Troy, how the City burned. The assault of Tenadon dured not long,
for as much as the Troyans were not advertised of their coming. When they saw
the air so enflamed, for to see from what place the flame came, they mounted
and went upon the high towers and buildings of Ilion, and looking toward
Tenadon, saw that the City was all on a fire, whereat they that saw it were
right sorye, and greatly abashed. About this they looked into the sea, and
espied then there the flote of the Greeks, whereof they were more abashed then
they were before. And then without any longer tarying, they descended and went
down into the hall of King Laomedon, and said to him: Alas Sir, what is best to
be done? the Greeks come upon us with aright great flote: we have seen them
and know them. The strong Hercules menaceth you, for to destroy your city.
Certes I believe it is he. For now, for the beginning of the feast, he has
burnt Tenadon, and that is it that causes the air to be full of fire.

The King Laomedon hearing this tyding began to sighe and taste of the evil and
trespass that he had committed and done against Hercules. This
notwithstanding, for to give courage unto his men, and to his son Pryamus
that was at that time of the age of xx. year, he did cause to sound to Arms,
and made him ready, and with his arms showed a right fierce and hardy
semblance. This done, he armed Pryamus his son, that never had bin in
battle before, and dubbed him knight: after he took him by the hand, and
issued out of Ilion. In issuing out he met many Troyans, that told him,
that at his port were landed many Greeks, that had destroyed Tenadon, and
unless he halted him, they would soon take land. Laomedon with out
speaking any word, passed forth by them that had brought him these tidings,
and came to a place that was there by Ilion, where he found mo then twenty
thousand Troyans ready armed. And seeing them, he began to joy in himself, and
called the principals, and said to them: Lords, ye be renowned in all the
world, by the high prowess of your ancestors: Before that Troy was walled,
they defended it with the sword against their enemies: the renowned king
Jupiter of Crete, could not get this City, nor the Thessalonians by their
war, might never subdue this City. It is now happened this day, that a new
assembly of enemies come upon this City, and as men say, they have put the
fire in Tenadon: let us go receive them courageously, and let us make of them
like as our fathers have made with other, etc.

When the Troyans had heard these words of their King, they answered all, that
they would live and die with him, for the weal of the City: and that they had
intention to keep his honor, and for to make grow their ancient glory.
Without holding of long process, the King Laomedon did then display all his
banners. After he issued out of Troy, setting and trayning his men in good
order. And then as he began to conduct and lead them forth, suddenly he heard
at the port, a passing great noise and brute of Trumpettes, Clarions, and
Tabours, of the Greeks. Then his blood began to chafe, then his hair of his
head began to stand up, he knew that they were his enemies: and as soon
as they knew the Greeks, without holding of any order nor measure, they
dislodged them, and began to run to the port, one before an other. When they
approached the port, they espied the Greeks, that landed with great forces.
Then they challenged them unto the death, and ran upon them sharply. The
Greeks were furnished with good armours, and put them to defense, and began to
skirmish the one with the other so vnmeasurably, that in the aboording and
meeting there were many dead and hurt. Hercules was there among the Greeks. He
began to fight sharply among the Troyans, and had his club. Certes he
welcomed them in such wise, that the most strongest of his enemies durst not
abide him: he fought fiercely, in desire of reuengement, in coveting of
worship, and to get him a name. Lifting up his hand, he showed to the Troyans
his club, and made them to feel the weight thereof, and the strength of his
arm, and he labored so earnestly, and did so valiantly, that they that saw
him, doubted him more then death, and said the one unto the other: behold
Hercules, but come not near him. It were folly so to do: all that he reaches
he sleaeth and breaks to pieces. We do evil to fight against him: this is
the deliverer from the terrible seruage and thraldom of Troy: how should we
resist his club, when the huge dreadful monsters be by the same put to the
foil? etc.

Such were the words of the Troyans. Hercules fought against them fiercely: he
was stout and stable: he went before: all the Greeks followed him, and took a
pleasure to behold him. The cry was great about him. What shall I say? he
fought until the night, and never ceased until the going down of the Sun,
and then the Troyans sounded the retrait, and they departed both parties.
Laomedon put his sword into his sheath, which was all bloody with Greeks
blood: and in likewise did Priamus his son. They reentred into their City,
after the skirmish, and they concluded, that on the morrow they would furnish
their enemies with battle. And the Greeks furnished them in the champaine, and
made good cheer, for they had lost but little of their people at their coming
on land. This night passed over: when the day appeared to the Troyans, and the
Greeks, each in his manner made him ready to the battle: many of the Troyans
would gladly have broken this battle, and prayed unto king Laomedon, that he
would render and deliver to Hercules the horses that he ought to him. Laomedon
would not do it, but answered, that he doubted nothing his enemies. He had
then about fifty thousand of fighting men, all ready: of these fifty thousand
he made two battles, one of twenty thousand, and that he led himself, and
the other of thirty thousand, of which he made Priamus captain. This done,
he issued out of Troy, with twenty thousand fighting men, and came unto the
fields, entering upon the Greeks, etc.

When the Greeks espied king Laomedon coming, they were full of joy, as they
that were ready for to receive them at the point of their spears, and with
hewing of their swords. They had made of their host four battles. In the
first was Hercules. And in the second was Amphitrion, and Theseus. And in the
third was the king Creon, and in the fourth was Euristeus. Hercules then that
had the first battle, marched when it was time, against the King Laomedon,
and he had four ancient knights well appointed in the feats of Arms, that
set and conducted his folk in array and order. They marched so nigh, the one
to the other, with great noise of Trumpettes, and Labors, that the Archers,
and Cross bows began the battle, after that that Hercules had summond
Laomedon to pay him that he had promised him, and that Laomedon had made
refusal thereto. The Greeks were furnished with stronger Bows and shot
then the Troyans were: and by that mean they slew abundaunce of their
enemies: and especially Hercules bare him so well with forty Arrows that he
himself shot, one after another, that he slew forty of his enemies, such
as he would choose, without failing.

Hercules was at that time the best archer, and the most sure at mark that was
in all Greece, and also in all the world. He and his men (as is said) cast many
of the Troyans to the ground by the shot. When the shot failed, Hercules
delivered his bow unto Philotes, that bare his harness, and took a strong
sword and sure. When it came to swords, and breaking and foyning with spears,
Hercules that was always in the first front, leapt against the king Laomedon,
that was departed from his host before all other, for as much as he rode upon
one of the horses that he had promised to Hercules. And running one against
the other as swiftly as they had flowen in the air, met and smote each other
so sore, that their spears brake in pieces, which sprang about them. Hercules
passed forth and smote among the Troyans, and Laomedon in like wise, entered
into the host of the Greeks: they began to handle their swords, and to hew
each upon his enemies. Then arose there a maruailous noise: they that had
spears and shields, employed them for to join battle. The fight was great,
the strokes were hard, the battle was general, for of the one party and the
other, many men were distressed and beaten, notwithstanding that the Greeks
were most boystrous and most hard in arms, and more valiant then the Troyans,
and better held them together, then they of the battle of king Laomedon.
Hercules wrought and bestirred him fast with his sword, that he had conquered
from Philotes. At every stroke and every step he killed a Troyan, and smote of
their heads and arms in great abundance, that it seemed that they that he
touched had not been armed. Laomedon was busy on the one side, and fained
not, but bare him right well upon his horse, and ran from rank to rank among
the Greeks: he rested not, but conducted his people knightly, and his people
were great in number: he set upon his enemies so eagerly, that he enclosed
them, and then was the murder and slaughter so great that on al sides a man
should not have seen anything but blood and heads, and arms fly in the
place and the field.

When Theseus and Amphitrion beheld the battle of Hercules so enclosed with
the Troyans, they bethought them, and came to his help ere he had need. At
their coming they made a right great uproar, they thrusted and couched their
swords upon the Troyans, which were too far forward, and joined to them with
such prowess, that they smote down the most stable and strong, and went so
far among them, that they made them that were so far come, to retire
again, and go back by force and strength. In this going back and reculing,
the host of Laomedon was all afraid and abashed. The three swords of Hercules,
of Theseus, and Amphitrion, were seen brandishing above all other in well
doing, and in short space they began to vanquish and overcome their enemies,
and would have brought them to the foil and shame. Then that the young Pryamus
with his thirty thousand appeared to come to the assault, making so great a
noise that all the ground trembled, and gave a maruailous sound, and they that
were upon the walls and edifices of Troy, made withal a great cry. Hercules,
Theseus, and Amphitrion, beholding Pryamus coming, and the puissance of Troy,
set their people in array, and in battle order went with a great train of
Greeks against them, for to withstand their enterprises. Theseus was the first
that spied Pryamus, who set and couched his spears against him, and he came
with a great courage mounted upon the second horse of king Laomedon his father,
and charged with so great might upon Theseus, that he bare him to the ground
turned up side down, bruising him upon his shield. Theseus relieved him being
right angry at this fall, and entered among the Troyans, smyting and hewing on
them with his sword, in such fury, that he smote off the heads of more then
thirty Troyans ere he ceased. The bruit and noise was great about him. The
Troyans would have revenged them of his sword, but their power was not so
great: they had work enough to save themselves, many Greeks came in the aid
and help of Theseus: and then they began to renew the battle.

At this time, and at this skirmish Hercules and Amphitrion were nothing idle:
they were on one side, and Theseus on the other: at meeting there was many a
man hurt and slain. Priamus did maruailes unto the Greeks: at the beginning,
he bare him so valiantlye among his enemies, that he found no man that did him
any harm or annoy. He made his sword for to taste stronglye the blood of his
adversaries: then as he was in this case he heard about Hercules, a right hie
and a great pearsing cry of his people, crying, Troy, Troy, in despair to
have prevailed. And then Pryamus weening to have helped, and to smite down
dead all them that were before him, ran unto the reskew, to his maladuenture:
for as soon as he was come before Hercules, and, Hercules saw him so on
horseback, he remembered him that it was he that had overthrown Theseus to the
ground, and said, that he would avenge him, and lifting up his sword, he smote
Pryamus so fiercelye upon his helm, that he was all astonished, and that his
sword slid down on his horse neck, and entered in so far, that there fell down
both Pryamus and the horse.

When Pryamus was so overthrown horse and man, and also so astonished, that he
wist not where he was: Hercules was advertised that it was Priamus son of the
king Laomedon: and then had pity of him, and took him prisoner, and did send
him out of the battle. The Troyans seeing this, were sore and grievously
troubled, and for the reskew of him they endeavored themselves and were
encouraged so terribly, that Hercules might not sustain all the rigor of the
battle, and that the Greeks were constrained to loose place. The King Creon
then displayed his banner, and his battle, and in likewise did Euristeus, and
they put them in two wings one on the right side, and the other on the left
side: and they came running in upon the Troyans with so great noise and so
great tempest, that all the Troyans felt well their coming, for at that time
they wist not where to turn them. They were smitten before and behind so sore
that they lost the company of Pryamus, and wist not where he was become. etc.

At this entermeeting, and skirmish, Laomedon was out of the prease and
refreshed him. When he heard say that his son Priamus was taken: he was
therefore passing sorrowful, and had so great pain, that the sweat came to his
heart and from thence unto all his members, wherefore he went himself again
to battle half out of his mind: the battle was then fell and enuenomed, and
there was most hard fighting. But, for to augment and increase the ouer-great
sorrow of this Laomedon, he found that his folk had the worse and loss, and
little fought, On the other side, he saw the horions and strokes of the
Greeks, so great and so unmeasurable, that his men were brought out of rank,
and the arayes broken, and charged with so heavy stookes of the heavy swords,
that they went and turned back, and began to fly: and then when it came to
the discomfiture, Laomedon abode not with the last, but entered again into his
City as hastily as he might. The Greeks followed the Troyans eagerly, and so
nigh, that they entered in with them, with great effusion of blood. Hercules was
the first that wa^ the gate: and as for the Greeks he was porter, and put in
all them that were of his knowledge. Many Troyans passed by the cutting of the
sword, and many fled away by the fields, and bushes. When Laomedon saw, that by
force his City was taken, and put in the hands and governance of the Greeks
(right sore discomforted, and all in despair) he took his daughter Exione and
Antigone, and his most precious jewels and gemmes, and fled away privily,
thinking that his enemies would make there a right great destruction and
pilling, as they did: For when Hercules had put his men within the City, he
let his men rob and pill. Thus the Troyans were persecuted. The channels were
tempred with their blood. The houses were beaten down, and the great riches
were put into prays: and of all the goods of the City, there were left
nothing whole, but the palace of Ilion, whither the ladies and the maids were
withdrawn. Hercules would in no wise destroy this palace, forasmuch as the
ladies made to him a request for to spare it. At this prise Hercules sought
long Laomedon in the palace of Ilion, and in all places of the city, but he
could hear no tidings of him, wherefore he was sore displeasant: and when he
had beaten down the walls, that had been made with the money of the gods, he
departed thence, and returned into Greece with great glory. And in this wise
was Troy, destroyed the first time. Wherefore I will thus now make an end of
this first book, and will begin the second book: where shall be showed how
Troy was reedified, and how it was destroyed the second time. And how Priarnus
raised it, and made it again. In continuing the noble labors of Hercules now
new begun, etc.

Thus ends the first book of the collection of the gathering together of the
histories of Troy.
The Table of the first Book of the Collection of the History of Troy.
THe beginning of this Book shows the genealogy of Saturn: and of the
covenant and promise that he made to his brother Titan, and how he took in
hand mortal war against Jupiter his own son. Cap. 1. Page 1 How Saturn
was crowned first king of Crete: and how he found diverse sciences, wherefore
the people held him in great honor as a god. cap. 2. page 6 How Saturn went
to Delphos, and had answer how he should have a son that should chase him
out of his realm: and how he married him to his sister Sibell. cap. 3. page 9
How Saturn had commanded to slay Jupiter that was newborn: and how his
mother Sibell sent him to king Meliseus, where he was nourished. cap 4. pa. 17
How, after the death of King Corinthus, of Corinth, his two sons Dardanus and
Iasius strove which of them should have the Kingdom, and Dardanus slew his
brother Iasius by treason, wherefore he must depart out of the country. Chap.
5. Page. 21 Of the great war that was moved between the Pelagiens and the
Epiriens: and how King Lycaon of Pelage was destroyed by Jupiter, because of a
man, put to him to hostage, which king Licaon did roste. Chap. 6. pa. 25. How
Jupiter after the discomfiture of king Lycaon transformed himself in guise of a
religious woman of the goddess Diana, for the love of Calisto daughter of the
said Licaon, and did with her his will. Chap. 7. pa 33. How Calisto, for as much
as she was with child, the goddess Diana put her out of the order of her
company. Chap. 8. pa. 40. How Titan assailed by war his Brother Saturn,
for as much as he had not put to death all his children males. Chap. 9. page
43. How Jupiter with aid of King Meliseus of Egypt delivered Saturn his
father and Sibil his mother out of the prison of Titan, and slew Titan in
battle. Chap. 10. pa. 51. How Jupiter vanquished Titan in the field, and cast
him in the river. Chap. 11. pa. 58 How Jupiter and Saturn reconciled them
together: and how Jupiter by commandment of his father went for to destroy
the king Apollo of Paphos: and of the medicine of Esculapius. Chap. 12. pa. 59
How Jupiter with great joy espoused his sister Juno: and how the King Saturn
began war against Jupiter his son. Chap. 13. pa. 63 How they of Crete, when
they had heard the commandment of Saturn, were sore troubled and grieved and
how they rose and moved themselves against Jupiter his son. Chap. 14. pa. 66
How King Saturn, with all his great host came before the city of Arcadia,
against Jupiter. etc. chap. 15. page* 68 How Jupiter sent his ambassadors to
his father Saturn. etc. chap. 16. pa. 70 How Jupiter vanquished Saturn his
father in battle. etc. chap. 17. pa. 74 How Acrisius had a daughter named
Danae, the which he did put in a tower, chap. 18. pa. 79 How Jupiter, in the
guise of a messenger, brought unto the tower of Dardane jewels etc. chap. 19.
pa. 83. How Jupiter (in the guise of a messenger, with many jewels) came
again. etc. chap. 20. pa. 88 How Jupiter came from his chamber by night, and
lay in the tower of Dardane, etc. chap 21. pa. 97 How the king Tantalus of
Frigie assailed by battle the king Troos, etc. chap 22. pa. 102 How the king
Troos chaced in battle, the king Ta^talus: etc. chap. 23. pa. 106 How Saturn
(by the aid of Ganimedes and of the Troyans) returned into Crete. etc. chap.
24. pa. 111 How Jupiter again discomfited king Saturn in battle, and
Saturn was put to flight by the sea. Chap. 25. pa. 117 How Jupiter after he
had sacrificed the Eagle, pursued the Troyans: etc. chap. 26. pa. 120 How the
king Troos and Ilion his son, made great sorrow for Ganimedes. etc. chap.
27. pa. 126 How the king Acrisius, when he saw his daughter with child, sent
her to exile, etc. chap 28. pa. 128 How Jupiter returning from Troy by sea,
encountered the great thief Egeon, etc. chap. 29 pa. 134 How the queen Meduse
came to Athens to worship in the temple the goddess Pallas etc. chap. 30. pa.
141 How Perseus vanquished (in battle) the queen Medusa, and she fled into
her city. chap. 31. pa. 149 How Perseus in this battle slew the mighty
sister of Medusa and vanquished in the battle. chap. 32. pa. 153. How Perseus
conquered Medusa and smote of her head, and went to sight against the King
Athlas of Septe a mighty giant. chap. 33. pa. 155 How Perseus turned king
Athlas into a stone: and how the queen Auria wife of king Pricus, was amorous
of the knight Bellerophon, etc. chap. 34. pa. 159 How Perseus vanquished the
mo^ster of the sea, and exposed himself against him for the love of Andromeda,
ca. 35. pa. 169 How Phineus would have had Andromeda, and Perseus answered him
that she should be his wife. chap. 36. pa. 174 How Perseus reestablished in his
realm the king Acrisius: and how he slew the king by evil adventure. ca. 37
pa. 177 How Jupiter lay with Alcumena: and queen Juno sent two serpents for to
slay Hercules, and he strangled them. chap. 38. pa, 181 How Hercules began the
Olimpiades, and waxed amorous of Megara etc. chap. 39. pa. 197 How Hercules
sailed by the sea into Hesperia, and vanquished the I Will with the sheep, etc.
chap. 40 pa. 210 How Hercules fought at the port of Troy against a monster of
the sea, for the daughter of king Laomedo^. ca. 41. pa. 218 How Laomedon snutte
Hercules out of Troy, and Hercules swear that he would aueng him. chap. 42. pa.
226 How Hercules had battle against the king Laomedon: and how he vanquished
and destroyed Troy the first time. chap. 43. pa. 230
Thus ends the table of the first book.
HERE Begins the second book of the Collection of the Histories of Troy.

Which speaks of the prowess of the strong Hercules, of his marvelous
deeds, wonderful works, and of his death.

VIR ESSIT VULNERE VERITAS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, 1596.

The second Book of the destruction of Troy.
How Hercules fought against three Lions in the forest of Nemee: and how he
slew them, and took their skins or hides.
IN the first book is begun the deeds and prowesses of the strong and
puissant Giant Hercules: and how he destroyed first the City of Troy, and
vanquished the king Laomedon, after which deed and conquest, he returned into
Greece, where he held him a certain space of time without doing of any thing
that is found by writing. But then, as the old Juno by her evil and cursed
envy gave her to imagine and think how she might make Hercules to be
destroyed and die, tidings came to Crete, that into the forest of Nemee were
come many Lions, and among all other, there was one that was sixteen hand of
height, that destroyed and wasted all the country. And this June had war
against Euristeus, and then, for to have acquaintance with Hercules, and under
color of good love, for to bring him into the claws of this lion, she made
peace with Euristeus, and sent for him to come into Crete, for to confirm the
peace. Euristeus, that thought nothing but well, went into Crete, and brought
with him Hercules. The peace was made, Juno acquainted her with Hercules, they
came to speak of the lions in the forest of Nemee, etc. And so much spoke
Juno, and reported to them that she said to Hercules, that it were well an act
for to get him honor and renown, for to go unto the forest of Nemee, and for
to employ him to conquer those lions. Hercules weening that Juno had counseled
him for to go and assail the Lions for his worship and profit, enterprised for
to go into the forest. Juno required him, that if he went, when he had
vanquished the lions, he would return unto her. Hercules promised her that he
would so do. After he departed from Crete: and first he went into Thebes for
to see Megara, and for to make his harness and arms for to be ready. When
the ladies of Thebes knew that Hercules would go against the lions of Nemee,
all they complained of his youth: and they thought that he should die there,
for the lions were cruel and terrible. Megara above all other, was passing
sorrowful, and required the ladies, that they would pray Euristeus, that he
would keep Hercules from going unto so dangerous a voyage. The ladies
accomplished the request of Megara, and had weened to have broken the voyage of
Hercules by the mean of Euristeus, but they might in no wise let his purpose:
For Hercules answered to Euristeus, and unto the ladies, that it was the first
enterprise that he had taken in hand at the request of any lady, and for as
much as the queen Juno had made him to do it, he had intent to accomplish it
by the pleasure of the gods and of fortune.

Hercules was great in heart and of courage, being exalted with honor, he had
lever have dyed then to have done a thing whereof should follow any dishonor.
When his arms were ready, he armed him. After he took leave of king Creon,
of Euristeus, of Amphitrion, of the ladies, and of the Gentle women,
accompanied only with Philotes, which would never leave him. He departed from
Thebes, and so sped him in his journey, that he came unto the forest of
Nemee, which stood not far from Argos. In approaching this forest, he went
two days without finding beasts or men, until the time that he entering into
the forest, found a pastor or heard-man named Melorcus. This heard man was
mounted upon a great tree. When that he saw Hercules enter into the wood, he
called to him, saying: Sir ye be dead, if ye go any further, return quickly,
for the fierce lions will eat you: or else come hither up to me upon this
tree. Hercules hearing the words of Melorcus, looked upon the tree, and
demanded him what he was? alas said the pastor, I am the most poor man of all
other, the lions of the forest at their coming have eaten a great heard of
beasts, that I have nourished here by: besides that, they have eaten all my
family and meinie: and they have devoured all save me alone, which have by
adventure a great while saved my self upon this tree, where I eat nothing
else but leaves and akehornes, and dare not descend and come down, for fear
of three lions which be here by, who will soon assail you, unless ye depart
and fly, etc.

The pastor finishing his words, there came leaping out of a bush the three
lions, and marched against Hercules, roaring and crying, and opening their eyes
with so great rage, that it seemed they would have pierced through Hercules
with their fell sight. The great lion came first, his hair standing up, he
was as high as an Olyphant, and great after that proportion, and his head was
twice as big as the head of a bull. Hercules seeing them come, took his sword
and his clubbe that Philotes bare. Philotes, notwithstanding his prowess, was
so sore afraid, that he went upon the tree unto the heard-man. Hercules set
his club unto the tree, and took his sword fast in his fists: the lions at the
appraching brayed in their throats. Hercules smote one of them between the
eyes, and bare him down to the earth, that he sat upon his buttockes. The
great lion thought to have sprung upon Hercules, and to have taken him in his
claws, and made a terrible leap. When Hercules saw and knew his intent, he
turned from him, and smote at the third lion, which was light and nimble, and
struck with his sword so right, and so firmelye into his throat, that he raught
him to the heart, what-soeuer resistance that he made in biting of the sword:
and left it within his body in such wise that he fell down dead. When the two
lions saw their fellow so used they set their claws on the earth, and howled
so yrously, that it seemed that thunder had sprung out of their stomachs. All
the forest sownded thereof. Hercules took his sword: the two lions approached
of new again, and ran upon him with their paws, and hurt him so
vnmeasurably, that they loosed his armor, their nails entering into his
flesh, and them they drew out al dyed with his blood.

Hercules had his heart sore troubled, when he felt his wounds that the Lions
had made: then he lifted up his sword, and smote on one and other, but the
great Lion had his skyn so hard, that his sword might no more enter therein
then it might on a great stithy. Thus began the battle of the Lions and of
Hercules. The little lion was passing eager and fierce, he launched him forth
often times against Hercules, and always thought to have hurt him with his
claws that cutted like a rasour: but he launched so often that it was to his
evil health and ease, for Hercules among, and after many strokes, made to be
divided from his body the right leg, very nigh by the shoulder, and smote him
down by the feet of that other lion that lay dead. etc.

When Hercules saw that he was delivered of the two evil beasts, and that he
had no more to do but with the great Lion, he began to have an hope of good
fortune. He then had comfort in himself of the battle, which was strong to
sustain: for the great lion gave him great strokes with his paws, and put him
often times in peril of death: the sword of Hercules might never enter into the
skin of the beast, it was so hard. The lion took his sword between his teeth
and his nails, that with great pain he pulled and haled it from him. Finally,
when he had long fought with his sword, and knew well that thereby he might
raise no blood of the lion, he would assay if his club were to him more
profitable. Then he took it, and the first time that the Lion came upon him,
he gave him a stroke with his club, so great on his mouth, that all the teeth
brake and fell out before him. The Lion feeling the stroke, made a great
maruailous howling, so he lifted up his paws, and thought to have pulled down
Hercules. But he fled the coming of the lion: and the lion fell to the ground,
with so great fierceness of running and failing of Hercules. And when Hercules
saw that he was fallen, he leapt upon him forthwith eagerly and beat him,
and held him with his hands about the throat, so fast, that he brought his
jaws out of their places out of joint, and made his eyes to fly out of his
head and strangled him, and so slew him.

In doing this deed or work, Hercules showed a singular hardines, and
incredible force: for he strangled with his hands a lion, with the skin so
hard, that spears nor swords might not do any harm: he put him to death by a
wonderful valiance: and when he had so done, he went to the other that lived
yet, and all to brake and tare him, as if it had been a little lamb. After he
called Philotes to him, and the pastor or heard-man, that were maruailous
joyous and glad of so high a victory. And Hercules found the manner how to flea
the Lions, and took their skins, by the help of the heardman. When they had
fleaed them, it was night. Hercules then demanded the heardman, if there were
any house or lodging thereby, where he might have meat and drink? The
heardman brought him to his house, where they found provision of meat and
drink, wherewith the good man feasted Hercules to his power, and he seemed
that he was in paradise. And thus Hercules passed the day and the night, and
forgot not to think on his wounds that were fell and smarted, so that little
or naught he slept that night. This notwithstanding, when the day appeared, he
took leave of the heard-man, and so departed, and took his journey for to go
into Crete, for to show unto the Queen Juno the three lions skins, and for
to thank her of her good advertisement.

CHAP. II. How Juno sent Hercules into Egypt to be slain of the tyrant Busire:
and how Hercules slew the tyrant against the hope and will of Juno.
AT this time reigned in Egypt the king Busire the son of the Queen of
Libie: and the land of Egypt was dry not fertile, but barraine. Busire, for to
remedy this, called his Clearkes that held the science of Zoroastes, and asked
of them what he might do for the health of his Realm? They asked counsel of
the gods, and had answer, that they must sacrifice unto them man's blood. When
Busire (that naturally was evil, and that had never done good) heard this
answer: he began to tyrannise more and more, that was a tyrant before. And
began first with his people, raking and plucking from the mothers their
little children, and from the men their wives, and from the wives their
husbands, in burning and defiling the temples of Egypt with their blood. For
all these homicides and slaughters the drouth ceased not, but augmented and
waxed more. The Clearkes demanded their gods, the cause why they had no dewes
of water nor rain from above? They answered, that they would not have the just
blood of Egypt, but the strange blood which they should take and make
sacrifice thereof. The gods by this answer, would have in sacrifice the
blood of Busire, for he was strange in virtuous policy, and far from all
good. And the Clearkes understood that they would have the blood of strangers.
Busire advertised of this answer, ceased to persecute the blood of Egypt, and
turned his sword upon the blood of strangers. And made an Edict and statute,
that no stranger should enter into his City, but he should be sacrificed to
his gods, and that he would slay all the strangers that he might get. By
this Edict, and by this damnable custom, many strangers, nobles and other
were put to sacrifice, and had their blood she^ in Egypt. Among all other, one
noble man of Crete (of the lynage of Juno) perished in this misfortune, by the
sword of Busire. The tidings came into Crete, and there was made for him a
great sorrow. As this sorrow was in his most prime, Hercules and Philotes
came unto the Queen Juno, and they found her charged with tears of weeping,
in her City. At that time there were an hundred Cities in Crete, and the King
Jupiter held him no more with Juno, for many causes and reasons, When then
Hercules was returned unto thi^ Lady Juno his stepmother, he made reverence
unto her. After he showed to her the skins of the Lions that he had slain,
and thanked her of the high adventure that she had admonished him of.

The cursed stepmother, for the return of Hercules, augmenting her sorrow upon
new sorrow, received and feasted Hercules, and made to him faintly the greatest
cheer that she could. It was upon the point to go to dinner, she made him to
dine and eat with her. In eating, after diverse speeches of the Lions, she
devised and thought how she might make Hercules for to die: and thought she
might do no better, then to send him into Egypt. At that time she concluded in
her self, that she would send him into Egypt if she might. For to do so, she
changed the reasoning of the lions, and said to Hercules: your coming again in
safety, is to me most joyful, for that your name shall be put in perpetual
renown and praising among the most worthy and best of the world: for ye have
done many fair enterprises and deeds. In your young childhood, ye made all the
world to wonder and marvel of the victory of the serpents, by you strangled.
After, ye made your sword to brandish in the west parts in Frigie, and now
newly in Nemee. The adventure of these exploits have given to you right much
honor and worship, whereof I have right great joy: for each person ought to be
glad and rejoice in the well doing of another, and especially of a noble man,
and principally such a one as labors to excel in valiantness, every
person is holden and bound to counsel him unto his worship and weal.
Wherefore, since it is so that ye endeavor your self from day to day, and
seek the perils of the sea, and the dangers of the earth, to the end for to
overcome them: I advertise you, that in Egypt is a tyrant that sacrifices al
strangers that come into his country, without reserving noble man or base. So
then me seems, if fortune will help for to go and conquer him, that ye
^^^uld get great honor and worship to you and yours, and health and profit
to all the nations of the world.

Madame, answered Hercules, I am not, nor never shall be in all my life, of
such recommendation as ye say and report: notwithstanding, for as much as I
have great desire for to do works that may be to the pleasure of the people,
and for their health and weal, I promise you, and swear, that to morrow
without any other delay, I will put me in deuoir on the way, for to go into
Egypt. And I will never return again into my Country, until the time that I
have seen the tyrant. And if he lay or put hand on me, for to sacrifice me, I
have intention, that he shall not do it without strokes. Juno hearing the
enterprise of Hercules, had in her heart passing great joy. That day they
passed in many conferences. Hercules took the skins of the Lions and
delivered a^^ labors to excel in valor, every person is bound to counsel
him to his honor and welfare. Wherefore, since it is so, that ye endeavor your
self from day to day, and seek perils of the Sea, and dangers of the earth, to
overcome them: I advertise you, that in Egypt is a Tyrant, that sacrifizeth all
strangers that come into his Country without reserving Noble or base So (I
think) if Fortune be still favorable to you, you shall gain great honor to
your self, and profit to all the Nations of the world.

Madam, answered Hercules, I am not nor never in all my life, shall attain to
such an e^^ceding height of honor as ye report: notwithstanding, forasmuch as
I have great desire to perform adventures to the benefit of all Nations, that
they shall concern. I promise you, and swear, that to morrow without further
delay, I will make all things in readiness, to go into Egypt And I will never
return again into my Country, until the time that I have seen the Tyrant. If
he lay hand on me, to sacrifice me, I have intention he shall not without
great strokes. Juno hearing the enterprise of Hercules, rejoiced in her heart
exceedingly. That day they passed in many confer^nces* Hercules took the skins
of the Lions, and deliver^^

them to a certain workman, to make of them a garment in manner of Armor, to
Arm him withal. On the morrow he took leave of his Stepmother, and departed
from Creet, so journeyed on the way with Philotes, (without finding any
adventure, worthy the remembrance) on a day he came to the Gate of the City
Memphis, in Egypt, where the Tyrant Busire held his residence.

When Hercules was come nigh unto the Gate, he took his Club that Philotes
bare, and entered himself into the City. He had not been long there, nor far
gone, but Busire which was advertised of his coming, came against him with his
accomplices, without speaking of any word, ran upon him. Hercules was well
appointed, for he knew the Tyrant by his gesture, and the sign that was told
him: he lifted up his Club when he saw him come and as the Tyrant would have
smitten him with his Sword, without any word speaking, he stroke the Tyrant on
the right side so vehemently, that not only he feld him to the earth, but also
all the ribs of his body were broken, that he could ne^^ releeve himself after.
The Egyptians seeing Busire overthrown some ran to releeve him, and the rest
assailed Hercules. Then was all the City in an uprore. Hercules was joyful he
had overthrown the Tyrant, and began to make the Egyptians to know his Club.
He slew many of them, and the remnant he made to fly. His strokes were so
forcible, that the Accomplices of Busire that were accustomed to shed man's blood,
had their blood shed abroad, and could not remedy their mis chance, which was
so great, that Hercules filled all the place with dead bodies. And after a long
battle, he found himself alone, for there was no man so hardy that durst be
seen before him. The people and the Commonalty of the Egyptians, minded not
the rescue of their King. When they saw him beaten, they all hated him, and
beheld the Battle from far by very great routs. When Hercules had then labored
so much, that he found no man to fight with him, he set down his Club, and
addressed him unto a great company of Egyptians that stood there, and assured
them, he would do nothing unto them, and asked what people they were that had
assailed him? They answered him kneeling on their knees, they were Man-slayers,
Hang-men, and people of vicious and evil life: that their King, which he had
first beaten down, was the worst of them all, and had purposed to put him to
death as a stranger, to make Sacrifice unto the Gods. And they prayed him to
Sacrifice their said King.

Hercules granting their petition, accorded it unto the people: and took this
cursed Tyrant Busire, and bore him upon his shoulders, unto the Temple, which
the Egyptians showed him. The false Tyrant cried after help terribly: but his
cry availed him not. The Egyptians cried unto Hercules, sacrifice, sacrifice
him. When Hercules came into the Temple, he sacrificed him, after he had showed
him his cursed and evil life. And then when the fire was put unto the
Sacrifice, it began to rain, and the great drought began to fail: Whereof the
Egyptians were so joyful, that none could express. They did sing praises unto
Hercules, and brought him and Philotes unto the Palace, and constituted
Hercules King over them: but he refused: and ordained Judges to govern them.
Then he returned unto Queen Juno, who had great sorrow, and to King Creon who
had great joy at the rehearsal of his good Fortune.

CHAP. III. How Hercules espoused Megara: and how he was made knight in Thebes.
IN like wise as the young Vine, by the labor and industry of the labourer,
grows in height, and his boughs spread abroad full of fruit: so Hercules, by
virtue laboring virtuously, grew in verdure of well doing, and in fruit of
nobleness: his works, his boughs, his branches then began to sproute
abroad, and to mount and spread from Realm to Realm. The secret conspiracies
of Juno, and her cursed enuyes might not hurt, nor minish the virtue of
Hercules. The more that she thought to put down and hurt him, she more she
was cause of his exaltation. As he was puissant and strong of body he was yet
more strong of virtue, for virtue was set in him, as the precious stone is in
gold, and as the sweet smell as in the flower, and as the ray of the Sun
beam is in the Sun: he was beloved of Kings, of Princes, of Ladies, of
Gentlewomen, of Nobles, and of base folk: in especially Megara the daughter of
King Creon loved him. And verily she was not deceived: for Hercules loved her
also, and was never hurt but he thought on her. Yet they durst none of them
speak to other of this matter: they were ashamed to discover that, whereby
they had hope to have honor and worship. They beheld each other, and often they
bewailed, and complained to themselves, and desired the day that they might
take each other in marriage.

And so much they wished after that day, that at the last it came. For on a
morning tide, as Hercules was gone unto the wood, for to take a wild beast, he
remembered him of his Lady, and began to speak and say to himself softly.
Shall I be always in pain? Shall mine heart never be eased, but always
languishing in love? I see one and other in great joy with their loves and
ladies, and I wot never how to come to the point of one only, that I have
chosen above all other, and for to atchieue my purpose I wot not how to
begin. I dare not speak to her, nor I have not assayed if she would
condiscende. Shall I speak to her I wot not well? If I speak to her, and she
refuse me, I shall fall in despair. I shall die for sorrow of melancholy and
displeasure, I shall never dare come after in any noble assembly a foot. Alas,
what pain? all considered, a time must come that I speak to her. If all her
friends were of one accord, for to give her to me in marriage, and she were
not content and pleased, all were lost. The most ieopardie is, to have her good
will and grace, for without her grace I may naught do. Then it is of
necessity, that I seek and require, if I may have her good will, since it is
so: for if I sleep thus and speak not, I shall never atchieue nor come to my
purpose.

Hercules resolute in his purpose, surprised and enflamed with great desire of
love, came from the wood, and abandoned the wild beast, and gave it over, for
to come unto Megara, thinking how, and by what words he might come and show
unto her that which lay on his heart. He went then so far, that he came unto
the garden of the palace, where he was with many ladies and gentle women. He
made to them reverence, until he espied the time that he might speak to
Megara, and he waxed so pensife that it is marvel: he entermitted nothing to
confer with the Ladies, but therewith he drew him apart into the garden.
When the Ladies beheld him so pensife, diverse of them came to him, and talked
with him to put him from his thoughts and pensifenesse, but they could not, and
at last Megara came to him. As soon as Hercules saw her come to him, he
began to sigh, and came against her. And she said to him, Hercules, why are
ye so pensive, put away from you such melancholy, and tell me of your news I
pray you? Lady (answered Hercules) I thank you of your good visitation, and
since it pleases you to hear of my tidings, and to know them, I will say to
you a part. First I tell you, that the cause that I am brought and put in the
abisme or swallowe of pensiveness and sighs that is this day come unto me, is
by beholding of you: for as I went to the wood to hunt, the remembrance of your
right noble beauty, continually being in mine imagination, came into me, and
made me enter into a secret perplexity, that is to wit, whether I should always
live vnguerdoned, and unrewarded of love, and also (if I durst say so to you) I
have set my heart and love wholly on you. Madame this perplexity was great, but
in the end I concluded to come unto you, for to know the conclusion of my
fortune, whether it be death or life. Being in this deliberation (thinking how
I might speed with you) and staying in this point and doubtfulnesse, your
coming has put me out of a right great thought and pensiveness, for I wist
not better how to come to the point for to speak to you a part) as I may now
do) then for to apply the matter in time, for I say to you for truth, that
since the time of my Olympiade, I have desired you night and day, and at that
time I set my heart on your service, resolving to love you for ever. Madame, I
know and wot well, that I have enterprised a thing that I am unfit and not
worthy of. This notwithstanding, I abide your mercy, and require you, that
it may please you to receive me into your grace, in such wise, that shortly I
may see the day of our marryage, etc.

When Megara understood the words of her love Hercules, she in heart rejoiced
with great solace, and much joy, notwithstanding she was abashed, and all
shamefast she answered thus. Alas Hercules, by what fortune find I me in the
grace of so gentle a man as ye he? Your excessive prowess, your glorious
labors, your resplendant virtues be so much of value, that ye are worthy to
have to wife the flower of Ladies and the choice. With these words the
gentlewomen came there unto them, to bear their conferences of love. And said
unto Megara, that it was time for to withdraw her for to dine. Megara,
sorrowful of hasty departing, and that she had no more space to reason with
her love, and that she might not atchieue her purpose, by constraint took leave
of Hercules, and went into the hall, al full fed with love, and Hercules abode
in the garden, glad and joyous of the sweet enswere yt he had received.

When the Ladies then had left Hercules in the garden, as soon as they were
gone, Hercules assembled Euristeus and Amphitrion, and said to them, that he
had great desire and will to be married, and prayed them that they would go to
king Creon, to know if he would give him his daughter Megara. They spoke to
king Creon of this marriage: the king heard them speak right gladly, for the
matter pleased him, and answered that he might no where better bestow his
daughter, then to the most noble man of the world Hercules, whom he loved as
his own son, which was so valiant and so noble, and had no fellow like unto
him: and that he was content to give to him his daughter, and all with her that
he would demand. Euristeus and Amphitrion thanked the King of his courteous
answer. Megara and Hercules were sent for: the king made them to troth-plyte
each other, with great joy of both parties. After this process of time, the
day of the espousals and marriage was celebrated with glory, triumph, honor
and joy. What shall I say? they lay together without more adoo, and lived
together right honestly.

Anon after the solemnity of this marriage, Hercules came to King Creon, and
prayed him that he would dub and make him knight, for as much as they of the
realm of Iconie were come unto him, and had chosen him for to be king of their
city, for his good renoume. The king Creon (joyous of that, that he was chosen
for to be king of Iconie) answered, that he would accomplish his desire: but
he would that this should be done at a certain day assigned: saying, that
then he would make a right noble feast, where men should ioust and turnoy, and
that he would cause to come thither all the Kings and the Princes of Greece.
Hercules accorded and agreed to the counsel of the King, and then the King
sent his messengers unto all the Kings of Greece, and prayed them to he at the
chivalry and dubbing knight of a noble man, that shall hold a solemn sport at
a day, named and set, for to answer all them that shall come to the ioustes.
The renown of this foresaid feast was anon borne and known unto all the
reigns of Greece: the provision and ordinance was great in Thebes, one and
other disposed them for to be there* the time passed, and the day came, many a
king and knight was come at that time to Thebes. Theseus and Jason the son of
King Eson, were there amongst all other. The kings made a great stir, and
great pompous shows about ten of the clock before noone. The king Creon went
into the place that was ordained, arrayed, and ready for the iousts. At a corner
in the same place there was a tent. In this tent was Hercules all alone. That
same time the Ladies and gentlewomen went and mounted upon the Scaffolds: the
iousters came into the place, no man knew nor wist not, who was this new
knight. What shall I say? When the king Creon saw that the knights were come
in on all sides, and that the ladies were gone upon the scaffoldes, he sent
for Hercules and made him knight after their statutes. And then Hercules
mounted upon his horse, took his Spear and his Sheeld, and challenged them
that were there, to the end that each man should do his deuoyr. And then one
and other that desired to have worship, took their spears, and ran against
Hercules, and began a iousting that was right hot and sharp. Their spears
were strong and brake not easily, but they met often times, and some were
overthrown and smitten down off their horses. They that might not ioust
against Hercules, assayed each other, like to like. Jason and Theseus iousted
often times against Hercules, and Pirothus son of king Ixion in like wise. All
they that I name, bare themselves right valiantly. Notwithstanding, above all
other, Hercules abode all men, and no man might abide his strokes, but he bare
them all down except Jason, which encountered him diverse times, and gave him
many great strokes. Hercules bare down Theseus to the earth, and Pyrothus, and
well near fifty strong knights. He did show so much valor, that no man abode
in the place but Jason and he. And then he left and ceased the ioustes, for the
valiancie that Hercules found in Jason, and ever after he had a special love
to him, and took acquaintance of him, and feasted him, and made him great
cheer.

At the end of this iousting, knights, ladies, and gentlewomen went unto the
palace. There was Hercules made king of Iconie. The feast was great and rich,
more then I can rehearse: the strangers were greatly feasted, and highly
thanked in common. What shall I make long process? When all the feast was
passed, with honor and glory of Hercules, and there was no more to do,
whereof any memory is for to speak of, Pirothus prayed al them that were
there to be at his wedding in Thessalonique, at a certain day named. Each man
promised him to go thither, and be thereat. Every man took leave of Hercules
when time was come of departing, and each man returned into his Country and
place: and they could not enough marvel of the glory abounding, and likely to
abound, flourish and fructify in Hercules, which was very courteous and
humble, and was not proud for the grace that he had in temporal honor and
renown. He was so virtuous, that he was not the more high minded therefore, nor
enhaunced himself, but the more meeked and submitted himself.

CHAP. III. How the Centaures ravished Hypodamia at the wedding of Pirothus:
and how Hercules recovered her again, and vanquished in battle the Centaures.
FOr to continue our matter, then when Hercules saw approach the day of the
wedding of Pyrothus, he disposed him to go thither. By space of time he went
forth on his way, and took Philotes with him: and at all adventure took with
him his armor of the skin of the lion. When Megara saw him depart, she was sore
troubled for his departing. And the more for that, that he took his armor
with him: for she thought, if Hercules had heard speak of any great exploit,
he would go thither, and endeavor himself to assay himself against it. With
great sighs she looked after him, as far as she might, praying to the
gods, that they would bring him shortly again. Hercules and Philotes went
forth into the Country, and as much as they might they hasted so their iourny,
that they came to Thessalonicque, where they were received with great joy of
Pyrothus, and of his friends. They found there a right great assembly of noble
men, Ladies and Gentlewomen. Theseus and Jason were there. The friends of Jason
would that Jason should be made knight. And for to do that, they presented
him to Hercules, which gave him the order of knighthood. And Hercules said,
that he had seen in him a good beginning of a noble man, and if he may live,
he shall attain one day to things right high and noble. Among other things the
day of wedding came, the city was all full of nobles, and the Centaures were
there: they were an C. Giants armed, that ran as the wind, which the king Ixion
had got him in Thessaly, of who^ some dwelled in Molose, and the other in
Aphyte a City of Epyre, whereof was Queen Hypodamia the Lady and bride of
the wedding. There were many kings and princes, of whom I have not the names.
The queen Hypodamia and Pyrothus were wedded together after their law. When
the time of the dinner was come, they set the Lady in the hall, where was made
a general feast. At this feast all the comers were amply served with all
manner of good wines, and good meats: in especial the Centaures made passing
good cheer, and drunk so much of the strong wines, that the principal
captain of all named Eurycus, and some of the other, had words together, and
troubled the feast. In this trouble they sought together, and cast each on
other pots, platters, wines and meats, so terribly, that many of them were
hurt and dead. Then anon was the hall full of noise. Euricus and fifty of his
giants issued out of the prease, and went to fetch their hardesse or armor.
When they were armed, they entered into the hall, and not content with the
trouble that they had made (albeit that Hercules and the other endeavored to
appease them that slew each other) they took the queen Hypodamia, and bare
her out, and ravished her, and fled away with her. When the Ladies saw this
great outrage, they cried out all afraid. The affraie was so great, that
Hercules, Jason, Pyrothus and Theseus, ran unto them, and when they knew that
the Centaures had ravished the Lady, at few words they went and armed them
anon.

Hercules did on the skin of the Lion, and took his sword, his bow, and his
arrows, and then went after the giants without abiding for any other company
or person. The giants were withdrawn under a tree, and there they trained them
in battle, as they that wist well and surely, that the first that should come
to them, should be Hercules. They hated Hercules secretly, and had envy at his
glory. They swore all the death of Hercules: and then when they were in these
terms and speeches, Euricus espied from far Hercules, and showed him to his
company. Hercules was all alone, and came not a pace softly as a man, but he
came running as nimbly and swiftly, as the heart runs in the valley, and it
seemed that he flewe in the air. The swiftness of Hercules abashed nor
afraid not the Centaures: they were about four score, and they were all of
great courages: they took then their Spears, Polaxes, Swords and other
weapons of war, and some of the strongest of them were against Hercules: on
the other side, as soon as Hercules approached so nigh as he might shoot at
them, he bent his bow, and with an arrow he s^^o^e a Centaure named Grineus, in
such wise that the arrow pierced the head, entering by the visage, and nailed
and fastened his head unto a tree that stood behind him. With the second arrow
he smote another Giant, named Petreus, in the breast through the armor, that
it went through his body. With the third he hurt Dorillas, a terrible Giant,
and nailed his hand unto his face, and the arrowe entered with so great might
(as before is said) and made the hand to be fastened to his face: of which
stroke he was dead.

He shot many mo arrows then, as long as he had any: and he shot none,
but with it he hurt or slew one of the Giants. When his shot was failed, the
Giants, being sore grieved for that they had seen their fellows die by the
shot and strong hand of Hercules* they cried upon Hercules, and enuyroned
him on all sides, Sisacus, Pheotones, Nessus, Mincus, Stilo, Lodeuin, and
Piseon, were the first that smote upon Hercules with their Swoordes. Hercules
took his Sword, and came against Pheotones, that had a great Axe, so great
that it was a man's burden. Pheotones anon lift up his great Axe, and thought
to have smitten a mighty stroke upon Hercules. But Hercules that knew enough
of the war, turned him from the stroke, and so the great Axe fell down to
the ground. And then suddenly Hercules caught that great axe, and plucked it
out of his hands, and forthwith gave him a stroke withal, so great that he
smote of his right arm with the shoulder. etc.

Such was the beginning of the battle of Hercules, and of the Centaures.
Cilarus smote then Hercules behind, with all his might. Piseon and Ledeuin
smote him also both at one time: notwithstanding Hercules was not once astonished
therewith, but running to Cilarus, he gave him a stroke with the axe so lustily
on his helm, that it entered into his body, so that he overthrew the giant to
the earth, and he served in likewise Piseon and Ledeuin. Jason and Theseus put
them then in the battle, and well proved their youth, at their coming. For
to give the other heart and courage, Hercules thrusted into the greatest prease
of the giants, and so wrought with the axe, that they cursed Pheotones that had
brought them thither, and all them that had gone about this matter. In beating
and smiting down all before them, Hercules began then to seek Hypodamia, and
found her al bewept, right beside and nighe Eurycus. Then he spoke to Euricus.
and said to him: thou evil glutton thou have this day troubled the feast, and
stolen the Lady of my freende Pirothus, and now anon I will trouble thy spirit:
with this word he discharged his axe, and smote with-al Eurycus, in such wise
on ye head, that he fell down dead, unto the great grief and amasing of the
other giants: For, in beholding the are dyed with the blood of Curyens their
captain, they were al abashed. Then began Hercules to smite more and more upon
the giants: there was none then so resolute, but he was affraide: nor none so
hardy, but he began to hide himself, and tremble for fear. His strokes were
not to be born, but he put his enemies out of array, and unto flight. Finally,
with the help of Jason, of Theseus, and of Pirothus, that were marvelous
valiant, they vanquished and chased them unto a river, where twelve of them
saved themselves in passing and swimming over, and all the remnaunt of them
were persecuted unto the death, save only Lyncus that Hercules held prisoner,
for as much as at the discomfiture, he prayed him of mercy, and yielded him
unto him. Thus were the Centaures destroyed, more by the strength and hand of
Hercules, then by any other. When Hercules had so fought that there were no mo
of the Centaures upon the place, he and his fellows returned unto Hypodamia,
and brought her again unto the City with great tryumphe. What shall I say?
the Ladies recovered joy by the recoueraunce of Hypodamia, and renewed and
began again the feast, that dured afterward eight days right great and
sumptuous. etc

CHAP. V. How Pluto ravished Proserpina: and how Orpheus went for her into
hell: and how the queen Ceres came unto the wedding of Pirothus: and how
Theseus and Pirothus fought with Cerberus, porter of the said hell. etc.
IN this time, that is to wit a little before the wedding of Pyrothus, as Pluto
(the king of Molose, son of Saturn, and brother of Jupiter.) sailed and went
by sea, seeking his adventures, so long he sailed that he arrived in Sicill,
and he found there nigh by the waters side a right great assembly of
Sicyliens that hallowed the feast of their gods. When Pluto saw this feast, he
did arm twenty of his company under their robes or garments, and went in
this manner for to see the feast, for to wit if he might find any booty. This
Pluto was the greatest thief, and the most lecherous man in all the world, and
had with him a Giant named Cerberus, enough like unto Pluto of conditions and
of courage, but he was much more stronger and more puissant of body. All the
other were great as giants, and had learned nothing else but for to practice
harm and mischief, and could none otherwise do. When then the Sicilians saw
Pluto come and his fellows, they supposed that it had been some of their
neighbors that came for to see their plays and sports, for as much as they
came clothed in their garments, and saw none of their armor nor harneis. And
they enforced them to sing and dance. But Certes their songs and their daunces
were not continuing nor dured long: for in coming unto them there, the king
Pluto cast his eyes aside, and saw there the Queen of that country that
beheld the feast: and by her, her daughter that made a garland of flowers. The
mother was named Ceres and the daughter was called Proserpina, and was married
unto a noble man, named Orpheus, that sat beside her and played on the Harp.
This Proserpina was passing marvelous fair. Anon as Pluto had seen her he
desired and coueted her, and advertised his folk secretlye of her, and after
came nigh unto her, that he set hands on her, and laid her on his back and
bare her away.

When Orpheus and Ceres saw Proserpina so taken away they cried out piteously
and lamentably unto Pluto. With this cry, the Sicilians left their feast, and
ran after Pluto in great number, men and women, hoping to have reskewed
Proserpina. But when Cerberus and his accomplices saw the uproar, they drew out
their swords, and showed their arms and smote upon them that approached them,
and sleaing them abundantly, they retired, and went unto the port Maugre the
Ciciliens and Orpheus. They guided Pluto into his ship, and after they entered,
and then disancred and carried away Proserpina. The Cicilians were then
dispurueied of arms. They could not withstand the taking away of Proserpina.
At the departing from the port was made the most sharp lamentation and
sorrow that could be. Proserpina wept sore on the one side piteouslye, and
cried right high and loud. Ceres on the other side, with the Cicilians, made
no scarcity of tears, and Orpheus failed not to furnishe his tears with
deep sighs, for he loved Proserpina, and she loved him also. At their
departing, their hearts were brought to a hard and grievous distress, with so
great anguish that Proserpina fell down in a sound: and Orpheus was so
ravished with anger, that he returned unto his Palace, when he had lost the
sight of Proserpina, and held him close in his chamber, with out speech two
days.

At the end of two days Ceres (...) dis^e Orph^^ that would neither eat nor
drink (...) said in him, that (...) knew well the rauishour of her ^^^^der
that it was Pluto the king of Molose, and they (...) a part of Thessaly in a
low and base Citt^^ (...) ^^ied H^ll for as much as in this I Will, King (...)
accomplices old so much harm and evil, that (...) compared unto d^^ is, and
their city was named He^^ (...) Orpheus understood that Proserpina was in
he^^ he (...) ^^ile hope in himself, and eat and drank, and made (...) that
he would never rest in place unto the time that (...) bin in Hell, for to see
Proserpina.

After that he had eaten, he sent for his mariners, and bad them to make ready
a ship. When the ship was furnished with all that it behooved, (after the lead^
and cong^e taken of the Queen Ceres) in habi^ (...) he entered alone into his
ship with his harp, and (...) mariners to sail forth on the sea, in such
^^se that he arrived at one of the ports of Thessalie. Orpheus went there a
land, and after he commanded his Mariners, that they should abide him in the
same place, until a certain time that he named. After, he departed and went
from country to country, so long for to dispatch his matter, that he came to
the gate of hell which Cerberus kept, and there he began to play on his
harp right sweetly and melodiously.

When Cerberus heard the sound of the harp, h^^ lifted up his head on high,
and came out of the gate for to know who was he that played so melodiouslye?
and by the sound of the harp he found Orpheus: and thinking that Pluto would
gladly hear him: (for to rejoice Proserpina that always wept) he made him enter
into the city, and brought him before the King. Orpheus then began to play
again on his harp. When the King Pluto had heard him, he took therein good
pleasure, and so did al they that were there by him. Then Pluto sent for to
seek Proserpina. When she was come, and heard him play with his harp, by his
play she knew well that it was her husband: then she was sore abashed, and
whereas she had sore wept before, she kept as much more after. Pluto was sort
for the sorrow that Proserpina made, and said to Orphe^s. if he could so play
with his harp that the lady should cease her weeping, he would give him what
he would ask of him. Orpheus promised and assured him that he would do it.
And Pluto swear to him, that he would hold and keep his promise if he so did.
And then Orpheus set and tuned his harp, and played diverse songs so
sweetly, that the infernal Ceberus, and many other fell asleep: and also
Proserpina, by the mean of certain tokens and signs that Orpheus made with
his eyes, ceased of her weeping.

When Pluto saw Proserpina so ceasing her weeping, he was passing joyous: he
awoke then Cerberus and the other that slept: after he spoke to Orpheus and
said to him, that he had so well harped, that no man could do better: and that
he would that he should demand something, and he would give it him without any
fail. Orpheus hearing the words of Pluto, had great perplexity in himself,
for to knew what thing he might demand: in the end he said to him. Sir, I am
Orpheus the husband of this lady, and for her love I have enterprised to come
hither in this case now: I pray and require you, that ye will give and render
her again to me, that I may bring her again unto her mother that dies for
sorrow. When Pluto had heard the request that Orpheus had made, he was all
amazed at the hardiness that Orpheus had showed: how be it, he answered to
him. Orpheus ye have demanded of me Proserpina: she is the Lady that I most
love of all the world. Nevertheless, for to accomplish the promise that I have
made to you, take her, upon condition that ye bring her out of this City,
without looking or beholding after or behind you: and if it happen that ye
once look behind you, ye shall loose her. At this answer Orpheus was
content, and it seemed to him that his wife was as good as recovered or woonne,
he and Proserpina passed over that night in good hope. When the morning was
come, Pluto delivered Proserpina to Orpheus, on condition before rehearsed.
Orp^^ and Proserpina took leave of king Pluto, and than^^ (...) after they
went on their way, but he had not gone half way to the gate, when Orpheus
privily looked behind him, for to see if any man followed him, and then he
found at his heels Cerberus, that took Proserpina away from him, and yielded
and delivered her again unto the king.

Orpheus seeing that by his unhappiness he had lost his wife, began to curse
the day that he was borne, and came after, and followed Proserpina, and began
again to harp, and to offer great gifts, for to recover her again, but it
was said to him for conclusion, that he should never have her again: and
also, that if he had used the feats of arms, as he had the strings of the
harp, he should have died. With this conclusion Orpheus departed from hell
full of sorrow and anguish, and returned into Sicill, unto the queen Ceres,
telling to her his adventure. The queen being acertained that her daughter was
in hell, as she that was advertised, that in Thessaly should be hallowed the
feast of the wedding of Pyrothus, and that there were many knights, of great
name, she went to the sea, and came fitly to Thessalonica, while the feast yet
endured. In approaching the city, on an after noone as Pyrothus and Theseus
were in the field they mether. Her army w s great. The seus and Pirothus
saluted her, and she saluted and greeted them again, and after asked them the
estate of the feast of the wedding. They told, and recounted her all. After
she demanded of them, if there were there no knights of great name, and high
enterprises? when they understood that she enquired so far: they would know
what she was, and demanded her name? I am (said she) the Lady Ceres of
Sicill. Then spoke Theseus and said: Madame, ye be welcome: for what occasion
demand you, if in the feast be any knights of enterprise? I can well say to
you, that there be truly: but notwithstanding I do wish you, I pray you, and
also require, that ye tell and declare unto us the cause why ye have so
demanded. etc.

Sir (said the Lady) since it pleases you to enquire of mine estate so far:
know ye for certain, that I have made to you my demand, for as much as
Pluto the King of Hell has ravished my daughter Proserpina, by which I am hurt
unto the death: and I would feign find some knight that of his courtesy
would imploye him for to get her again, and yield her to me, and for to
assail the cursed tyrant: who I pray the gods may be damned and confounded
everlastingly for his demerits. Wherefore I pray you, if ye know any that will
to me be merciful, that it please you for charity to direct me unto him.
Madame (answered Theseus) be ye no more inquisitiue to find such a knight as
ye seek: for in the favor of all Ladies I will be your knight in this work,
and promise you upon mine honor, that I will transporte me into hell. And the
king Pluto shall never have peace with me unto the time that he has restored
your daughter.

When Pyrothus heard the enterprise of Theseus, he began to break of his
words, and said to him. My brother, what think you to do, when ye enterprise
for to go into hell? ye know not the bounds nor the situation of that place.
Hell stands behind the inner sea between mountains and rocks, so high
that the Citizens that dwell therein, be in continual darkness and shadow:
and the Entry is so difficult that it is impossible to come within the City,
unless the porter consent: For here-be-foretime, many have gone thither, that
be there left and abiding: there goes no man thither that ever comes again.
It is right an hell, and each man names it hell, as well for the situation
thereof in so dark and vnlightsome a place: as for the inhumanytie and
terriblenes of the inhabitants that wait to do evil and displeasure to all
the world. Theseus answered unto Pyrothus, and said: There is nothing
impossible unto a valiant heart.

The King Pluto is cruel and strong, his folk and people tyrannous. His
City stands in a Country enuyroned with mortal perils. Notwithstanding,
certes the doubt and fear of these things, shall never ^aunt nor withdraw my
courage, but that I will do my deuoir to atchiue this enterprise, and will
perform my promise, or will have reproach of all manner of Knights. A man
to kpeepe his own honor and worship ought not to doubt any peril what
soever it should be. etc.

When Pyrothus had heard the noble answer of Theseus, he allowed it greatly,
and said to him, that his words were to him right pleasing and so acceptable,
that he would hold him company in this adventure. The Queen Ceres thanked the
two Knights: so they brought her into the City and into the palace. She was
there received and feasted as it apperteined. The stealing away of her daughter
was told, and the enterprise of the two Knights. By the report of this
adventure, and with the enterprise that Theseus and Pyrothus had made, all
the feast was troubled again on a new. Among all other Hypodamia considering
that her husband that was so newlye married unto her would go in this
perilous voyage of hell, her heart began to give out weeping of tears, and
might receive no solace nor comfort unto her eyes. What shall I say? the feast
ended in great sorrow. Jason and Hercules would gladly have gone with Theseus
and Pyrothus, and spoke thereof to them, but they would not suffer them. Then
departed Hercules and entered into a ship, as if he would have gone into his
country. Each man in like wise departed, and Theseus and Pyrothus took their
way for to go unto hell. And then about their departing, whereof Hercules was
advertised, Hercules made for to direct his ship unto the marches of hell, and
there went a land alone, concluding in himself that he would go after Pyrothus
and Theseus his loyal and true fellows, and betook to Philotes the charge
for to bring Lincus unto Thebes, and for to put him there in prison until his
returning and coming again. After, he departed, and Philotes shipped in the
sea, where he had a dolorous adventure, as shall be said hereafter. But at
this time I must cease speaking of that matter, and will recount of Hercules,
how he went into hell.

CHAP. VI. How Hercules found Pyrothus dead at the gates of hell, and Theseus
in danger: and how Hercules vanquished Cerberus: and how he conquered
Proserpina from Pluto, etc.
IN this place it ought to be spoken, that when Theseus and Pyrothus were
departed from Thessalonica, for to go and assaie if they might recover the
fair Proserpina, they did so much travail, that by their diligence in short
time they arrived in the vallie where was Proserpina, in the vallie full of
sin and cursednesse. Pyrothus that knew the country, found the direct way
that went to the City, and entered first therein. This way was so strait, that
there might no man but one alone go neither on the right side, nor on the left
side, the rocks were so high, that no man might go on neither side. When they
had passed this way, they found a rock carved and cut into stayres or grees,
made and hewed out with chysels. And then they saw low beneath, Hell, as a
City strong, enuyroned with waters that fell down impetouslye and fearfully
from the rocks, and made a terrible noise and roaring: for they fell from right
high into a low swalowe or abysme in the earth. This City was all enclosed
with mountains. For to speak properly, it was a right Hell, and it had no
more but one entry and one gate: then for to come down to the gate, Pyrothus
and Theseus descended down by the degrees made in the rock. Then in the
desceding sodaynlye they saw spring from the gate a great giant out of
measure, that had an head meruailously misshapen, fierce black and vglye. He
had his nose high and and wide, his Chin long, his teethe great as a horse
teethe, his eyes great like unto an ox, his ears hanging like an hounde, his
shoulders large and broad, his bellye swolen and great bolned, his legs and
his thighs were passing stronglye bened and mighty. This terrible Giant was
Cerberus, whereof is touched and rehearsed before.

The Poets named him the hounde with three heads, considering his right
grievous and unhappy living, which is compared and likened unto three singular
vices: that is to weete, to pride, to auaryce, and luxurye, or leachery. By
pride, he gloryfied himself, and enhaunced him above all the men in the world
with his force and strength, for he was so strong that no man might withstand
him. By avarice and Couetise, he had an apetyte insatiable for to gather
to-gither treasours, and took and bare away all that he might have or could
find. By luxury, there was no man living of more foul life then he was: for
he had never done other thing in all his life then for to defile and ravish
women and maidens, ladies and gentlewomen, and so by good right the poets named
him an hound with three heads, for he was soul as an hound that lives in
multiplication of sins, and takes therein his felicity. O grievous
felicity? When Theseus and Pirothus had espied this enemy Cerberus come unto
them all armed, making the wheel in marching proudly unto them, Pirothus said
to Theseus. My brother, behold what enemy this is: he that puts him in
such perils for for the love of ladies, sets but little by his life. It
behooves us now to live or die, let us now atchieue ioyously our enterprise.
And to the end that ye may not think but that I had lever die then to have
reproach, I will be the first that shall begin the battle. Theseus had no
space nor leisure to answer, for Cerberus came to them, and called to them,
saying: What seek these fellows in hell? We come (said Theseus) for to seek
Proserpina, whom Pluto has taken away from the Queen Ceres. We will never
return into our Country, unto the time we bring her with us. Truly (answered
Cerberus) if ye will return into your Country, ye shall render and yield
again Proserpina, but I will forbid you the return. And this day I will
present unto you Proserpina, my Sword dyed in your blood. And here you shall
be buried: ye shall never see Proserpina, nor come no nearer then ye be now.
With these words he lifted up his Sword, and gave so great a stroke to
Theseus upon his Shield, that he did bear away thereof an half quarter, etc.

When Pirothus saw his fellow smitten, he took his sword, and smote Cerberus
on the one side. Theseus smote him on the other side, and they gave him two
right great strokes, so great that they made Cerberus to be chafed so sore,
that he began the battle so vnmeasurably, that he all to frushed and brake
their shields, and their harness, and also made his sword to be dyed with
their noble blood, as he had before said. The battle was hard and mortal at
the beginning. Theseus and Pirothus received many wounds by eager strokes,
their arms were all to hewn and broken. The battle endured long, and
Pirothus did right well behave himself: but Cerberus smote upon him so
vnmeasurably, that after many wounds given to him, he all to brake his helm,
and cleaued his head in two pieces unto the stomach, etc.

When Theseus saw his fellow die, he stroke with his sword in great anger, and
smote Cerberus so fiercely that he made him stagger, and go back two paces.
Cerberus would have avenged him of this stroke, and smote upon Theseus a
stroke, by so great force, that if the noble knight had not turned back,
Cerberus had borne and smitten him unto the earth. This stroke of Cerberus fell
upon the earth, and entered therein, and Theseus smote again upon his enemy,
which had the heart so great, that he began to rore as an old Lion, and smote
Theseus so fiercely with his sword, that he all to brake his sheelde, and all
to frushed his helm, that he was all astonished at the stroke. But always
Theseus abode in his place: and then Cerberus would have brought him unto
destruction, following the evil adventure of Pirothus, if that fortune had not
brought thither Hercules, which came so fitly to reskew, that Theseus knew not
else how to save him.

At this point when that Theseus was so astonished, Hercules that was departed
from the sea (as is said) came to stayres that were cut and made in the Rock,
and beholding Theseus all covered with blood, and Pyrothus dead, he began to
descend down, crying to Theseus that he should not be afeard nor take no
dread. When Cerberus saw and heard Hercules, he began to cry again and
rore, and assailed eagerly, for to be quite of him. Theseus might no more,
howbeeit that he was recomfortes with the voice of Hercules, but began to run
now here and now there before Cerberus.

So much then hasted Hercules for to go down the stayres or degrees in entering
the place, and as hastily as he might he cried to Cerberus, and said to him.
Tyrant cruel, let the knight run and come to me: thou have put to death upon
the earth my good freende Pyrothus, whereof I am sorye certain: and if I may I
will take vengeance on thee for him. Cerberus hearing the sentence of
Hercules, ran no more after Theseus, but tarried and beheld Hercules with a
fierce look, and answered to him. So weneth he to avenge his shame that so
believes: I have destroyed thy fellow unto the death, and unless thou
exceed him in skill of arms and in bodylye strength an hundred fold double,
it is folly for thee to come hither: For I am Cerberus the porter of hell, he
that at report of my name all the world trembles.

Thus ending his answer Hercules was at the foot of the rock, and he had his
club upon his shoulder. Cerberus came against him, they smote each other
lustily, and thus they began a right hard battle: and then Theseus that was
passing weary sat at one side by, out of the way, and rested him in drying and
clensing his wounds of the blood yt had come out of the^.

Hercules beheld then on the one side, and seeing Theseus purging and clensing
his profound and great wounds, he began to imploye the force of his
strength and might, by such marvel, that with a stroke that he gave him upon
his helm upon the right side, he made him to bow and stowpe under his club,
and to kneel to the ground with his left knee, and at the second stroke in
pursuing him hastilye, he made his sword to fly out of his hands, and then
he made him to fall on his arms to the ground, and with the third stroke, as
Cerberus weende to have relieved him and gotten his sword, Hercules smote him
upon the body, that he made his head reele against a great stone that was
thereby: after that he sprang upon him, and bound his legs with the
strength and force of his hands, maulgre the giant, and he tare of the helm
of his head, and would have slain him, but Theseus prayed him that he would
not put him to death there, and that he would bring him into Thessalonica, for
to die by the sentence of the Queen Hypodamia, etc.

Cerberus was not then put to death, at the request of Theseus. Notwithstanding
Hercules bound his hands behind his back, and after he made him arise, and
took him by the beard, and made him go upon high on the rock, and there he
laid him down, and bound his feet, his hands, and his neck together, in such
wise that he might not, nor durst not remove. When he had done so, he went
down, and entered into the gate of hell, and leaving there Theseus, he went so
far that he found the palace of King Pluto, and there came into the same
hall where Pluto was with Proserpina. All they that were there, maruayled at
him, when they saw him entered: for they knew nothing of the ouercomming of
Cerberus, as they that left all the charge and keeping of their City to
Cerberus, without having any doubt or suspicion: and also they were so far
from the gate, that they might not hear of the battle, nor knew nothing
what was befall to their porter. Then when Hercules had found Pluto and
Proserpina, he had great joy, and knew by tokens and marks of them there
being, that it was he, he addressed him to Pluto, and said, Pluto, by thy
malice Sicil is now all full of weeping, and of tears, for the rauishing of
this Lady, which thou have not willed to yield, and render again to her
husband Orpheus. I wot not what pleasure thou have therein, but I will say to
thee, that thou shall receive great displeasure, in following the evil
adventure of Cerberus, whom I have vanquished and overcome, etc.

With these words Hercules lift up his club, and gave such a stroke to Pluto,
that he overthrew him to the earth, so that he moved neither hand nor foot.
When he had so beaten Pluto, thinking that he had been dead, he assailed all
them that were there that made any murmur, and put them all to death lightly
with his club in the presence of Proserpina, which trembled for fear. Then he
comforted Proserpina, and said to her, that he was come unto that place for to
deliver her, and for to bring her again to her mother, and that she should
boldly follow him, Proserpina assured and resolved, was comforted with these
words of Hercules, and followed him.

Hercules opened the hall, and went out, and Proserpina with him. After he
addressed him unto the gate of the Palace, and it happened to him that he
found there a right great company of Citizens, that were aduertysed of this
affray, and they ran upon him vnmeasurably pursuing him to death. When Hercules
saw that, he willed Proserpina that she should get her a part. After that he
enhaunsed and lifted up his club, and began to skirmish with his enemies right
virtuously and by so high prowess, that he covered all the entry of the
Palace with these miserable, tyrauntes that he flewe, smote down, and all
forfrushed them, and put to death more then four hundred. Finally he wrought
so that the other fled and gave it over: and then when he saw his evil willers
dead and scattered, he took Proserpina by the hand and lead her out of the
gate of the city.

Theseus (that abode and tarried at this gate, as is said) greatly rejoiced when
he saw Hercules come again with Proserpina: he arose and went against them,
and saluted the lady, and presented to Hercules a chain of a diamond iron
that he had found at the gate, and many prisoners bound, that Cerberus had
bound withal. Hercules unbound the prisoners, and took the Chain, and bound
Cerberus with, all. And when he had buried Pyrothus, he departed from this
hell, and took his way with Proserpina, Theseus and Cerberus, and without
great adoo for to speak of, made so his journey, that he arrived there in
Thessalonica, and delivered Proserpina to the queen Ceres: and to Hypodamia,
he presented Cerberus, rehearsing to her and the Ladies, how he had slain
Pyrothus. Hypodamia had so great sorrow for the death of Pyrothus, that for to
recount and tell, it is not possible. All they of Thessalie likewise made great
mourning and sorrow, and sore bewailed their lord. What shall I say? for to
revenge his death. Hypodamia did cause to bind Cerberus to a stake in the
theater of the City, and there young and old tormented and vexed him three
days long continually, drawing him by the bearde, and spitting at him in the
vysage, and after slew him inhumainly and horriblye. And then when Hercules and
Theseus, Ceres and Proserpina had tarried there a certain space of time in
comforting Hypodamia, they took leave together, and Hercules went accompanied
with Theseus toward the city of Thebes. But of him I will now leave talk and
will come to speak of the adventures of Lyncus

CHAP. VII. How Andromeda delivered Lycaon from his enemies: and how he slew in
battle the king Creon, and took the city of Thebes etc.
WHen Philotes had received into his guard and keeping Lyncus, and Hercules
was gone to the succors of Theseus and Pyrothus, as before is said: the
mariners took their ship, and went to the sea, and sailed all that day
without finding of any adventure. But on ye morrow betime in the morning,
fortune that always turns without any resting, brought to them a great
ship, that drew his course unto the same place that they came from. Of this
ship or galley was Captain and chief, Andromedas King of Calcide. This
Andromedas was Cosen unto Lyncus. When he had espied the ship where Lyncus
was in: he made to row his gallie abroad, and said, that he would know what
people were therein. In approaching the ship of Thebes, Lincus beheld the gallie
of Andromeda, and knew it by the signs and flags that it bare. In this
knowledge Andromeda spoke, and demanded of the mariners, to whom the ship
belonged? Anon as Lincus saw and heard Andromeda, he brake the answer of the
mariners, and cried to him all on high. Andromeda, lo here thy friend Lincus.
If thou give me no succor and help, thou may loose a great friend in me:
for I am a prisoner, and Hercules has sent me into Thebes.

Andromeda hearing Lincus, had great anger, for he loved well Lincus, and
called to them that brought him, and said to them, that they were all come unto
their death. And also that they were under his ward. Philotes and his folk
were furnished with their arms and harness, and made them all ready for to
defend themselves, and with little talk they of Calcide assailed Philotes, and
Philotes and his folk employed them at their defense. The battle was great
and hard, but the ill fortune and mishappe turned in such wise upon the
fellows of Philotes, that they were all slain and dead. Andromeda had two
hundred men in his company, all robbers and thieves on the sea. These thieves
and robbers smote hard and fiercely upon Philotes, and all to hewed his arms,
striking and giving to him many wounds, and he buried many of them in the
sea. But their strong resistance profited them but little, for in the end he
was taken and bound, and Lincus was delivered and unbound from the bonds of
Hercules.

Lincus had great joy of his deliverance: he then thanked his good friend
Andromeda. After this, he told him how he was taken, and how Hercules had
dissipated and destroyed the Centaures. And among other he named many of his
friends that were dead, whereof Andromeda had so great ire and such
displeasure, that he swear incontinently, that he would avenge it. And that as
Hercules had slain his friend, in like wise he would destroy his cousins and
kinsmen. Lincus took great pleasure to understand the oath of Andromeda which
would avenge the death of his kinsmen. He said to him, that Hercules was gone
into hell. And after demanded him how he would avenge him upon the friends of
Hercules? and thereupon they were long thinking. In the end when they had long
taken advice, Andromeda concluded, that he would go assail the City of
Thebes, and if he might get it by assault, he would slay the king Creon and
all them of his blood.

With this conclusion came thither all the galleys of Andromeda which followed,
in whom he had eight thousand fighting men. Andromeda made them to return
toward Thebes, and as hastily as he might he entered into the Realm, wasting
and destroying the country by fire, and by sword so terribly that the tidings
came unto the king Creon. When the king Creon knew the coming of the King
Andromeda, and that without defiance, he made him war, he sounded to arms,
and assembled a great company, and knowing that Andromeda was come into a
certain place, he issued out of Thebes all armed, and brought his people upon
his enemies, that had great joy of of their coming. And then they set them
in order against them, in such wise, that they came to smiting of strokes. The
cry and noise was great on both sides, spears, swords, darts, guisarmes,
arrows and polaxes, were put forth and set a work. Many Nobles were were
beaten down and dead. Lincus and Andromeda fought mortally: the King Creon and
Amphitrion failed not, there was blood abundance shed on the one side and on
the other. And the battle was so cruel and sharp then, that in little while
after Andromeda and his people gatte and wanne upon them of Thebes, and
constrained them to retire and for to go back: whereof the king Creon had
right great sorrow, and weening for to have put his men again in array, put
himself in the greatest prease of the battle where he fought mortally, and
made so great a slaughter and beating down of his enemies, that Lincus and
Andromeda heard of the skirmish, and then they came together. And as Lincus
saw the king Creon do maruailes of arms, he gave him three strokes one after
another, and with the fourth stroke, he all to brake his helm from his head,
and slew him, whereof they of Thebes were sore afraid, and disparred so, that
they were put to discomfiture, and fled: which flying Amphitrion might not
remedy, albeit that he was strong and of great courage.

Of this evil adventure Thebes was right hastily advertised. Megara was gone
up upon one of the high towers of the palace, and saw and beheld the
battle: and from that place she saw them of Thebes slain without remedy,
and also turn their backs. The sight of the beating down of the king her
father, and the view of the slaughter of other made her to cry out and said.
Fortune, Fortune, what mischief is here? where is Hercules? Alas where have
thou brought him? Alas that he is not here to defend the country of his
nativity, and for to keep his wife far from annoy, and for to put his hand
and shoulders for to bear the great acts and deeds of this battle?

When she had said this, she fell in a swoune, and so lay a great while.
Nevertheless, the king Andromeda and Lincus, followed so hastily them of
Thebes, that they entered the City with them. And for as much as the Thebans
were without head, and put out of array, and that Amphitrion had so many wounds
upon him, that all the members failed at this work, the unhappy Lincus and
Andromeda took the City, and flewe all them that might bear arms, except
Amphitrion, whom they found not in the heat. After they went up into the
palace, and there they found Megara and Amphitrion in great desolation, with
many ladies and gentlewomen.

As soon then as Lincus had espied Megara (she was so fair and pleasant) that
he became amorous of her, and came to her and said. Lady weep no more:
Hercules the bastard son of Jupiter, is gone into hell, and there he is dead.
Ye have been wife of a man gotten in adultery, from henceforth ye shall be
fellow and wife of a man legitimate, and borne in lawful marriage, for I will
wed you, and will do you more good and pleasure then ever ye had. Megara
answered: false traitor, weenest thou that I be so foolish as to give faith
and credit to the words of the homicide of my father, and to the enemy of my
lord Hercules? Know thou that I am his wife, and that I will never have other
husband but him: he is no bastard, but son of my Lord Amphitrion, and the
most noble man that is in all the world. Lady (answered Lincus) I am king of
this City, ye be now at my commandment, will ye, or will ye not, I shall do
my will with you, but I will put it in respite, and in my sufferance till to
morrow. After these words Lincus sent Megara into a Tower, and made her to
be kept there. After he sent Philotes into a low prison, and finding there in
bondage and misery Priamus the son of king Laomedon, he had pity of him,
and sent him again to Troy, where he was after received with great joy of the
Troyans, etc.

CHAP. VIII. How Hercules entered into Thebes in unknown habit: and how he
put to death the Giant Lincus, and his accomplices, and his wife Megara, etc.
BY the sword of Lincus then and of Andromeda, Thebes was troubled dolorously.
Lincus exercised there many tyrannies and wickednesses. In this misfortune
Andromeda departed, and went to do his business, leaving there Lincus with
four hundred men of war, for to keep the city, and to hold it in his
obeisance. Thus was taken vengeance of the Centaures. In the time of this
revenge, the Queen Juno came into Thebes, and had great joy when she found it
in desolation, and full of widows and orphelins, and in the enemies hands of
Hercules: then were great the tears and lamentations of Megara. Amphitrion was
nigh her, who understood all her greefes, and comforted her. Lincus came many
times unto her into the prison, and requested her sweetly to have her love, and
that in the fairest manner he could. Yet his sweet and fair words auayled
not, for he found her constant and firm, and always keeping inviolable her
chastity, and gave him many virtuous aunsweres, whereof follows one, which
was the last, and this. Lincus, thou have now thy hand strong, and have
conquered Thebes. Fortune and ill hap has given unto thee the tyranny, whereby
thou have enriched thy self with vices. Thou have furthermore the power for to
commit on me murder: but thy power, nor thy sins be not so strong, nor of
such might, for to make my virtue to bow in two fold. Megara always bewailed
Hercules: she lamented so much on a day, that she became all ravished, and in
a trance. And that same day Hercules that was departed from Thessalonica a
good while before, made so his iourneys, that he entered into the realm of
Thebes accompanied with many noble men. And entering into these coasts, he
found the country all destroyed. And he had not gone far, when it was told
him, how Lincus was Lord of Thebes: and how he had slain in battle the king
Creon, and had imprisoned Megara, etc.

When Hercules had received these tidings, he was replenished with great anger,
and said, that he would avenge him if he might. Then he clad him above his
armors with a mantle, and disguised himself as much as he might: when he had
so done, he left there his fellows, and entered himself into Thebes unknown,
and passed through the gate, and bare him so well, that the Porters let him
pass forth: and in likewise entered into the Palace. At the entry of the
Palace, a soldier came to Hercules, and demanded of him what he sought
there? Hercules cast away his mantel a far, and took his sword that was
strong, and without any word he gave so great a stroke to the soldier that
was not armed, that he cleft his head from the highest part down to the
ground. Many other soldiers that were there, seeing the stroke, cried, and
being afraid, ran to their axes and clubs, and some were of them that put
forth themselves for to take Hercules: but Hercules smote off their heads, and
beat them down: and then began to arise a great uproar, and so great a noise,
that Lincus heard it. And thinking it had been his porters that quarrelled,
he came running down all unarmed, for to make peace. As soon as Hercules
perceived, and saw him coming out of the hall, he drew unto him with his sword
ready drawn in his hand, crying, Hercules, Hercules, and smote him so that he
cut off the right arm, and with the stroke he fell down to the ground. And
after he smote upon one and other, that had no helmes on their heads, nor
habergions on their backs, and then they knew that it was Hercules. He slew
them so thick, that with the blood that ran down, was made a right great
rushing, as if it had been a river.

Among these things the gentlewomen of Megara issued out of the palace, and
went into the streets crying with high and clear voice, that Hercules was
come again, and that he had slain Lincus. With these cries all the City was
moved, the good men old and young, the widows, wives and maids ran unto
arms with great courage, and assailed all about the men of Lyncus. There was a
terrible battle, and many people gathered together, men and women against
their enemies. In a little while all the city was troubled. When Hercules had
put to death al them that he found in the close of his palace, excepting
Lincus whom he put in the guard and keeping of the Queen Juno, and of many
Gentlewomen that came unto him: then he sprang into the streets, and showed
his sword, and smote down right on all sides in skirmishing so mortally with
the men of Lincus, all about where he might find them, that by the help of
them of Thebes, he made them all to pass the sharpness and cutting of his
sword. And then was Thebes all glad: and Hercules returned into the palace,
unto the place where the ladies kept Lincus. Then Hercules sent for to break
up the door of the chamber where Megara was in, for as much as they could
not find the keys, for they that kept her were dead. Megara then full of
gladness came unto her lord. Hercules rose up to her, and would have embraced
her, and kissed her. But Lincus, that thought on nothing but for to do evil, by
the secret persuasion of Juno, turned him from it, saying: Hercules, let be my
concubine, I have taken my fleshly desires with her: she is of mine
acquaintance, and the most luxurious lady that ever I was acquainted withal.

When Megara heard the right great injury and wrong that the traitor charged
her with, she fell backward for anger being furious, without saying of any word.
Hercules was al full of anger, and hot and full of great ire, weening that
Lincus had said truth, so he smote off the head of Lincus, and with the same
sword that he had slain the traitor with, he put to death Megara, who was with
child. Howbeit the Cronicles of Spain tell, that Hercules slew not his wife,
but that he put her into a religious house, that he ordained in Thebes in the
temple of Diana, renouncing her company: and there it is said, that this was
the first religion that ever was in Thebes. These things accomplished in the
one manner and in the other, Hercules went forthwith and took out of prison
Amphitrion and Philotes, and departed from thence al angry and sore grieved:
so that at that time and long after he spoke not: and went his way at all
adventure, accompanied with Theseus and Philotes, with the great bewailing of
them of Thebes, which then after his departing crowned over them Layus the
son of King Agenor of Assirie, for as much as he had wedded the daughter of
the king Creon named Iocasta.

CHAP. IX. How Hercules put to death the King Laomedon, and destroyed Troy the
second time.
HErcules, Theseus, and Philotes, departed from Thebes, and went into many
diverse lands, seeking their adventures. And passing by Licie where Hercules was
made king, on a day they came into Mi^imidonie, unto the palace of the King
Eson, where Jason was, which had enterprised for to sail to the I Will of
Colchos, and made his things ready. When Hercules had been feasted of Jason
and of Duke Peleus, and that he knew of the enterprise, that Jason would go and
conquer the fleece of Gold, he vowed and promised that he would accompany
him And if fortune would be with him, he would adventure to bring his
enterprise unto an end. What shall I make long process? Jason and Hercules
made ready a right good ship, and went to the sea, and renewed not their
victual till they came to the Port of Troy. And then they renewed (...) them
at the port, for the king Laomedon was then in Troy, which had fortified
maruailously the City again: and knowing that there was landed at his Port a
ship full of Greeks, he sent down a man that commanded them rudely, that
they should depart thence, and that he was enemy to the Greeks. Jason (as
Captain of the army) answered coueteously the messenger of King Laomedon, and
prayed him that he might have victuals for his money. The messenger answered
him, that he should have none there, unless they gat it with the sword. Then
Hercules might no longer tarry, but swear to the Troyan, that if he might
return from the voyage that he had enterprised, that he would yet once again
destroy Troy, and that he would not leave one stone upon another. With this
conclusion Hercules and Jason departed from Troy, and by fortune they were
brought to the port of Lemnos, whereof was a woman Lady and Queen, named
Hypsyphyle, which waxed amorous of Jason, as it is contained in the history of
Jason. In this port of Lemnos Hercules was advertised, that thereby was a king
named Phyneus, which suffered himself to be goueruerned by an auaricious
woman. Phyneus had been married to another woman before, and had by her two
sons. These two sons were unrightfully by their stepmother put to exile.
For to say the very truth, his second wife was so corrupted with avarice, that
she took from the King his riches, and held greater state then he. When
Hercules had knowledge thereof, he went and spoke to king Phyneus, and to the
Queen, and showed to them their vices in so good manner and fashion, that the
two children were called back from their exile, and that the king held his
estate royal. Then returned Hercules into Lemnos, and took the sea with
Jason, and went into the ^^e of Col^os, where Jason by the learning and
industry of Medea, conquered the sheep with the fleece of gold, which he bare
with him into Greece. Then Hercules recommended greatly Jason among his
parents and friends, and told them of the right great unkindness of the king
Laomedon, and how that he had sworn for to destroy Troy for the rigor
that the king Laomedon had done unto them. They swore all together with
Hercules the destruction of Troy, and concluded the day of their departure,
and after made ready their ships, and all that was necessary for them. And
then Hercules held so well his covenant in their army, that at the day
concluded among them they entered into the sea, and did so much travail that
they landed at the port of Troy, with so great an host, that Laomedon durst
not forbid them the Port.

Jason was at that time in a far strange country. Hercules had with him
many noble men, And among all other there were with him the king Thelamon,
Ajax, the duke N^stor, Castor, Pollux, Theseus and many kings and dukes At the
landing of this port, which was of strong entry, Hercules, that nothing
doubted his enemies, made to sownd and blow up trumpets and labors, and made
so great a noise, and stir, that the walls of Troy, and of the Palace,
redounded thereof, and that Laomedon seeing (out of one of his windows) the
host of his enemies, was a right great while in a thought whither he might go
to battle against them, or no. It happened to him, that as he was thus
pensive, he beheld toward the market place, and saw there more then thirty
thousand armed men: which enflamed his heart in such wise that he went and did
arm him, and (all his thoughts and pensiveness put a part) came to his
people, whom he warned and desired to do their part and deuoyr. And after,
himself, trusting in fortune, issued out into the field in order of battle
with good conduct: and although he supposed that Hercules was in the army
landed at the Port, whom he doubted, he marched unto his enemies which ioyed at
his coming. And then began the Troyans and the Greeks a right hot
skirmish, with so great murder and manslaughter, that at the joining there was
many a man hurt. Hercules failed not to smite and trouble his enemies: he cast
his eyes on high, and saw the banner royal of Troy: he fought and smote down
on the right side and on the left side, and with his club he smote down
vnmeasurably, that he came to the banner, and finding there Laomedon that did
maruailes of arms upon the Greeks, he smote him with his club often times
upon his helm, in such wise as he might not save himself, and that he pierced
his club within his head and brain, and with one stroke he slew him among
plenty of Greeks lying dead on the sea sand, ending there his miserable life.

After he smote upon them that bare the banner, and rent the banner, and then
were the Troyans all discomforted and cried: Let us fly, let us fly. And with
this cry that was impetuous, they began to retire and go back unto the
City weening to save themselves. But the Greeks spoiled them with the points
of their swords and cuttings of their sharp glaines, so mortally, that in
sleaing and killing the most part fell dead like as the tempest had run
among them. They took the City, so troubled with the death of the King
Laomedon, that there was none or right little defense among them. In entering
into the gate of Troy, Thelamon was the first man, and Hercules was the second,
and then Hercules found well the he did right high chiualries. Priamus was
not at that time in Troy, but he was gone into the East by the commandment of
King Laomedon, after his return from Thebes. What shall I say? fortune having
cast down the King Laomedon (as is said) by the strong hand of Hercules.
Besides that, he put into Troy Hercules and his people, which brought them all
to the ^ewing of their swords. They entered into Ilion, and pilled it, and after
did try havoc upon all the treasures of Troy. In likewise they took Exiona
the daughter of the King, whom Hercules gave unto Thelamon, requiring him to
take her, forasmuch as he was the first that entered the City. And when they
had taken all that they found good in Troy, for a final vengeance, Hercules
heat down the Towers and buildings: and put the fire therein: in such wise,
that there abode not a stone upon an other, etc.

CHAP. X. How Hercules and Affer assailed by battle the Giant Antheon: and
how they vanquished him in battalle the first time.
AFter this general destruction of Troy, when the Greeks were departed, and
Hercules had left them, the Greeks returned into Greece, with great glory, and
Hercules went by the Sea seeking his adventures, accompanied with Theseus, and
Philotes: and it happened him, that as he arrived at the port of Alexandria, he
found in this port a great army. When the Captain of the army saw him come
to ankre, he knew by the ensigns of Hercules, that it was Hercules: and for
that he had heard him recommended above all manner men whatsoever they were:
then he came unto him all full of joy, and said to him, Lord of nobleness and
treasure of virtue, among the people, most mighty, and among the kings most
resplendant in all glorious virtue, I salute you, and request you, that I may
be your servant and friend. And thus saying, he was on his knees before
Hercules, and in sign of humility, he kissed the earth. When Hercules saw the
salutation and the manner of the doing of this man, he took him by the hand,
and (lifting him up from the ground) saluted him, and after demanded of him
his name, and to whom that army belonged that he saw there? He answered him,
that he was named Affer, son of Madiane, the son of Abraham, and that in
that army was none other captain nor chief but himself, and that the
Egyptians had ordained him duke and leader of this host, for to go into Libie,
for to destroy the country in vengeance of the evil and harms that the
tyrant Busyre, that was of Lybie had done to them, in such wise as he
well knew.

When Hercules had understood the name and the affairs of Affer, he took him
for his friend: and said to him, that he would accompanye him to conquer Libie.
After he thanked him, and brought him into a right rich ship, where he feasted
him as much as to him was possible. They had not long abiden there, but they
went unto the sea with great gladness, for the Egyptians were so joyous and
glad to have Hercules with them, that they thought and believed verily, that
there might no mishappe nor evil come to them. Hercules found in the said ship
of Affer, the wife and also the daughter of Affer, This daughter had to name
Echee: she was the most fair gentlewoman of all the world, and young and fresh.
By the daily sight of her, Hercules became amorous of her, and required her to
be his wife. Echee answered, that of her self she might not accord to his
demand: but she said, if fortune give me so great a grace that I might be your
wife, I should have more cause to thank the gods, then any wife living.
Hercules was right well content with the Damsel: and by her persuasion,
called Affer, and required him that he would give to him his Daughter to be
his Wife. Affer thanked Hercules for that he vouchedsafe to demand his
daughter: he that was the most excellent of nobles: and said to him, that he
should take her and do with her his will and pleasure. Hercules espowsed and
wedded Echee, by the consent of Affer, and they lay together, paying the due
debte of marriage in such wise that Echee conceived of the seed of Hercules.
What shall I make long process? Hercules and Affer sailed so long that they
found the port of Lybye, where now stands Carthage, and there they arrived
and took land, in a night which was clear, and after they entered hastily into
the country, and beseeged the City of Lybie, without resistance or
gaynsaying.

In this City was then a great giant named Antheon great above measure above
other giants, the most strong and the most conquering that was in all the
parts of Europe and Libie, Cirene, Trypoly, Mountains and all the Isles
enhabited in these countries unto the Isles fortunate. This king then advertised
of the coming of the Egiptians, was passing angry, and swear that never none of
them should return again into Egypt.

As Soon then as he might he did cause his men to arm them and issued out of
the city with a great company of Libyans, and had so great haste to run
upon the Egiptians, that he set no order among his people, whereof he took
great harm? for when he came to the battle, he found that Hercules had
trained his people, and set them in two battles, of which he lead and
conducted the first battle. It happend so, that they of the said company of
Hercules, by force of shot, bare themselves so valiantly, and with strokes,
that they brought to death more then fifteen hundred Lybiens. When the shot
failed, Antheon sprang into the greatest prease, as the most valiant, and
supposed well to have skirmished with his enemies: but anon as Hercules saw him
come, he laid hand on his club, and put him forth before and gave him so
great a stroke, that he made his head to bow on the left side. Antheon had his
sword lifted up for to have smitten Hercules, when he received the stroke
that Hercules gave him, by which his stroke was broken. Nevertheless he said
between his teeth, that he would avenge him: so he lifted up his sword
again, and smote Hercules so vehemently, that with the stroke he brake his
shield. Then knew Hercules, that the giant was a man of great strength. This
notwithstanding, he smote him the second time with his club: and thus Hercules
and Antheon gave each other so great strokes, that there came between them of
the two parties, Libians, and Egyptians. There was a great noise of clinking of
swords and sounding of the shields and helmes that were broken, and halberds
that were dismailed, shieldes quartered, and glaiues broken: there was the
blood largely shed on both parties. Hercules and Antheon were parted by force
of the prease. Antheon by great ire smote without ceasing upon the fierce
Egyptians: Hercules all broke the helmes largely with his club, and did with
the Libians all his pleasure, and brought so many to death with his club, that
in little time he passed throughout the whole power of king Antheon many times,
and in his way he covered the earth and the way that he held all with dead
Libians. The first skirmish was strong and damageable to Antheon: for against
one Egyptian that he flew with his sword, Hercules made die with his club ten
Libians. About Hercules was nothing but blood, Hercules made the mountains
redounde with cries, the companies to tremble, the Libians to fly and go
back, and wan little gain. What shall I say more? as long as the day endured
he held the battle in vigor, and about the evening, when Affer and Theseus
came to the fight, he bestirred himself in such fashion against Antheon, that
he made him fly, all charged with horions and strokes, and then in like wise
fled after the Libians.

CHAP. XI. How Hercules took king Athlas: and how he began to study the
science of astronomy, and the seven liberal sciences.
WHen Hercules saw the Libians turn into flight, he did cause to sound the
retrait, for as much as it was late, and with great glory returned into the
place that he had chosen for to hold his siege at. His wife Echee came against
him with open arms and be clipped and kissed him: she help to unarm him, and
brought him fresh water for to wash his face with, and there was made right
good cheer of all the Egyptians. Contrary to this good cheer, the Libians
were in the City and made great sorrow, for they had lost near thirty
thousand men: especially Antheon made simple cheer, for he had good cause: for
Hercules had so beaten him with his club, that he might not help himself,
but went with great pain to bed, and with sorrow sent for his Physicians and
Surgeons, which came and visited him, and found him all bruised, and said to
him, that it would be well near a month ere they could heal him Antheon
considering his case, sent and desired of the Egyptians truce for the space of
a month, offering to them for to send them daily a certain number of cattle,
and a right great quantity of victuals. Then he made out his commandments,
and sent unto all the kings and princes that were his tributaries, and also unto
his neighbors, praying them that they would come and succor him with their men
of arms, in the most hasty wise that they might. This truce so made, Hercules
began to remember the^, that before time he had heard Philotes speak of a king
that reigned thereby named Athlas, and that he was the most wise man and
cunningest of all the world, and that he dwelt in a Castle standing on the top
of a right high mountain named Athlas, after the name of the same king. In
this remembrance, Hercules being covetous of the science of Athlas, called
Philotes and said to him, that he would go into the Realm of the king Athlas,
and that his intent was to seek there his adventure. Philotes answered and
said, that he could well lead and bring him into the Realm, for he knew the
country. Then Hercules called Affer and Theseus, and charged them, that they
should always make good watch. And after took leave of them and of his wife,
saying that he would hastily return. This done, he and three mariners with
Philotes went unto the sea in a gallie-finely made and light, and sailed and
rowed into the sea Mediterrane: they had speedy wind and ready, and Fortune
was good to them. In little while they came unto the strait of Gibraltar. And
then Philotes showed unto Hercules the mountain and the castle where Athlas
was at that time abiding.

When Hercules saw the mountain and the castle, he went and took land
ioyously: after he took his clubbe, and commanded Philotes and his mariners
for to abide them there. Then he went toward the mountain, and it happened
that he met with a man that descended down from the hill, and he adressed him
toward the said man, for to hear some tidings, and demanded him from whence
he came? He said, I come from the castle that ye may see yonder on high.
Whither go ye, said Hercules? unto the City of Mercelie, answered the
stranger: the king Athlas to whom I am servant, has sent me thither to publish
his commandment unto the Citizens, that within six days they should be
furnished with their arms, for to accompany him to go unto the war of the
great king of Libie, which requested instantly to have his succors. Wherefore
if ye will serve him in this army, and be his soldier, go up and ye shall
find him in his Castle studying the science of astronomy. The servant of
King Athlas with these words went forth on his way, and Hercules went up into
the mountain, and came to the gate of the Castle, where he found four
knights, that demanded of him what he would have? Hercules answered, that his
will was for to speak to the king, for certain matters that touched him. The
four knights (not thinking but good) brought Hercules within a great hall,
wherein were all the men of king Athlas, assaying them with swords and axes,
forasmuch as they had heard say, that they should go to war and they were all
armed.

When these knights had brought thither Hercules, they gave knowledge unto the
king, that a strange giant asked after him, and would not tell them the cause
why? Then Athlas went down, and found Hercules armed with his skin of the
lion, and asked him what he was? Then he answered and said, he was Hercules
that has conquered Philotes and the garden with the sheep of thy daughters: I
am now come hither for to conquer thee with thy sciences. Wherefore it
behooves thee, that thou do to me obeisance, and give over to help the great
Antheon mine enemy, and that thou come to me. And if thou will not do so, arm
thee hastily, and defend thee with arms, and that I demand of thee: and if
thou will not consent thereto by love, I will make thee accord to it by force.
Athlas was exceedingly discouraged when he knew by the mouth of Hercules that
it was he that had late conquered Philotes, and had slain the giant his
fellow, taken his sheep, and also newly had assailed by war Antheon, to whom
he had promised to give succors: and also considered, that he willed that he
should yield him to him: his heart then began in him to swell for anger and
pride, and in great rage he said to him O thou presumptuous Hercules, how art
thou so hardy to come alone before me: thou that I may not love? Know thou
that I have had many a displeasure by thine outrage, for Philotes was my right
great friend: and now thou art come to renew this displeasaunce, and wilt that
I should yield me unto thee, that is not mine intention, etc.

Athlas with these words went into a Chamber there fast by, and commanded that
every man should arm him, as they did. Hercules had always his eye upon him, to
the end he should not escape him. When he was armed, he came against Hercules,
and challenged him to the death. After he gave him a stroke with his sword
fiercely. With the cry and with the stroke, all they of the fortress assailed
Hercules. Then Hercules put himself in defense, and laid about mightily by
the rigor of his club, and with twelve strokes he slew twelve of his enemies.
After he hurt and wounded many other, and spared long the blood of Athlas. But
in the end, forasmuch as Athlas gave great strokes to Hercules, Hercules smote
him upon the helm, without employing of all his strength, and gave him a wound
in the head, that all astonished he bare him to the earth. From that time forth
they of the fortress, durst no more assail Hercules, nor they adventured them
not for to reskew, nor to relieve Athlas, but fled thence out of the Castle,
and Hercules abode there alone with Athlas, and the dead bodies. So in the end
when Hercules saw that they had given it over, he took Athlas, and made him to
cry him mercy. After he went into his study, and took all his books, which
he laded upon a camel, and after returned unto Athlas, and constrained him to
follow him. And when Hercules had done in the Castle all his pleasure, he
departed accompanied with Athlas, and with his books, and brought him down to
the sea side, to the place where Philotes abode him, etc.

When Philotes saw Hercules come with Athlas, and his books, he had great joy,
and took acquaintance with Athlas, who was so sorrowful that he might not
speak: and then they entered into their Galley, and went unto the go unto the
war of the great King of Lybia, which requested instantly to have his
succor. Wherefore if ye will serve him in his Army, and be his soldier, go
up and ye shall find him in his Castle studying the science of Astronomy. The
Servant of King Atlas with these words went on his way, and Hercules went up
unto the Mountain, and came to the Gate of the Castle, where he found four
Knights that demanded of him what he would have? Hercules answered, his will
was to speak to the King, for certain matters that concerned him. The four Kts.
(thinking nothing but good) brought Hercules within a great Hall, wherein were
all the men of King Atlas, assaying them with Swords and Axes, forasmuch as
they had heard say, that they should go to Wars, and they were all armed.

When these Knights had brought Hercules thither, they gave knowledge unto the
King, that a strange Giant asked after him, and would not tell them the cause
why? Then Atlas went down, and found Hercules armed in a Lions skin, and asked
him what he was? then he answered, he was Hercules that has conquered Phylotes
and the Ga^den with the Sheep of thy Daughters: I am now come hither for to
conquer thee with thy sciences. Wherefore it behooves thee that thou do to me
obeisance, and give over to help the great Antheon mine enemy. And if thou will not do so, Arm thee hastily, and defend thee with Arms, and that I command
thee: If thou will not consent thereto by love, I will make the accord thereto
by force. Atlas was exceedingly discouraged, when he knew by the mouth of
Hercules that it was he that had conquered Philotes, and had slain the Giant
his fellow, taken his sheep, and also newly had assailed by War Antheon, to
whom he had promised to give succor: and also considered, that he willed he
should yield himself to him: his heart then began to swell for anger and pride,
and in great rage he said to him. O thou presumptuous Hercules, how art thou so
hardy as to come alone before me? thou that I may not love? know thou that I
have had many a displeasure by thy outrage, for Philotes was my great friend:
and now thou art come to renew this displeasure, and that I yield me unto
thee, is not my intention.

Atlas with these words went into a Chamber fast by, and commanded that every
man should arm him, as they did, Hercules had always his eye upon him: to the
end that he should not escape him. When he was armed he came against Hercules,
and challenged him. After he gave him a stroke, with his Sword fiercely. With
the cry and with the stroke all they of the Fortress assailed Hercules. Then
he put himself in defense, and laid about mightily by the rigor of his Club,
and with twelve strokes he slew twelve of his enemies. After he wounded many
other, and spared long the blood of Atlas. But in the end, forasmuch as Atlas,
gave great strokes to Hercules, Hercules smote him upon the Helm, without
employing all his strength, and gave him a wound in the head, that all astonished
he bare him to the earth. Then they of the Fortress durst no more adventure to
assail Hercules, neither durst they adventure to releeve A^las, but fled
thence out of the Castle, and Hercules abode there alone with Atlas, and the
dead bodies. So in the end when Hercules saw they had given it over, he took
Atlas, and made him to cry him mercy. Then he went into his study, and took all
his books, which he laded upon a Camel, and constrained Atlas to follow him.
And when Hercules had done in the Castle all his pleasure, he departed
accompanied with Atlas, and with his books, and brought him down to the Sea
side, to the place where Phylotes stayed for him.

When Phylotes saw Herc les come with Atlas, and his books, he had great joy,
and took acquaintance with Atlas, who was so sorrowful that he could not speak:
then they entered into their Galley, and went unto the

Sea: Atlas was sorrowful, and troubled with the wound he had in his head.
Hercules requested him instantly, that he would teach him his science. Atlas
would in no wise do it at the beginning of his sorrow: but when he had
conversed and tarryed with Hercules, as well for the bounty he saw in him, as
by the persuasion of Philotes, which affirmed that Hercules was the most noble
and virtuous man that ever was, he began to teach him all his sciences: wherein
he learned and profited by quick and sharp wit, that he attained to all, and
that afterward he became the best Philosopher, and the most perfect Astronomer
in all the world. Thus studying, Hercules returned with great honor into the
Army of Affer, and found at his coming, that his Wife had brought forth a fair
Son, which the Egyptians had Crowned King of Egypt, where he reigned
afterward, and was called Dedon.

When Affer saw Atlas, and knew how Hercules had vanquished him, he marvailed
much of his prowess which was so great, and of his wisdom that attained to
such high things. But Hercules bent all his wit and study to learn the science.
In the mean while a little and a little the time passed, and Antheon assembled
a very great host, and was all healed of his wounds, and the Truce failed and
expired, whereat the Egyptians had great joy: for they yet hoped to have
victory of their enemies. And the Lybians hoped to revenge them of the shame
that Hercules had made them receive. When the Truce was expired, the day
following Hercules made ready his battails of the one side, and Antheon
ordained his on the other side. Antheon made three battails, the first of
twelve thousand fighting men, the second of twenty thousand, and the third
battle of thirty thousand. He then ordained himself King and chief Captain of
the first battle: in the second, he ordained the King of Getulie to be
Governor: and in the third, he made the King of Cothulie. And then when he had
well set them in array, and trained them, in a morning he made them to march
joyously against his enemies, expecting nothing but the hour when Hercules
would charge them.

CHAP. XII. How Hercules assembled his battle against Antheon King of the
Lybians, which he put to flight, and slew the King of Cothulie.
HErcules had made of his folk two battails, the first whereof he conducted.
Affer and Theseus guided the other. When he saw the Lybians march, which made
the greatest tumult and noise in the world, he went forth before, and his
Company followed. Then began the Trumpets to sound, and Tabours to make great
noise: the cry was great, they began sharply the battle, whereof Hercules
and Antheon made the assay by a swift course, and with sharp Swords smote so
sore together, that Antheon brake his Sword, and the Iron of the Sword of
Hercules pierced the Shield of Antheon and his arms on his right side, by
which he had a wound where the blood sprang out. Antheon was almost dead with
sorrow when he felt the stroke, and saw that his Sword had done but little to
Hercules: he took his Sword, and Hercules took his, and they smote each other
so hard, that Hercules bare Antheon unto the earth with one stroke, and had
slain him, had not the Lybians run upon Hercules on all sides, they gave him
so great an assault that he knew not to whom he might attend. Then Hercules
employed his Sword upon the Lybians. The Egyptians assembled them eagerly upon
their enemies. Antheon relieved himself all ashamed of his fall: applying all
his puissance and strength to revenge him, not upon Hercules, but upon them of
his party. This Antheon smote eagerly on the one side, and Hercules on the
other. Antheon fought with great fierceness and anger, and Hercules by
Prowess. The fierceness of Antheon was great, but the Prowess of Hercules
was so excessive great, that the Lybians fled him, and when they saw him they
trembled for fear, at this battle, before the Sword of Hercules all bloody.
Then the great routs of the Lybians were sore afraid, and kept no array: he
smote off heads, and laid them down to the earth: his folk that were destroyed
by Antheon he gathered together again. He made such work that the Lybians had
the worse, and Antheon sent hastily to the King of Cothulie, that he should
come to his help.

The King of Cothulie at the sending of Antheon, departed, weening to have come
to the skirmish: but when Affer and Theseus saw him, they went against him, and
hindered him. Then began the fight so great and mortal, that Theseus and Affer
slew the King of Cothulie, beat down his Banners, his recognisances, and his
Cotuliens, and smote so sore upon their bodies, that they went back, and were
constrained to cry for help. The King of Getulie seeing this evil adventure,
came unto Antheon relieved himself all ashamed of his fall: applied all his
puissance and strength for to avenge him, not upon Hercules, but upon them of
his party. This Antheon smote on the one side, and Hercules on the the other.
Antheon fought by great fierceness and anger, and Hercules by prowess. The
fierceness of Antheon was great, but the prowess of Hercules was so excessive
great, that the Libians fled him as the death, and where they saw him, they
trembled for great fear at this battle before the sword of Hercules all
bloody. Then the great routs of the Libians were sore afraid, and kept none
array: he smote off heads, and laid them down to the earth: his folk that
were destroyed by Antheon he gathered together again. He made such work that
the Libians had the worse, and that Antheon sent hastily to the king of
Cothulie, that he should come to his help.

The king of Cothulie at the sending of Antheon, departed, weening to have come
to the skirmish: but when Affer and Theseus saw him stir, they went against
him, and let him of his way. And there began the fight so great and so
mortal, that Theseus and Affer slew the king of Cothulie, beat down his
banners, his recognisances, and his Cotuliens, and smote so sore with the Iron
upon their bodies, that they went back, and were constrained to cry after
help. The king of Getulie seeing this evil adventure, came unto

the reskew, and found the Cothulians all discomforted. At his coming, the
cry, the noise, the tempest and strokes began to renew: many a valiant act,
and many a prowess was shows there. Many showed their virtue and strength,
and many were slain there. Theseus did there maruailes, but always the
Getulians held them together, and fought against Theseus by the space of three
hours, and lost but few of their people unto the time that Hercules brought
them of the battle of king Antheon to discomfiture, and made them to fly, to
save themselves with the Getulians, that then discouraged themselves in such
wise that after they had seen the battle of king Antheon disranked and
broken they might not lift up their arms to defend them, but were slain by
little and little: and finally, they were brought to so straight limits and
bounds, that they wist not where to save them. And then they fled out of the
place, dispersed by the fields and champaines, without leaders, guides, or
captains. And then Hercules put himself forth in the prease al before, among
them that fled first of the Libians, so that he came to the gate of the city
with them, and there he began to smite so vnmeasurably, that he put to death
the Lybians flying thither, and the porters, and them that would resist him.
Also he made the Egiptians to enter into the town. And Antheon seeing fortune
against him in all points, fled into his palace not accompanied as a king: but
went at large in to the fields, by the conduct of four moors only, that
brought him into Mauritania after.

CHAP. XIII. How Hercules fought again, against king Antheon, and put him unto
the death.
BY this manner Hercules and the Egiptians entered into Lybie, and subdued it by
force of arms. And Antheon was fled into Mauritania, where he assembled new
folk hastily. They of Libie yielded them al to the mercy of Hercules. When
Hercules had thus daunted them of Lybye, and their neighbors, seeing Antheon,
he made Affer king, and named it after him Affrique, and said that he fought
not for his singular proffit and covetousness but for lyberalytie, and for to
enhaunce virtue. O most valiant and noble Hercules, there was never man borne
among the paynims more liberal, more noble nor more virtuous. He would not be
king of all the world: he was liberal, and employed his conquest right well
and wisely, and gave all gis gifts advisedly. When he had made Affer king, he
enquired what laws they held, and established among them the Sacrament of
marriage. For at that time the women were there all commune, and when it
happened that the women had children, they gave them to the men after their
Phisiognomies: and thus tells Aristotle in his politikes.

Besides this sacrament, Hercules ordained unto the Affricans, that they should
hold the laws of Greece, and by right wise and politic government, made the
Affricans live reasonably and virtuously. And above all other things, he made
them have the order of marriage in great reverence. When Hercules had ordained
all this, tidings came to him, that Antheon was come again to chase him with
many Moors, that followed him. Then he returned toward Antheon and the
Moryans, and there smote them down with his club so deadly that he made it red
with their blood, and slew them all and put them to flight so cruelly, that
Antheon abode alone against Hercules, and fought against him body to body by
great strength, and gave him many strokes hard to bear.

But Hercules gave to him so many and so large strokes that the Giant wist not
how to save him, and weened to have fled. But Hercules that ran as swiftly as
an horse ran after him, and embraced him in his arms with all his might, and
lifted him up into the air, and bare him over the host of the Maurytanes.
And when he came nighe unto them, he cast him down dispiteouslye to the
earth, that all to bruised and forfrushed Antheon abode there dead. And his
death turned unto the Moors so great abashement, that they lost all their
strength and puissaunce, and were slain by great excess without remedy: they
lost there ye king Antheo^, ye king of Mauritane, ye king of Tingie, and many
other kings, and all the honorable of the battle: for in the end they all
fled, in which flight was taken and subdued to the segnorie of Affrique the
City of Mauritans.

CHAP. XIIII. How Hercules and Theseus fought together against the two Damsels
of Scythie, etc.
IN remembrance of this victory, Hercules did make in the field a statue or
image of a man sleeping, in the place where he had put to death Antheon, and
there under he did bury the body of Antheon. And anon as the image, which
was made of the bone of an Elephant was set up there, the neck of the the
image began to sound like as it had been a man sleeping, wherefore the Moors
had afterward the sepulcher in great reverence, and worshipped the idol. After
this statue thus accomplished by Hercules, he went by Tingie and Ampeloste, and
by many other Countries, and conquered all the country that now is called
Affrique, and gave all to Affer, and Affer returned into Libie, and there he
found Echee his wife dead by a grievous sickness: wherefore he took and made
sorrow so great, that it was marvel. Then to forget this sorrow, he took leave
of king Affer, and the Egyptians, and had thought to have departed thence, but
as he was in taking leave, a damsel strangely arrayed came unto him and said,
Lord of Libie, the Queen of Scythie, Ladies of Egypt, of Cappadocie and of
Asie, have sent me unto you: which ladies have conquered the said contries, in
taking vengeance of the misfortune of their husbands now late dead: and have
abandoned their Country because of the great outrage that Vexores King of
Egypt made in Scythie. And as as much as ye be of the lineage of the Egyptians,
they send to you, that ye submit you unto their obeisance, for to do with you
that that shall please them: or else, that ye come against them in battle,
for to eschew the effusion of blood. And they let you know, that they have good
right to subdue you, and that if there be among you two knights, that against
two of them will do feats of arms to try their lives, they will deliver to
you two Ladies in place conuenable, upon condition, that if the Ladies
vanquish, and overcome you, ye shall be holden as vanquished, and be a^
their commandment: and if your men overcome the Ladies, they shall be
reputed as overcome, and shall be subject unto you.

Hercules hearing this greeting and message of the Ladies, answered unto the
messenger. Damsel, since that the Ladies of Scythie he so chiualrous, that
they have conquered the great Realms of Egypt, of Cappadoce, and of Asia, they
be sore for to doubt. Nevertheless for to eschew the effusion of blood, and
for to defend the Affricans from their bondage, ye shall return unto them and
say, that the battle of the two knights against two ladies, is accorded and
agreed unto them, for to be done to morrow, upon the condition that ye have
said. Then Hercules, Affer, and many other swore and promised to hold these
things, and did great honor and reverence unto the Damsel.

The Damsel having done her message, as is said, returned unto the Ladies,
which were entered a great way in Affrique, and tol^ to them word for word,
the answer of Hercules. The pr^ncipall or mistress of all these Ladies, was
named Synope, and had two sisters, so expert and strong in in arms, that they
dread no knight of the world, the one was named Menalippe, and the other
Hyppolita. Anon as these Ladies had received these tidings of the Affricanes,
they had great joy, and holding opinion that Affrique was woonne by the
strength of Hypolite, and Menalippe, which did maruailes in arms, they
ordained that they should fight with the two Knights: and so for to do, they
warned Hyppolite an Menalippe, which were on the morrow ready in the fields.

At the hour that was ordained, Hercules and Theseus (sitting on two strong
horses with a great company of Affricanes,) rode into the place that the
Ladies had chosen for to do feats of arms in. There were the two Ladies
abiding, in a fair place armed and well mounted on good steedes, and by them
were the other Ladies in great number. As soon then as Hercules and Theseus
had espied the two Damsels, they made them that followed to stand, and come no
near, and sent unto the Damsels, to wit what they would do. The Damsels
answered, that they abode the two knights, and that they were ready to do
deeds of arms against them, under the condition of their quarrel. And if
they were come, they would come forth.

Hercules and Theseus, with this answer took their spears, and spurred their
horses, and made sign unto the Damsels. And they furnished with Shieldes and
with Spears, ran against them so chiualrously, that it seemed that they held
of heaven, not of earth, and at the coping of their sharp spears, the strokes
were so huge and great, on both sides, that Hyppolita and Theseus bare each
other unto the earth: and in like wise did Menalippe and Hercules. The
Affricans maruailed much to see the two Princes borne down: and yet the Ladies
of Scythia maruayled much more of the Damsels, etc.

When the Knights on the one side, and the Damsels on the other side, found
themselves lying on the earth, shame and abashment smote them unto their
hearts. Nevertheless, each of them got them up as lightly, and with great
courage took their swords, and approached each other, and charging and smitting
the one upon the other so fiercely, that the Ladies and the Knights felt the
strokes, Hyppolita pursued her man Theseus, and Menalippe held her unto
Hercules. The strokes of Hippolita were great, and did great grief unto
Theseus. Theseus enforced himself strongly to avenge him, and might not well
come to his purpose. Hercules put under and overcame Menalippe lightly with his
sword, and put her in his mercy, but Hippolita mainteyned her force so
mightily against Theseus, that she had put him to foil, had not Hercules
been, that said to him: Brother, what shall this be? where is the prowess of
Theseus? Shall that be daunted by the chivalry of a Damsel? If it be so,
certainly all men shall have shame of your dishonor.

These words began to quicken, and to wake again the blood of Theseus that was
before asleep, and to lighten the courage, in such wise that he recovered a new
force and strength, and put himself forth, and began to smite with such
prowess, that he made the Damsel recant, and took from her, her sword, and
conquered her: whereof the Ladies were much grieved and sorrowful, and in
especial the Queen Synope, which then sent to Hercules her arms, in token
that she was vanquished, praying him that he would yield again and render the
two Damsels. And Hercules took the arms of the Queen, and sent to her
Menalippe, and made peace with her for the Affricanes, upon condition, that she
should give Hyppolita in marriage to Theseus, which was amorous of Hyppolita. So
then the wedding was made in Affrique with great honor and worship. And the
Ladies hearing tell of the maruaylous acts and deeds of Hercules, praised him
all, and held themselves happy and fortunate to be vanquished of him.

CHAP. XV. How Hercules began to wax amorous of Deyanira: and how Achelous and
Hercules had battle the one against the other: and how Achelous was
vanquished.
AFter the conquest of these ladies, Theseus took leave of Hercules and of
Affer, and returned into his country, for to bring home his lady, and went to
the sea, for to go into Calcedony which lies in the opposite of Achaie and of
Arcadia, for to see a fair lady of excellent beauty, that he had heard
greatly recommended by a Calcedonien that was in his company. He did so much,
what by sea and by land, that he came into Calcedonie. The king of that place
had to name Oeneus, and had two daughters, the one named Deyanira, and the
other Gorge. Deyanyra was the fairest, and that was she that Hercules came for
to see. When Oeneus had understanding and knowledge that Hercules came into his
country, he had great joy, and went against him, and received him embracing
him so honorably as was to him possible. In entering into his palace, the
Queen and his two daughters Gorge and Deianira welcomed Hercules. Incontinent
as Hercules cast his eyes upon Deyanira, that was the most fairest woman that
ever he saw, and that she by desire right deep was settled and rooted in the
most deep place of his heart, he felt himself ravished meruailously. This
desire entered into Hercules all full of rays of love, and pearsed into his
heart as sodaynlye as the rays of the sun pass through the glass.

Deyanyra had so much beauty, and was so well accomplished and so glistering
and shoone among the ladies, that to her might be made no comparyson, not all
only in beauty, but with that in wisdom and bounty. She was the most
precious treasure of Calcedonie: and thither came many Ladies and gentlewome^
and other. Her neighbors were al amorous of her, and especially the king
Achelous that was strong and puissaunt. This king had great seignory, and
marched thorough the realm of Calcedonie. When then Hercules had been there a
space, in passing the time ioyously, and in beholding the behauior of Deyanira,
it happened on a day that the messenger of king Achelous came to Oeneus, and
said to him, that Achelous demanded of him, if he would give him his daughter:
and that if he would not give her to him at this time, he would molest and
grieve his country, and would make him war. At this message Oeneus was
troubled, and answered the messenger, that on the morrow he would give him an
answer. All that day Oeneus was pensive, and sorry, and abode alone: and for
to pass his melancholy, he came to Hercules. When Hercules saw him so pensive
he adjured him in earnest wise that he should tell him the cause of his
pensiuenes: who told it him, and said. Lord Hercules, since it pleases you
to know of mine anoiance and grief, I will anon tell you the cause. There is
hereby a king my neighbor named Achelous, great and fierce and proud, which
many times has required to have to his wife Deyanira my daughter. I have not
been in will to accord the marriage, for as much as I know this king a man of
right evil life. And for this cause I have had many menaces of him, and also
this day his messenger is yet come again to me and has said to me, that if
I give him not my daughter at this time, he will make me war. Certes Hercules,
if ye ye see me pensive, it comes to me by this occasion, for I have not yet
given him his answer, but I must give it him to morrow.

Nevertheless, I have concluded in my self that I will not give unto him my
daughter. And now when I see verily, that by the refuse of my daughter, it must
needs be that the war be open between the aforesaid king Achelous and me,
know well that I am displeased: for war is the eternal desolation of the
country, perdition and wast of the people and of goods.

Sir (said Hercules) it is needful unto a man that he take and bear all that
fortune will. As ye say, war is not increasing of people, but dimunition, yet
by that extremity it behooves to pass, It is expedient that a man rejoice in
his right. Right comfort the courage of a man, and the courage of a man
comforted, brings him often times to glorious victory. A brute beast
disgarnished of reasonable wit, fights for his hole and nest, with his
claws, with feet, with his teeth, and with his bill. What shall a man
sensible and endowed with wit and reason, do with any assault (and namely in
his own land and territory?) Nature wills and instructs that where
corporal force fails, vigor and virtue of courage works, and that they
fight for their country. Take courage then in your right, and say your intent
unto your enemies: ye have received me worshipfully, and in my receiving these
tidings that be come, I will help you if it be need: and I suppose if Achelous
assail you, he shall repent him.

With these words the king Oeneus comforted himself greatly, and the day drew
over. On the morrow Oeneus called the messenger of Achelous, and said to him,
that he should come no more to demand his daughter: and that he was not minded
to give her to his master: and furthermore, if he moved war against him for
this cause, he had intention to defend himself unto the death of the last
man of his people. The messenger returned with these words, and told them to
Achelous and all that he found with him. Achelous was evil content with king
Oeneus, and as he that was overmuch smitten with the love of Deyanira, began
to assemble his men of arms, in intention to make war on king Oeneus, and to
take from him his Daughter. Hercules was then in Calcedonie, and often times he
was with Deyanira in gracious conferences. He found her so well adressed in all
honest manners, that all day he was the most part with her, and in the night he
did naught but dream and think on her: howbeit, he said nothing to her that
touched his amorous desires, willing first to show there his power in arms.
It happened on a day he opened a window that was by the garden of Deyanira, and
casting his eyes down, he saw Deyaninira, that sat upon a green place,
accompanied with many Ladies and Gentlewomen. Then he set all his mind to
contemplate the excessive beauty of her. After he desired her, and in coveting
and desiring said. O Deyanira, thou that have not the prerogative to know the
hearts and the thoughts of men, if I should say to thee the tenth part of the
love and desire I have to thee: thou might not believe it. I have gone many
a country, and seen mannie a Realm and many a treasure, I have desired many
a thing. But of all, for to come to my wished bliss, I was never in so great
thought as I am for to get thy grace.

The same hour that Hercules spoke by himself, Deyanira was not idle: she
had Hercules in her mind, and remembrance, and in her heart, then being rich
in the points of love, sown between variations of hope and despair, was
esprysed in all her veins with the heat of that fire that burns amorous
hearts. This fire burning, was strong and very hard to quench, or to cover the
right pearcing sparkle. She lay down then upon the grass, and began to say
in her mind. Alas Hercules, what shall Deyanira do? she may not come to
attain unto your love, I was wont not long since, not to daigne to behold a
man, and then said, that neither Prince nor King should have my love. Now I am
all of another nature, and desire no other thing, but that I might be your
wife. I have supposed to have remained and continued a stable virgin, and I
only was disdainer of men, contrary to the requests and admonitions of the
ladies: these be now far other tidings. with these words she ceased a
little, and began to think on many other things. At this point, as she
thought on Hercules, and Hercules on her, tidings came thither, that Achelous
was coming for to besiege the City, by land and by sea, and that he was very
near by. For these tidings arose in the palace a great murmuring, that came
to the ears of Hercules and of Deyanira: their spirits were trauersed in such
fashion, that Hercules left to behold Deyanira, and the damsel left to think
on Hercules, and both two went unto the king Oeneus.

Anon as Hercules came unto the king, and that the King saw him, he went
against him, and said to him, that his enemies were very near the City,
Hercules answered ioyously, that it behooves to go feast them: and willed that
he put his people in arms. At this answer of Hercules, the king did sound to
arms, and with this sound all Calcedonie was moved, and each man made him
ready. Hercules and his Greeks were ready in a little space. The Calcedonians
assembled by great companies in the palace. When they were assembled, the king
and Hercules brought them into the field, and Hercules put them in order: that
done, he did cause them to march, and the Calcedonians and Greeks so sped them
on an after dinner, that they came and found their enemies, and approached them
so nigh, that there was nothing to do but to smite and lay on. Hercules had
made two battles, one and the first with his people, and the other with the
Calcedonians. When they came to the point to meet, Hercules went to the
Calcedonians, and in the presence of the king said to them. Lo here ye may
see your enemies that set little by you, for they be come into your
Lordshippe to assail you. I pray you that the great outrage of them abate not,
nor minish your courage. Ye ought herein to have the fierceness of a Lion, the
puissance of an Elephant, and be greedy as a Griffon, for to deliver you
without end, from the enmity of king Achelous, in keeping your country, your
dominion, your honor, your treasures, your wives, your children, and that more
is, your lives. Be ye then studious to do well, be ye inflamed with desire of
vengeance, be ye covetous to get worship and glory. If ye show not your selves
valiant at this time, ye may not have any thing but beggerie, or servitude to
death: for your enemies will do unto you all the evil of the world, if they
have victory over you. These words wrought in the hearts of the Calcedonians,
and gave to them courage marueilously. And all they with one right good will
desired the battle. When Hercules had finished his exhortation, he went to
the battle: for it was come to the point to fight. Then were there great cries
on the one side and on the other: tabors, trumpets, clarions, harness, and
weapons began to sound: knights began to stir at the entry of the battle.
Hercules and the Greeks shot and drew largely upon their enemies, and made
Achelous all abashed, forasmuch as he hoped not to have found so great
resistance with the Calcedonians. Then they cast their eyes upon the banner of
Hercules, and seeing the great Lion that was painted therein, they began to
imagine that there might be Hercules, of whom was spoken thorowout all the
world, for his virtues and his strength.

When they were thus imagining, the shot failed, with great slaughter of them
of the party of Achelous. When the shot was so failed, Hercules took his
sword, and went up and down among them of Achaie, that were in the first front
of the battle of Achelous, and there made an hole so great, that the
Calcedonians and the Iconians wan upon them at the first joining, and made the
other party to recule, and go back, whereof Achelous had great sorrow: and
he took to him twenty knights which were chosen, and came and ranged with
them there, where Hercules scattered and brake the battle of the Achaians.
There he approved his courage lustily. This strong giant, and his horsemen so
valiantly fought, that the Greeks entering tarried and abode, and also Hercules:
for they died their swoordes and the earth with their blood, and beat down
many Iconians. And there was the strife so great, that men might see nothing
else but heads and arms fly into the field. Hercules smote no stroke but it
cost to Achelous the death of a man. Achelous in like manner stroke for stroke
smote down one of his enemies. The residue of their folk did the best they
could, now before, now behind, and yet might never the Achayans confound and
put back their adversaries, howbeit they were always four against one: and the
Iconians were in great number, and they had always fresh people and new. In this
manner the two puissaunces fought together more then four hours. Love wrought
sore there, in Hercules and in Achelous, both two made their swords to
flourish covered with blood. They met often times and smote each other, but never
durst Achelous abide before the sword of Hercules, for the horible strokes
that he saw Hercules give, but he put him in the prease as soon as he had
smitten him, or had angered him.

In this battle Hercules did wonders and maruailes. Oeneus took a great
pleasure to behold him, and the Achayans had therein displeasure, for they
that saw him, were no more assured to escape the death, then he that fa^leth
the sword in his neck in the hand of a tyrant. There received no man a
stroke of him, but he abode in the place: he made so great a slaughter, that no
man can well write it. In the end, king Oeneus with all his Calcedonians came
to the battle: in his coming the Achayans received loss upon loss, and
peril upon peril. The king Oeneus made many of his enemies to die. Hercules
showed his puissance more and more: by his well doing, he put the Achayans all
out of array, and after unto flight: and the loss of the field turned greatly
unto the damage of king Achelous: for Hercules chased him shamefully into his
ships, and made him to loose twelve thousand Achayans, etc.

CHAP. XVI. How Hercules put to the worst king Achelous: and how he espoused
Deianira.
AFter this victory, when Hercules saw that the king Achelous saved himself
by the sea, he called the king Oeneus, and said to him, that he would pursue
his enemy, and that he would deliver the world of him: and after took an
hundred of his chosen men, and took leave of the king Oeneus, and went to the
sea, following after Achelous, recommending him to Gorge and to Deianira. In
this night Oeneus after the departing of Hercules, returned into Calcedonie,
and told his wife and his daughters the high prowess that Hercules had done
in the battle, and how he had chased his enemies, and how he was gone after
with two hundred men. The ladies Gorge and Deianara were right joyous of the
victory, but it grieved them sore that Hercules with so little a company
pursued Achelous: and above all other, Deianira was greatly vexed and grieved
at the enterprise of Hercules, so sore that she went into her chamber, and was
constrained to weep, and not to have joy in heart until the return of
Hercules. For to return unto the purpose touching Hercules, when he was put to
the pursuit of Achelous, as is said, he entered into his realm, and followed
him so nigh, that he was constrained to withdraw himself in a right strong
castle standing by the sea. Hercules besieged Achelous in this castle. When
Achelous saw that Hercules pursued him with so little a company as with two
hundred men only, he called his friends and his leaders of men, and among
other things told them, that it was a shame for them to suffer themselves to
be besieged with so little a number of people. They answered, that he had said
truth: and concluded, that the same hour they would issue out, and raise and
break the siege, and forthwith they sounded to arms with short counsel. It
was not long after that they issued out of the castle, but Hercules espied
them, and knew that they came to the battle: he set his men in array, after
he went alone before unto his enemies, as he that doubted of nothing. When
Achelous saw him come, he began to make a great sigh, and cried unto his
people, upon him: saying that it was he with the clubbe that had chased him out
of Calcedonie, and promised great gifts unto them that best belabored him
with strokes. But when his folk knew that it was Hercules, they made courtesy
each to other for to go before, and trembling as the leaf on the tree, they
durst not abide the weight of the clubbe: but without smiting of any stroke
turned their backs, and fled unto the castle.

Achelous seeing the behauior of his folk, and the dread and fear that they
had of Hercules, weened that he should have died for sorrow: so he went and
entered again with them into the castle. And Hercules returned with his people,
laughing at the poor dealing of his enemies. Hercules began then to think
on Deianira, and Achelous began to imagine how he might annoy the
Calcedonians: he had there one of his captains that said unto him: Sir, ye
know well that your strength may not compare unto the strength of your enemies:
we be ten against one, but that may nothing help us: for, alonely the clubbe
of the mighty giant that is with them, is enough for to bury us all, and also
for to destroy your realm. Consider ye then, since it is so, that open
puissance and plain strength may not be used at this time, it is expedient to
imagine some subtlety, for to grieve the Calcedonians: and it is mine advice
that there shall be made a great flaming light in the sea, such as I shall well
devise, so as by that means they that have besieged us, may be deceived
lightly. This flaming light must be by night, and it shall be great and
forcible: we will make it secretly: as soon as our enemies shall see it, they
will leap out of their tents, and will go unto the sea for to see the
marvel, peradventure without any arms, for they dread nor fear us not, and
then we will set on them, and shall find them unfurnished and unpurveyed of
their arms, and consequently it may ensue, that of them all we shall make a
notable riddance. etc.

When Achelous heard this counsel, it seemed to him good, and he would that
it were put in effect in such wise as he had devised. The deviser did make an
hundred torches, which were finished in fifteen days. During these fifteen
days, Hercules assailed many times the castle, where Achelous was in, but he
might never do any thing thereto, for the fortress stood upon the sea, and in
a strong country, and might not be gotten by assault, and Achelous might have
no succors from no part: for, between this castle and Achaye was a great
country. When the fifteen days were passed, and the torches were made, on a
night when it was peaceable from wind and storm, they that carried the
torches, issued out of the castle, four of them unto the haven, where was left
but one little boat which was on ground, and had not in long time before been
put to the sea. And if ye demand where the ships were become that Achelous
brought to this port, I say to you, that Hercules had caused to take them, and
sent them into the sea, to the intent that Achelous should not escape him, nor
take away the ships by night. The Achayans then came to this little boat lying
on the ground, and plied them that they brought it aflote on the Sea as
secretly as they could, and entered therein, with all that to them was
necessary. And the king Achelous put himself in ambushment with a thousand of
his men, in a place nigh whereas him seemed that the Calcedonians would go
out for to see the light that should be made. Then when they that were in the
sea, knew that it was time to light their torches, they set them a fire and
put them round about the mast, wherein were made as many holes as was torches.
And so as they had imagined, they did. Anon the knights that kept the watch of
the host of Hercules saw it, and sore marueiling at this light, awoke Hercules
and his fellows, and showed them the light.

As Soon as Hercules saw the brightness of the torches, he would know what it
was: and then he approached the bancke of the sea and his company with him, and
had not been long there, when the king Achelous did cause to light an hundred
torches that he had provided, and after he issued out of his ambushment with
his thousand men, and ran upon Hercules, and assailed him and all his men
fiercely. But when Hercules saw them discover themselves, he set his people in
order in the best manner he might, by the light of the stars, and received his
enemies courageously, where began a right dolorous battle: for the one smote
on the other very felonously, and there were many wounded and dead. The
skirmish was great. Achelous thought to skirmish, but he was skirmished with
himself, unto the effusion of his blood: for Hercules among all other smote
him on the helm, that he foundred, and gave him a wound on his head that the
blood gushed out: and moreover, he took him, and delivered him to twelve of
his men to keep. There were great cries, and great abundance of strokes of
swords. Then were the torches quenched and put out by the force of the smiting
of the Achayans, which desired greatly to rescue their king: and so they
abandoned their lives in the heat. But when their torches were quenched a little
and a little, they began to cool them, and withdraw them, for they saw nothing
at all. When they were withdrawn, Hercules assembled his folk, and said to
them, that he would go assay if he might take the castle in this trouble, and
that they should follow him hardily and fiercely: and anon after, when he
saw his enemies return unto the castle, he ran after and stayed them, and
put himself in the thickest of them, and smiting with his club on the right
side and on the left side, he made a right large place and way. And by this way
he lead his people unto the gate of the castle, where he entered with them that
fled, and there made so great a slaughter of his enemies, that with little
resistance, that same night he put to death twelve hundred, and the other fled
into the city of Patrace, from whence they were. In this battle, and in the
battle that had been in Calcedonie, all the men of Achaye were slain, except
about a four hundred, which saved themselves by flying: for Achelous had taken
all his men with him, his country and his city Patrace was all destroyed.
When Hercules had taken the castle, afterward he went into the country and
into the city of Patrace: and entering into all places without any resistance,
he set over this realm into the hand of king Oeneus, and he abode not long
after that he had subdued this realm, but he departed and returned into
Calcedonie as hastily as he might for to see Deianira: and there he was
received with so great glory, joy and triumph, that no man can rehearse ne
write. The Poets report and write this conquest that Hercules made upon
Achelous, faining that Achelous fought first in guise of a man, and that then
he was vanquished: after he changed himself in a guise of a serpent. This is
to be understood, in subtilnesse and in malice, as he did in assailing Hercules
by night. To conclude, he fought in the guise of a bull, and that Hercules
brake his one horn: that is to be understood, that at the last Achelous was
fierce as a bull, for he died well nigh for pride and sorrow that he was
taken: and that Hercules brake his horn, that is to be understood that he brake
his realm and destroyed it.

CHAP. XVII. How Nessus took Deianira from Hercules when he passed with her
over the river: and how Hercules slew Nessus with an arrow.
GReat was the feast then, that the king Oeneus made for the victories that
Hercules had achieved upon king Achelous: For he doubted him passing sore.
Hercules at his coming presented to him Achelous and his realm, and said to
him that he should have it without any refuse. The king Oeneus sent king
Achelous into exile, and held himself greatly bounden and beholden to Hercules
who^ he honored marueilously. Then Hercules took to his heart again right
amorous conceits: and also in like manner did Deianira, she had sovereign joy
to see Hercules, and desired none other thing but for to see him. What shall I
make long process? when Hercules had been there a space, he required king
Oeneus that he would give him his daughter to wife. Oeneus with right good will
agreed, and accorded to him, and Deianira consented with better will. The
wedding was solemnized pompously and solemnly, and they went to bed, and lay
together. And soon after when Hercules saw that his father in law had his
realm in peace, he took leave of the king Oeneus, and departed from
Calcedonie with Deianira and his people, for to go by land into his realm of
Iconie. Hercules had always in his journey Deianira by him: he loved her
exceedingly, and had great solace in her beauty: and if he had not studied with
Athlas, he could not have absteined him from beholding her beauty. In passing
the time pleasantly in the manner that folk do that be new married, Hercules
iourneyed so far, that he came to a quarter of Thessaly, where the river of
Hebenus runs, and arrived on this river, which was deep and broad running
impetously, and had neither bridge nor plancke to pass over, but there was a
Centaure named Nessus that spent there his life, by the means of a little
boat, in the which he carried the people over the river, etc.

When Hercules had found this passenger Nessus, he came to him, and demanded
of him how he and his folk might pass the river? Nessus that knew Hercules
since the time that he had vanquished his fellows at the wedding of Pyrothus,
answered to him, that he might not pass the river but by his little bote.
And if he would pass, he would with a good will do him the pleasure to set
him over. Hercules thanked Nessus: And forasmuch as he saw that the boat was
but little, and that the time was disposed to rain, he would that Deyanira and
her damsels should pass first. Deyanira and her maidens entered into the boat.
When they were therein, Nessus rowed, and in the rowing, he beheld Deyanira,
and he looked on her so much yt her beauty ravished him. For as soon as he
was come over on the other side, he took Deianira, and said that she should be
his wife, and then catching hold on her, he took her on his shoulders and bare
her away: wherefore Deianira and her damselles made great cries. And Hercules
seeing that the old giant bare away Deianira, which he would resist to his
power, bent his bow, and shot an arrowe upon the giant, with so great might
and cunning that he smote him on the right side unto the heart, and gave him
the deaths wound. The bow of Hercules was so great and strong that no man
could bend it but himself. Nessus, when as by his wound that Hercules gave him,
he began to feel ye approaching of death, and to suffer sharp anguish always,
he ran a great while after unto a valley, where he fell down, and considering
that his life had no recovery, he employed the end of his life to imagine how
he might do displeasure to Hercules, and remembered that he had terrible
poison about him and mortal, and said to Deianira by great malice. Lady, the
love of you has caused me to receive the death, which me displeases not so
sore, as does that cruel Hercules shall enjoy you, which are worthy to have a
worthy man. Hercules is no true husband, but the vntruest to his wife that ever
was. And forasmuch as I have singular pity of you, and that your beauty
constrains me to do you pleasure, I will give you here a precious thing,
and having such virtue, that if ye boil it with one of the shirtes of Hercules
with the blood that runs out of my wound, and if that ye give the shirt to
Hercules and that he wear it, he shall never after love other woman ne lady but
you.

And with these words the giant took the poison, and tempered it with his
blood, and wound it in a linen cloth, and gave it to Deianira. The foolish
Deianira giving credence to the giant, took the poison. The giant charged her
that no man should touch it bare, saying that then it would loose his virtue
after the touching: and with that he gave up his ghost and died pitiously, and
Deianira escaped from his hands, purposing that she would keep that poison
secretly at all adventure, for to help her self, if it were need. In the mean
while that these things befell between Deianira and the giant, Hercules was
not in hearts ease for Deianira: for he was in great distress when he saw
Nessus bear away his wife. As Soon as he had smitten him on the right side
with his arrow, as is said, he unclothed himself, and cast his gown, his
harness and club, over the water by great strength, and after he started into
the water, and swamme over unto the other side, and then as he put on his
raiment, Deianira (again accompanied with her damsels that followed her) came
to the river furnished with the cursed poison. When Hercules saw Deianira
return, he imagined anon that he had slain the giant, and went against her,
and demanded where the traitor was. Deianira answered not at the first to
this demand, but said to him: alas my Lord, in what peril have I been? what
oppression? what despair of joy has oppressed mine heart? The traches of mine
arms where yet is seen the print of the hands of the giant, show in what
displeasure I have been. The cursed glutton giant bare me unto the depth of a
deep valley, where death approaching by ye stroke of your arrow, yt made him to
fall down, and he would never let me go until the last sigh of death. Certes,
I have suffered a great ieopardy, but thanks be to the gods, since I have
found you again. And know you verily, that I am avenged of mine enemy, whom I
have seen die miserably, whereof I am all rejoiced and glad again.

CHAP. XVIII. How Hercules fought against the serpent of the moore Lerna, and
slew him, etc.
DEianira and Hercules kissed each other by right great love. After, Hercules
went into the place where the giant lay dead, and forasmuch as he found him
deprived of his life, he let him lie there to the beasts and to the birds, and
took his arrow that lay by him. And this was the Arrow that Achilles was
slain with after in the temple of Phoebus in Troy, for the love of Polixene.
Then Hercules and Deianira came again to the river, and Hercules set over his
men, and went from that place into the city of Lerna. The king of this City
did great honor to Hercules, and received him as honorably as he could. Among
diverse talk Hercules demanded him of his tidings. The king answered and said,
that he knew none other, but yt in a great palace there dwelled and abode a
monster half man and half serpent, that destroyed all his realm by common
murder. For he said that all the men, women, and children that this monster can
find, he slaieth them with his tail that is inuenomed, with his claws armed
he deuoureth, and destroieth them with his teeth, and there escapes none. And
so it will come to pass that this country be desert: for the laborers nor
marchantes dare not go by the country with less company then two hundred
men: and if they be less, the monster assaileth them, like as he has done
many other, etc.

Hercules was passing glad and joyous of these tidings, and said to the king:
Sir, I have labored yet hitherto for the common weal of many realms, and
yet have I the will to persevere and to do the works of virtue. Know ye then,
since that I am here arrived, I will do somewhat for the weal of this
country, like as I have done for many other. And I have intention for to put
me in deuoire to morrow on the way toward the monster, and for to abide the
adventure, to vanquishe him, or to be vanquished of him. This monster was
called Hydre, forasmuch as he dwelled in the waters. When Deianira heard the
enterprise of Hercules, that he would go alone, and abandon himself in so
great peril, she began to weep and make so great sorrow, that no man might
apease her, nor make her stint her weeping. Hercules comforted her the best
wise he could. Athlas and Philotes comforted her in like manner, and showed to
her the right high and glorious deeds of Hercules, for to give her hope in
this adventure. All that might not help nor avail: she loved Hercules with
all her heart, with all her might and puissance. She required him with her eyes
charged full of tears, that he would abstain him from so high an enterprise;
saying that it was no wisdom for a man to expose himself to so evident
terrible dangers, and that the gods had sent the monster into the country,
for to correct and chastise the people. Notwithstanding that Hercules was very
ardently in love with her: yet her tears that she wept, nor her prayers, nor
her reasons can cause Hercules to break his purpose for to enterprise this
adventure. But on the morn early he clothed him, and departed from Learn,
and took his way toward the moore, whereas was the monster.

This moore was long, and three miles in compass, as the Chronicles of Spain
rehearse, and all environed with fountains that sprung out of the high
mountains. In the midst of this plain was a great lake or pond, wherein
dwelled the Hydre on dry land. When then Hercules was come to this place, the
Hydre that never slep^ with both eyes, and that had always the neck stretched
on high and the ears open, had anon espied him, and suddenly came against him
running with great force. Hercules abode when he espied the marvelous monster,
and had great pleasure to see him: he was ten foot of height, and had as a
long a tail: he was foul and covered with hair: he had his body armed, and
in his right hand held a naked sword, and in the left hand he bare a shield.
Hercules thus beholding him, suffered him to come to him. Then the monster
spoke to him and said: poor giant whether go thou? behold this sword
sharply on both sides cutting: yet was there never man that heard me speak,
but he died by the point of this sword. Forasmuch as I am the most wise
creature that ever nature made, and that I am accustomed to make a question to
such men as I find, and then to destroy them if they cannot answer thereto.
And forasmuch as I find not in my realm, any but people as beasts, and without
understanding, I have therefore destroyed their blood, and so will I do thine,
if thou can not assoil a sophisme that I shall make to thee. O thou man
serpentine said Hercules, thine eloquence, thy prudence, thy cruel sword,
foul and polluted with infinite homicides make me nothing abashed, ne
discourage me: I seek thee, and am come hither for to destroy thee. And I will
assail not only one of thy sophismes, but as many as thou can think: and
will that thou well know, that if by force of my wit, I assail thy sophismes,
and fallacious arguments, I will do unto thee like as thou would do to
me: and if it happen that thy science may not overcome me, yet will I that
that thou defend thee with arms, and that thou keep thy life as well as thou
can, etc.

With these words the monster made unto Hercules seven sophismes one after
another, all fallacious and subtle: then when Hercules had given solution to
one, the monster replied by seven arguments. Yet Hercules that was full of
philosophy, and expert in all science, answered so substantially to all his
fallacious arguments, that he set hm at a nonplus. And for this cause the
poets feign that this Hydre had seven heads, as it appears in the first
tragedy of Seneca, and say that when Hercules had smitten off one of his
heads, that seven other heads came again in the same place. In the end then,
for to pursue this matter, when Hercules had so disputed against the serpent
that he yielded him to Hercules, in such wise as he wist not what to say.
Hercules said to him: Serpent inhumaine, we have fought long enough with the
tongue. Take thy sword, I may no longer withhold my hand from smiting upon
thee, and assay if thou be as subtle in arms as thou art subtle in language.
Poor fool, said the serpent (which was full of pride) know not thou, that
by my part serpentine I have infected all this country, and I will this day
drink thy blood, and devour thy body, wherefore make good watch, and keep thee
well.

Without mo words Hercules enhaunsed his sword, for to have smitten his
adversary, but he could not so soon haste him but the serpent gave him first
two strokes, one with his sword, and the other with his tail, wherewith he had
almost smitten him down to the ground. Yet Hercules abode standing, and with
his sword yt he had lifted up he smote the monster upon the helm with such
strength that he al to frushed the helm, and made him a wound in his head. At
this stroke that the Serpent felt, he was full of fury, and with his sword
smote Hercules the second time upon the helm, with so great might that the
sparkles and the fire flew out, and the helm was broken. Hercules that never
before had received so great a stroke, promised him that he would revenge it,
and smote him right angerly. Their strokes were great and deadly, they smote
each other (...), and they were both two of great courage. But when fortune had
enough cherished them both, she turned against the Serpent so earnestly: that
after many strokes Hercules smote his sharp sword within the helm into his
head, and bare him down dead unto the earth.

Hercules had great joy when he saw the monster put to the foil, and he went
for to fetch the king of Lerna, with Deianira, and his folk, and brought them
for to see the monster. When he had showed them the monster, he made a great
fire and burned it, and made sacrifice unto the gods. And by the fire he
consumed the monster Hydre. Wherefore there were given to him great and right
high praises and thanks. And he was brought to the City of Learn with great
glory of Ladies and of gentlewomen, which conveyed him unto the kings palace
singing melodiously. Deianira the^ ioyed greatly in the triumphant victory of
her noble husband. When Hercules had abidden there a while, he departed and
went to Athens, where Theseus received him gloriously. Then Hercules and Athlas
held school in Athens, forasmuch as they of Athens were quick of capacity
and of wit, and gave themselves all to learn science: and there they were a
great while introducing and enforming them of Athens in philosophy and in
astronomy. And especially in astronomy Atlas profited in such wise, that the
students said, that he sustained and bare the heaven on his shoulders. O noble
virtuous man. When Hercules had spent some time there, and studied so long that
his doctrine had given light unto the Athenians, he departed from thence with
great bemoning, and brought his wife unto the city of Licie. And then he was
so greatly renowned, that from all the realms of Greece there came daily to
him noble men and other, for to profit in virtue, in nobleness, in honor, in
arms, in philosophy, in astronomy, and in all other perfection, etc.

CHAP. XIX. How Hercules went into Spain: and how he fought in the Sea
against king Gerion, and vanquished him: and how he took the city of Megidda,
and entered therein.
IN the time that Hercules flourished in virtue, and that his name was borne
from realm to realm by glorious renown, as the Chronicles of Spain
rehearse, there was a king of the City of Megidda that stands upon the
river of Gaudian which began to make his name to have a great report by many
bad misdeedes and tyrannies that no man could tell the third part. This tyrant
had to name Gerion, he was king of Andalos^e, and Destremadure, and also of the
mountains of Galicia, and of Portingale. The Poets feign of this tyrant, that
he had three heads, forasmuch as he had two brethren great giantes, the which
were all of one nature, and of one complexion, and they were so united
together, that all that the one would, the other would: and they were never in
discord. Gerion was the worst of them all. He did cause to be made a temple in
the City of Megidda, and ordained that all they that were noble should there
have their image and sepulture: and that men should make there the
remembrances of all the men of name that he should flea, to the end that there
should be a memory of them in time coming. What shall I say of his deeds? he
and his brethren tyrannized not alonely upon the strangers, but also upon his
neighbors, and had pity on no man, in such wise that he gat him an evil
name, and that the Affricanes, whom they persecuted more then any other, went
for to complain to Hercules, by the commandment of Afer, as to the sovereign
destroyer of tyrants and of monsters, and prayed and required him greatly,
that he would deliver them out of this tribulation.

When Hercules understood the complaint of the Affricanes, and was advertised
of the tyranny that Gerion and his brethren used: He enterprised for to go
into Hesperie, and promised to the Affricans, that they should have right
shortly lidings of him. And after asked them of the state of king Afer. And
when they had told all that they knew, they returned with great joy into their
country. Hercules from thenceforth, disposed him for to go into Hesperie:
wherefore his wife Deianira made great sorrow. The renown of this voyage was
anonne spread in all the country. In short time there came more men, of arms
into Lic^e for to serve Hercules then he sent for, he was so good, bountiful
and wise: and also valiant and so free that he gave a way all his spoils;
wherefore every man would follow him, and good cause why: for no man followed
him nor served him, but that he rewarded and enriched him in all wealth and
worthiness. When then his army was ready, he took leave of his wife
Deianira, and departed out of the realm of Licie. Many a tear was shed at
his departing, as well of Deianira, as of his scholars that learned of him.
Theseus and Hispan, Athlas, and Philotes were with him. During this voyage, he
studied often times with Athlas, and was never idle without doing somewhat that
ought to be remembered. He arrived in Affricke, where he found Afer, which
received him worshipfully. From Affricke Hercules passed by the strait of
Gybaltar, and went into the Gades, that now we call Galicia, and peopled the
country, forasmuch as he found there good land, and delivered this people for
to govern unto a noble man named Phylistines. This Phylistines as Bocace
rehearses in the genealogy of gods, was son of Phenis, king of Phenycia.
And this Phenis was son of king Agenor, son of king Belus. Philistines then
reigned in Galicia, and was after named the Priest of Hercules, forasmuch as
when Hercules had vanquished the tyrants of Hesperie, he founded there a temple
which he held after in great reverence. Always as Hercules peopled and inhabited
this land, he did cause to be made pillars or columns high and marvelous
great, and set them upon the sea: and upon every pillar or column he did
make an image of hard stone, in the semblance and likeness of a knight, like
unto Hercules all clad with the skin of a Lion. And there was one of the images
that held a table wherein was written with letters of gold. Pass no further
for to seek land, ne go for to conquer further any realms in the West, for
thou shall find no more land, etc.

The noble Hercules went then into the country whereas stands now the city
of Siuil, which was not then founded, and found by his science that there
should be builded a city of great renown: wherefore in memory thereof, he
set up in that place a pillar of hard stones, and thereupon set an image
holding in his hand written, that said: That there should be made one of the
greatest Cities in the world. This land of Galicia appertained to Gerion. But
then when Hercules had made this pillar aboue-said, and set it whereas now
stands Civil: he had a great will for to begin to build the city, for the
cou^tray was passing good and commodious. But Athlas (by the science of
astronomy) counseled him contrary, showing him by certain signs, that it was
destiny, that another should make the city. And therefore nigh the pillar, he
did make a column of white marble, upon which stood the image of Hercules
great and rich, that held one hand against the East, wherein was written: Here
has been Hercules. And with the other hand he showed the writing that the
other image held.

These things accomplished, Hercules departed from thence, and left to
inhabit and keep the country eight hundred men of his of the country of
Scithia, that were strong and expert in arms, and with good will they abode
there, because the country was plentiful. Then went Hercules by the banks of
the sea, into the last and furthermost part of Europe, and sailed so far that
he entered into the river of Guadiana, whereas the tyrant Gerion dwelled and
abode in the City of Megidda. The same time that Hercules entered into the
river: Gerion went up to the top of an high tower, where he might see all about
the country, for to epsy if any person came, upon whom he might exrecise his
tyranny. He had not bin long there, when he beheld the river and saw the army
of Hercules: And seeing this army, he had great joy, for him seemed well that
in all haste he should subdue and overcome them. Without other delay he
assembled his accomplices, and sownded to arms. Within a little while all his
men that were ready and furnished with arms, came unto him for to know what he
would? when Gerion was all armed, and ready for to go and enter into the
battle, he declared to his people his intention, after he entered into his
galleys as hastily as he might, and went from Megidda approaching toward the
Greeks. Thus rowing forth, it happened him that he met a little boat: And from as
far as he saw it come, he went against it and arested it. In this boat were
no mo then two mariners, and Hispan. Gerion then called Hispan, and demanded of
him whither he went, and what he was? Certes sir, answered Hispan. I am a
Greek, and have intention to go to the king Gerion, that is now in his city
of Megidda, for to dispatch a message that I am charged with. Messenger (said
the king) if ye seek Gerion, ye need for to go no further forth: for I am
he, whom ye speak unto. Sir (answered Hispan) since that you be he to whom my
message apperteineth, I let you have knowledge in the name of the virtuous
Hercules, that he is an enemy to your vices: and for to correct your great and
abominable trespasses and sins, he is come into your dominion. Messenger
(answered Gerion) how is Hercules so presumptuous as for to come upon me, to
take upon him to correct my vices? he wot little with whom he has to do: go to
him, and tell him, that he shall not be let to find me, but it shall be too
soon for his health, and that I will feast him in such wise ere he escape me,
as I have been accustomed to feast strangers.

Hispan departed with these words, and returned unto Hercules as hastily as he
might, and told him word for word what Gerion had said unto him: and moreover
he said, that he would meet with him right soon all prepared and ready for
to begin the battle. When Hispan had finished his message, the galleys of king
Gerion appeared, and were seen from far. Hercules and the Greeks had great
joy, and began a right great shouting, in sounding trumpets, fifes, and
tabours. Gerion and his folk seeing and hearing their enemies, they likewise
began to shoute, and to make a marvelous great noise. The air was then
filled with a right great and joyful noise. In this uproar and outrageous
noise, the two hosts approached each other. At the approaching was not spared
darts, nor round stones, nor arrows. They of Hesperie had great abundance of
daries, which they used and cast on the Greeks as it had been rain. The
cries redoubled on the one side and on the other, so that there were many dead
and hurt. They were all men of war: each man bare him valiantly, and among all
other, Hercules having the bow in hand, slew as many of his en^mies as he shot
arrows. The shot dured long. When it failed they fought hand to hand. Then
began the battle to be eagre and hard. Gerion showed himself a man
boystrous and well expert in arms, and put to death many Greeks: but for one
that he slew, Hercules slew ten of the Hesperiens, etc.

At the encounter that the Galleys made, there were many hurt, and strokes
given. Hercules took his clubbe and in smiting one of the Galies, that thought
to have grapled and borded his galley, he struck with so great force, that he
made it to cleave asunder, and that the water came in so suddenly that the most
part of them that were in that galley were drowned, and perished without stroke
smiting. After this, Hercules came to another galley, and there did he
maruailes of arms: all they that he raught with his club were dead or sore
hurt. Some he smote the brains out of the head, and of other he brake legs
and arms. It seemed to thunder with him: he did so bestir him, that each man
fled from him: and there was no man that withstoode him, or durst abide him.
When he saw this, he put himself forth to exploite great affairs. He leapt
from gally to gally, and made so great slaughters, that his people by his good
example abounded in valor of courage and puissance, and the Hesperiens
diminished and lessened: and also they had so much damage, that all things
went against them. And then Gerion, cu^sidering that he might not but lose, and
that fortune was an enemy unto him, he did sound a retrait, and so left the
battle.

CHAP. XX. How Gerion assailed Hercules the second time, before Megidda, and
how Hercules slew his brethren, and vanquished in his battles, and
constrained Gerion to fly, etc.
WHen Hercules saw his enemies busy to withdraw them, he sounded the retrait,
and forasmuch as it was nigh night, and also because he had enclosed the
Galleys of Gerion, in such wise that they might not return into his City
without passing by him. When the two armies were withdrawn, Gerion in the
darkest of all the night, shipped and went into the sea, and went into the City
of Valeritia, whereof one of his brethren was king, and put him there in
safety, in purpose to make the greatest army that he could to come upon
Hercules. Hercules after the retrait, ankred his Galleys upon the river of
Gaudiana, and passed there that night. On the morrow when he saw that Gerion
and his folk were fled, and were not upon the sea within kenning, he rowed up
into the city of Megidda. There he took land and assailed fiercely the city.
The assault was eagre and sharp, and the Megiddans defended themselves, but
they were so disfurnished of men of war, that they might not hold it out, but
opened the town to the Greeks and yielded them al to the will of Hercules.
Thus was Hercules lord and master of the principal city that Gerion had, and
he entered into it, and the Greeks with him. There had they good daie^^ the city
was well provided with vittaile. Since they departed out of Greece, they found
no where so good fortune. What shall I say? Hercules held him there a space of
time searching in what place he might find Gerion. During these things, he
went unto the temple, for to thank ye gods. In this temple were many Sepultures
garnished with right fair marvelous histories. Among all other there was one
passing rich: for the remembrance of Gerion was there, as of a king of fine
gold, and he was environed with 30 kings, whose heads were smitte^ off.
Hercules abode at this sepulture, and demanded of the Citizens wherefore
served the statues and images so rich. A citizen said to him, that there were
the sepultures of the noble men of their realm, and that the king Gerion had
brought up that custom to make these Sepultures, for to have remembrance of
them that were valiant in arms. Furthermore (said that same man) as soon as in
this country a man has put a noble man to death, then he does to make a
remembrance of that dead man on his sepulture. And forasmuch as king Gerion in
his time has slain 30 kings, he has caused this sepulture to be made which
you see, meaning to be buried here, in the end of his days. When Hercules
heard this that the Citizen said, he answered, that he held himself happy,
that he had escaped the sword of such a tyrant, that put so many kings to
death, and made his Orisons, and his prayers unto the gods: After this he
returned to the palace, and there came unto him the messenger of king Gerion,
that by the power of his master commanded him to void the city, and the realm,
or else to make good watch. Hercules answered, that he was entered into the
realm, and also into the city with strength of arms and that he would not go
out thereof until ye time that one had taken from him his sword and arms, by
force of arms, or until the time that he put the country in obeisance.

The messenger returned from Megidda with this answer unto Gerion, and told
him what Hercules had answered him. Gerion was with his two brethren: they
took the words of Hercules impatiently, and swear that they would avenge them
of him. To make short work: they went to the sea with a great army of men of
arms. They rowed and sailed with all the strength they might unto Megidda: the
wind and fortune suffered them in few days to come and arrive at the port of
Megidda: And Hercules was advertised of their coming, who suffered the^ to
take land, and let them rest that day that they came there: they were fifty
thousand men. At that time that they came a land it was late. When they saw
that the Greeks made no defense at their landing, they said one to another,
that they durst not come and fight with them. And weening all to have won
advantage, they thereupon concluded that on the morrow they would assail the
City right early. Upon this conclusion, Gerion and his brethren purueied them
of things appertaining to the assault, and menaced greatly Hercules and his
Greeks for to slay them villanously. Hercules and his Greeks were then in
Megidda, thinking on their affairs, not only in the intention for to defend
them from their enemies, but for to issue out the next day following, and for
to assail them by battle, as soon as the night were passed. Then a little
before the sun rising, on the morrow, Hercules made two battails. In the first,
he put a thousand fighting men, and enterprised to conduct them. In the second
he put the residue of his army, and made Theseus captain of them. After this,
when he had right well trained his people, and set them in a right good
order, he admonished them to do well their deuoire, and had in mind to say to
them certain things, but he might not finish his speech: for that same time
Gerion and his brethren, and their folk, made their approches to assail the
city, and made so great a hurly burly and noise, that all about it redounded,
etc.

When Hercules heard this vproare, he did prepare open ye gate, for to behold
and see what new thing was there. And at the issuing out he saw his enemies
that hasted them to come to the forts and walls with ladders and other Engines
fit and necessary to make an assault. Then he began to laugh in himself, and
bad his men to follow him: and he went straightway forth for to begin the
skirmish. And as soon as the porter had opened the gates, Hercules marched unto
ye Hesperiens bringing his club with him. When Gerion saw Hercules come from
far, he knew him, by his skin of the Lion, and by his club, and showed him to
his brethren, that marvelled of him, because he came alone upon them. Luther is
our mortal adversary, said Gerion: he is full of pride, and sets little by
us: Let us assail him al three, and destroy him: it is time: all the gold of
the world shall not save him. Hercules with these words came so nigh the three
giantes, that he might well speak unto them, and cried unto them and said:
ye evil tyrants, lay down your engines apperteining to assault: it is now no
time to assail the city, but it behooves you to dispose you to enter into
battle. The battle is ready, begin at me, and I at you, and let us sight
together till more come. With these words he lifted his club, and discharged
the stroke so sore upon one of the three brethren, that he cast his shield
before the stroke, and all astonished he bare him to the earth. When Gerion and
his other brother saw their brother so borne down and beaten, they smote with
their swords upon Hercules with great fury, and so employed their strength,
that they brake part of his arms. With these two strokes of their swords,
Hercules received more then an hundred darts upon his body: howbeit the
swords nor the darts were not so hard tempered, that they could pearce, enter,
ne hurt the arms of Hercules, ne Hercules left not to work with his clubbe:
but he it lift up on high at that time, and strak it upon the second brother of
Gerion so lustily, that down from the top of the helm, he all to crushed and
bruised him, and smote him down to the ground, like as an hard and great rock^
had fallen on his head, etc.

Gerion was all afraid for to see so great a stroke, and with a wonderful
angry and fierce heat, he laid upon Hercules, and gave him so great a stroke
upon the helm with his sword, that he made the fire spring out: but the helm
was so hard, that the sword might not enter. Then was Hercules environed with
his enemies, and was smitten in many a place upon his body. The Hesperians
desired sore to see their swords and glaiues red with the blood of Hercules,
but Hercules put himself to defense, joyous for that he might employ his
strength upon them. And when he proved him thus upon one and other, and would
suffer none come nearer then his arm and clubbe might reach, and that his
enemies more and more came about him, Malion, that was nephew to Ulysses,
issued out of Megidda with a thousand men of the army of Hercules. And seeing
so great a company of people about Hercules, and was assured that he fought
there, he and his people addressed themselves thitherward, making so great a
cry, and setting on so valiantly, that in bearing down all before them, they
came and found Hercules, that he had slain more then six hundred of his
enemies, and that he feared yet nothing. They that bare ladders and other
engines, were constrained to cast them down to the ground, and to go to the
battle. The battle was there grievous and hard: and there were many knights
slain. Gerion bestirred himself terribly. His brother that was first beaten,
after that he was borne out of the prease, came unto the field again, and in
his coming he made a great room among the Greeks: he was strong and puissant,
and bare a right heavy guisarme, the edge of which was three great foot long:
he did maruailes with this guisarme, and beat down so many of the Greeks,
that the noise arose greatly about him. And this noise came to the ears of
Hercules. Then left Hercules them that he fought with, and drew to the noise
that proceeded by the cause of the giant. As Soon as he saw the giant, that
deall with the Greeks as he would, he was not well content with that guisarme:
and he lifted up his clubbe, and smote the giant upon the shoulder, employing
his strength in such manner, that the shoulder and the side he all to brake,
and bare him down to the ground, not fully dead, but in worse estate then
dead, for he might not relieve himself, and must needs die under the feet of
the men of arms right miserably.

At this time Theseus and Hisp^n, with the residue of the Greeks, came unto
the battle right joyfully, and finding their enemies without ray, and without
conclud, they skirmished among them fiercely, and slew so many, that all the
place was covered. Hispan and Theseus clo^ the heads of many knights unto the
teeth: they (...) right expect in the feats of arms. At their coming they
made their enemies to retire, and wanne upon them with so good fortune, that by
their means and well doing, Gerion lost mo then thirty thousand men. In short
time the battle was such about Hercules, that his enemies wist not where to
save them. And Gerion being advertised of the death of the second brother,
turned his back and fled unto the sea, blowing his horn. When the Hesperiens
heard the horn, anon they endeavored suddenly to commit themselves to flight;
and they that might save themselves, saved them without delay. Hercules,
Theseus and Hispan, with about twelve hundred Greeks followed them swiftly:
they entered into some of their ships, and pursued Gerion, but they had not
mariners so ready as the other had, wherefore they were a little let.
Howbeit, as far as they might see, Hercules pursued them only with his
twelve hundred men.

CHAP. XXI. How Hercules pursued Gerion, and how he went and vanquished him,
and put him to the death, at the port of the Corogne.
THus having finished the battle for this day, to the great damage and
dishonor of Gerion, and all to the honor and profit of Hercules, Malion
abode in Megidda by the ordinance of Hercules, for to keep the Greeks that
abode there, and for to take the spoil of their enemies. Hercules on the other
side, sailed and rowed after Gerion. Gerion perceived him, and was sore afraid
and fled all that ever he might. The flight dured three days. Gerion had good
mariners, who kept them warily from bording of the ship of Hercules. And they
sailed by the sea Mediterrane, from coast to coast, from flood to flood; now
before and now behind. But the end was such, that on the fourth day they were
constrained to abide Hercules at the battle upon the sea or descend to land
at the Corongne in Galicia. For to fly always the death, whereof they were in
doubt, they left the sea and took the land at a port, imagining that they
should well defend them against Hercules, for they were ten against one. Anon
as they had taken land at the port of the Corongne, they took and tramed them
about the port, for to defend the sea, which was strong for to take. And then
Gerion warned his men, saying: lo nowheere is the hour or the day that we
must die or overcome our enemies in. Fortune has done to us the worst she can.
She was wont to make all strangers to tremble before our swords. Now she
makes us to tremble before a right little number of people. Alas what shame is
this? truly the shame is great, and we ought to have right great reproof so
to do. Since we be at this point, there is no way but to avenge this shame. If
we aue^ge us at this time, we shall recover our worship and honor. In our
usage lies right good hope, for fortune has brought us into a very good port;
and me seems that she w^ll raise us again, and make us conquerours of our
adversaries: let us now defend the port. Avenge we our blood, avenge we our
sorrow, avenge we our damage: it must needs be done, etc.

In the mean while that Gerion encouraged thus his folk, Hercules and his
company rowed so nigh the port, that they were come to strokes smiting. The
Hesperiens cast upon Hercules then round stones, darts with sharp yrons on the
end, spears and swords. Against this the Greeks took their shieldes, and
covered them, and put them in deuoire for to win the port. But the casting of
the Hesperiens was so mortal, that it constrained their enemies to abide, and
not approach the port. They had at this port great abundance of stones. The
Hesperiens kept well the entry more then three hours, so that the Greeks
could find no way nor mean to remedy it. At the end of three hours,
Hercules right sorrowful to see his men troubled so, thought he would enter
into a little boat, and adventure himself alone to win the port. Then he that
doubted no stroke of any mortal man, entered into the little boat, and
steared it himself, with help of the wind which he had at his advantage,
and hoised up the sail, and putting all in adventure, as fast as he might he
brought the boat unto the port, whither he came by his hardiness. But this
was at such time as he received more then a thousand strokes with stones: and
that his sail that stood over end by force of the wind, was smitten full of
holes, and the cords broken, and the mast overthrown, and the boat well nigh
filled with stones. Notwithstanding all these things, Hercules ceased not at
all from his enterprise, but through he passed by all the strokes of his
enemies. He labored so that he took land, and that he thrust himself among
the Hesperiens: and there he began to smite with his clubbe, on the right side,
and on the left side endlong and overthwart, with such abundance of prowess,
that all the place was red with their blood and with their brains. Theseus and
Hispan, and fifty of the Greeks best armed, by the example of Hercules, took
a light boat and adventured themselves to win the port. Hercules was even at
the mouth of the port: he saw Theseus come, and for to make him have passage,
he ran hither and thither, and did so great hurt to the Hesperiens, that
without great danger, they took land, and sprang out of the boat. Then was
the assault hot and furious. Gerion came to the landing of Theseus and fully
three hundred of his men that followed him. All they smote and laid upon the
Greeks, and of the fifty they slew ten. When Theseus and Hispan saw that,
their hearts began to swell. They encouraged themselves, and piersed the
assembly of Gerion: and against one man that was slain of theirs, they slew
fifty of the Hesperians. And there they used so their prowesses, that they did
there the greatest marueiles of the world by arms.

Gerion died for sorrow that he might not come to have his will on the Greeks:
he and his men were eager as Tygres that had been famished. The Greeks were
very mighty and strong as Elephants: their strokes were great, they doubted
neither death nor sword, but put all in adventure. The battle was strong, and
the Greeks received many a wound: always Theseus and Hispan by their marvelous
prowesses saved them from the death, and made passage through a great prease
where Hercules was. Hercules that left not to smite was very glad when he saw
Theseus and Hispan, and their forty companions. Their coming cost Gerion the
death of a thousand men and more: for Hercules, for to encourage his men, and
for to be to them an example of well doing, he added to his deeds strength upon
strength, and prowess upon prowess, confounding his enemies so dreadfully and
terribly, drawing them toward the sea, that they that saw him, wished that they
had bin in their mothers wombs: and in flying they were in such haste, and so
distressed, that they beat each other into the sea, and so they slew each other
themselves. Then was Gerion smitten to the heart with great ire, meddled with
impatience: so he put himself in the prease, and smote not only upon
Hercules, but also upon the companions of Theseus: he smote the first man upon
the helm, so that he cleft his head unto the teeth. After he assailed another,
and bare him to the earth so astonished, that he wist not where he was.
Consequently, he made there a great assault suddenly on the Greeks, so that he
died his sword with their blood, and that the Greeks were constrained to make
a huge great cry, for to have succors.

At this season the Greeks, that were left in the galleys, entered into the
port, and took land easily. When Hercules and his folk heard the cry that
his men made, he ran thither to the assault, and made about them a new noise
great and pitious. Gerion knew anon, that the noise came because of Hercules:
For he saw him come and smite in ye thickest of the prease, for to save
himself: then he called to his folk and cheered them in encouraging, and had
there so great mishap, that for one stroke that Hercules gave him with his club
by chance he was constrained to depart from the prease, and to withdraw him
apart with them that were weary, and for to take his breath. Gerion afterward
fought to his extremity, and casting so his eyes upon the skirmish and
fighting, he saw the Greeks upon the port, and providing them unto the
battle. After he saw how they put many of his men to the worst, and that he
might not resist it: al his losses came before his eyes, and then he began to
sigh, and said, with a dolorous heart: alas, what is the mutabilitie of
fortune? Flattering fortune, what have thou thought? All the honor that thou
have given me here before, redound now to my shame, since thou have sent and
parted to me so many goods, wherefore have thou sent to me Hercules? this is
the enemy of all my glory no^e quenched. He from a shining has brought me unto
a name all full of darkness. At least, if thou have given him sufficient: let
him not come after me with his horrible deeds. All my veins be replenished
with furies, my heart murdereth it self boiling with ire. O what great mishap
is this: since it must needs be that I shall be unfortunate, I will verily die
of the club that I have seen my brother die with: or I will take vengeance.
Gerion all out of his wit with these words put him in the prease, crying:
Gerion, Gerion, for to make his men to courage themselves. Thus crying and
seeking Hercules, he put to death many Greeks: he was al furious, so as his
sword was died with the blood of his enemies. In the end he came unto Hercules,
and with his sword so died, he smote him sore. Hercules was weary, for without
ceassing, he abode fighting by the space of 4. hours, and had received upon
his arms so many strokes, that no man could number them. This notwithstanding,
he fled not at all from Gerion: but came to him joyfully, and fought against
him with so great force, that all they that saw it marvelled: and after many
strokes smitten of Gerion and Hercules, Hercules smote him one stroke, so great
that he al to bruised Gerion, and beat out the brains of his head, and smote
the helm upon his shoulders, so that he fell down dead among the dead men, in
such wise mangled that he abode there dead.

CHAP. XXII. How Hercules founded the City of Corogne, upon the tomb of
Gerion.
SVch was the end of the unhappy life of Gerion the tyrant: he died in like
wise as the two brethren did, by the club of Hercules. When the Hesperiens saw
him brought to that pass, as for to taste the bitter morsel of death, all left
their arms. All they bewailed sorrowfully the death of Gerion, and fell all in
despair: So that one stayed still to be slain, other fled by desartes, by
mountains, by the banks of the Sea, and turned all back in discomfiture.
When Hercules had espied them so disraied, he thanked the Gods, and began for
to pursue his enemies. The pursuit dured unto the Even. The Greeks filled the
fields, the mountains and the ways by the Sea, with the blood of them that
fled. When the night was come, Hercules and the Greeks withdrew them into the
Galleys, and did eat, and drink such as they had, and made joyful cheer.
The hurt men were remembered and comforted with the victory and spoil. The
weary men forgot the labor that they had done. They rested them after their
travail, and passed the night over. When it was day, on the morrow Hercules
issued out of his galley: And beholding the port him seemed that a city
should stand well there, and said that he would make one there: and concluded
to begin it. He sent unto all places where he wist that any people were
thereaboutes, and gave to each man in knowledge, that he was minded to make a
city there, and that the first person that would come to put hand thereto,
should have the government thereof. This thing was known in all Galicia.
Many came thither, but a woman named Corogne was the first that came. And
therefore Hercules gave unto her the ruling thereof, and made to begin the
city, and named it Corogne, in remembrance of the victory that he had there.
Upon the body of Gerion he founded a tower, and by his art composed and made a
lamp burning continually day and night, without putting of any thing thereto.
Which burned afterward by the space of 300. year. Moreover upon the pinnacle or
top of the tower: he made an image of copper looking into the sea, and gave
him in his hand a looking glass having such virtue, that if it happened that
any men of war were on the sea meaning to do any harm to the city,
suddenly their army and their coming should appear in this said looking
glass: and that dured unto the time of Nabuchodonozor: who being advertised of
the property of the glass, filled his galleys with white things and green,
bows and leaves, that it seemed a wood, and in the looking glass appeared
none other thing but a wood: Whereby the Corogniens not knowing of any other
thing then their glass showed to them, furnished not them with men of arms,
like as they had been accustomed to do when their enemies came: And thus
Nabuchodonozor took the city in a morning and destroyed the looking glass
and the lamp. When this tower was made, Hercules caused then to come thither
all the maids of the country, and willed them to make a solemn feast, in
remembrance of the death of Gerion. After, he departed unto Megidda, where were
presented to him 100. oxen of ye fairest.

CHAP. XXIII. How Hercules assailed the king Cacus, and had battle against
him, and overcame him: and how Cacus began to tyrannise in Italy, etc.
AFter this conquest, as Hercules intended to people and inhabit this new
country, tidinges came to him that in the City of Cartagene, a king and giant
reigned, named Cacus, which was passing evil, and full of tyranny, and had
slain by his cursed dealing the kings of Aragon and of Navarre, their wives
and their children, and possessed their seignories, and also held in subjection
all the country of Italy. Hercules received right ioyously these tidinges, and
said, that by the pleasure of the Gods, he will assay if he may take
vengeance of the death of the kings of Arragon and of Navarre. Then he
disposed him unto this work, and having an appetite to correct the king Cacus,
as soon as his army might be ready, he went unto the realm of Castile,
whereas was the king Cacus in the city of Cartagene, that stood beside a
mountain named Monachaio. And he passed by many realms that did him
obeisance, for his virtuous renown: but when he came to approach to
Cartagene, the king Cacus came against him without obeisance, and in arms: for
he had been advertised of his coming. And as he entered into the frontiers,
he sent unto him one of his knights, that said to him these words that follow:
Hercules thou open tyrant, that have thine heart greater then thy body, and
that would assail the heavens, for to conquer them, if the Gods had given
thee wings for to fly as the birds have: If thou seek peace and love unto
the king Cacus, thy equal in condition and fortune, I salute thee in his name:
and if thou come otherwise to him as his enemy, I defy thee in his name. And
in no wise be thou so hardy as to enter into his country. And if thou enter,
know thou that thou shall find in Cacus and in the Castiliens so hard an
encounter, that from thy evil adventure shall no man of thy company be quit,
etc.

Knight (answered Hercules) whatsoever you be, you show not that you have
the heart of a noble man. For it is a shame to all men, and especially to a
noble man, to missay or speak evil of another man. Ye have called me an open
tyrant: and also ye have compared me unto the tyrant Cacus. I answer you to
this article, that I am no tyrant: but a destroier of tyrants: and therefore
ye shall return again unto Cacus, and signify to him, that I have intention
for to show what hate I have unto tyrants: and that within few days he may
prove upon me the hard encounter, whereof I have now received the menaces.
With this answer the Castilien departed from the presence of Hercules, and
returned unto the king Cacus, and told him word for word what Hercules had
said to him. When Cacus had heard all this: he was abashed, notwithstanding
that he was a strong Giant and a puissant, and that he had never found a man
stronger then he was himself: for the renown of Hercules was then so great
through the universal world, that the most strong, and the most assured in
arms, and most fortunate doubted him, and trembled hearing him speak of his
deeds. Howbeit Cacus took c^urage in himself, and in passing over abashment,
in the p^esence of his nobles he said: Blessed be these next hasty days, that
nature and fortune shall bring to us, for to make the proof of our force and
strength. Now it behooves that Castile and Sicille show the force of their
arms, for to defend the king Cacus from the claws of his enemies: and it is
of necessity likewise that the king Cacus, for his people display, and put
forth the uttermost of his strength. Now go we on my brethren and friends, we
be come to the war. The Greeks come upon Castile without any quarrel, let us
go against them and fight for our country: the birds fight one against the
other for their nests, and the dumb beasts for their caves. Nature leads
them so for to do. If we have the same nature: the time is come that we ought
to show it, etc.

When the Castiliens and the Aragonnoys that were there, heard Cacus so speak,
they praised greatly his courage, and answered all with one voice, that they
were ready to assail their enemies. With this answer the king did dislodge
his host that he had there in the fields: and went forth against Hercules,
the straitest way that he could. The king Cacus then went on the way desiring
sore to find Hercules. Hercules on the other side came then against Cacus.
They went so long the one against the other, that soon after they saw each
other, nigh a place where Hercules founded after a city, which was named
Terracene. As Soon as they saw each other, they began to make great joy, and
to make shoutes and cries. After they trained them in order of battle, and
marched the one against the other so hotely and sharply, that they filled the
air in short space with shot of arrows, casting of stones, and of darts. At
the beginning of this battle the Castiliens bare them valiantly, and there
were many of their part slain, more by hardiness then for dread. For they put
themselves too far forth. And they doubted not the shot of the Greeks, that
shot on them so sore, and so thick, that all the ground was made red with their
blood. And the Castiliens which were so far gone and sore chafed were driven
to resort back again to their fellows. When king Cacus saw his folk so
sore bestead, and heard that they reculed from the shot of the Greeks, he
had great sorrow in his heart, and wist not what to do for to entertain and
hold his battle. Some fled, and other reculed and went back, and other
fell down to the earth dead or sore hurt. The battle dured long in this
point, always to the sorrow of king Cacus. But in the end the shot of the
Greeks failed, and the Castilians with Cacus recovered new strength, in such
sort, yt they came to fight hand to hand with swords, and that they shed and
spread largely the blood of them of Tire and of Ancone which were in the first
front of the battle of Hercules.

The noise arose great there: there were many shields broken and skins of
Lions cut in pieces. There as Cacus approached, it seemed that the tempest was:
he was great, strong, and fierce and outrageous in smiting: each of his strokes
was the death of a Greek. In the end, he did so much that the cries of them
that were about him mounted so high in the air, that the Castiliens had well
weend to have won all, and began to make joy for their good fortune in
chasing the Greeks to the death: but even in like wise as a right clear day is
other while trobled by a dark black cloud: so by the alone coming of Hercules
that came then to the skirmish, all their joy was troubled and turned into
mortal loss. For the deadly arm of Hercules laid about him then so terribly
that he beat down the Castiliens, like as a mower with a sith cutteth down
the grass in a medowe. When Cacus saw Hercules so foundre and beat down his
men, all the blood in him changed. Then his blood so moved, as a courageous
man he presented himself before the front of Hercules, and smote him with his
sword so sore and hard, that he cleft his shield in two parts. The Castiliens
seeing the shield of Hercules fly by pieces, thought anon that Cacus had
slain and put to death Hercules, and then made a cry for joy, but it dure^ not
long: for Hercules lift up his arms with his club, and smote Cacus upon the
top of his helm with such strength, that it seemed to Cacus that he saw an
hundred thousand candles, or that he had been smitten down with the greatest
rock of Spain. This notwithstanding Cacus abode standing in his place, and
challenged Hercules to death, and smote him with all his might. At this
assailing, the Castiliens hoping in the fortune of Cacus, al they assailed
Hercules. Hercules was gone so far among his enemies, that he was alone from
all his company. When he heard that Cacus threatened him to death, and saw
that the Castiliens assailed him and came to him from al sides, he had his
heart all filled with solace, and abandoned the thickness and hardness of his
skin of the lion to the swords of them all, without revenging him save only
against Cacus. Thus began the battle between Hercules and Cacus: the strokes
were great and fearful without measure. Cacus fought in the spirit of a
tyrant chafed, and desired sore to overcome Hercules for to tyrannise and
triumph over him. Hercules fought in a virtuous heart, founded and nourished in
virtue, and as an enemy of vice, he assailed this vicious king. Both two were
great, fearce, and strong, of great courage. But certes when they had both
tasted enough each other, at length the strokes of Hercules were so great and
so forcible, that the shoulders of Cacus nor his head might not bear, nor had
the might to sustain them. So the end was such, that after their battle had
dured two hours, Cacus left him: for he might no more suffer him, but fled
and went his way, etc.

When Hercules saw that Cacus fled, he meant not to follow after. This
notwithstanding, for to have the victory in this battle, he began to hew on
the Castiliens, Arragonoys, and such other as he might find: for he left no
man alive, before him young nor old, feeble nor strong. Hispan and the other of
his side, made their feats of arms to flourish and shine. The battle was
sharp: for then the Greeks doubled and redoubled their strokes, and slew many
of their enemies. In the end when Cacus had taken his breath, he put him again
into the middle at one side, where his folk fled, and made the^ to tarry,
smiting and beating the Greeks more terribly then he had done before, whereof
the cries arose so high there, that Hercules then sighting on another side,
heard the cry, and then he ran thither at all adventure. And anon as he spied
Cacus, he went before him, and brake the prease, and smote down so sore, that
Cacus knew Hercules, but he durst not abide him, but fled again with evil
hap. And then the Greeks made a cry and a joyful noise, so that all the
Castiliens fled, some here and some there to the great hurt and loss of
Cacus. For of all his people there was left no more but 50 which saved
themselves upon the mount of Monchayo which stood thereby. But that was with
great effusion of blood of them of Castile, that thought to have mounted up
with the other, yt it seemed that there had been a great spring of blood, that
the caves in the valley were replenished with blood, howbeit Cacus for to fly
well, saved him self and fifty of his men upon the mountains, as the
chronicles of Spain rehearse. When he was above, and in sure peace, he
returned and looked down to the foot of the hill, and he saw there so many
Castiliens, that without number were dead, or in danger for to die: he had
great sorrow then at his heart, not for pity, but for despite, and for the
danger that he saw ready whereby he must pass. Anon after he saw from far
in the champaigne and each quarter and place there all covered with them of his
part and of their blood. Also he saw them that fled taken and brought to the
hands of the other. These things considered, the desolation of his dominion
and the punishment of his tyranny was to him evident: he thought then that
Hercules would soon conquer all the country: For they obeyed him for his
tyranny, and not for natural love. This notwithstanding he dispaired not,
albeit that he saw all the puissance of his men destroyed by the clubbe of
Hercules, and knew that he might no more reign in that country, for all
were slain in the battle, and then he returned unto his Science. And thus
as sorrowful as he was he entered into a house that he had there. But first
appointed twelve of his men to keep the passage of this mount, which was so
strait and narrow that there might go up but one man at once.

When then Hercules and his men had put to death all their enemies, Hercules
began to assail the rock, and to mount, and go upon the degrees or stairs:
but then suddenly they that kept the pass, cast upon him great stones, in so
great abundance that of force he was constrained to descend. When Hercules
saw that he must withdraw him, he obeyed fortune, but notwithstanding he made
there a vow that he would never depart from the foot of the rock unto the
time that he had constrained Cacus to descend and rome down by famine or
otherwise. This vow made, Hercules came unto the foot of the hill, where
battle and slaughter had been, and made the place to be made clean and
purged of the dead bodies and of the blood of them that there lay dead. After
he did make his tent of dewes and leaves, and his bed of fresh grass, and
commanded that each man should lodge there. At that time the night came and
the day failed, the Greeks were weary for that they had all day labored in
arms, and would feign have rest, and made good cheer with that they had. And
after that they had ordained and set their watch, as well for to keep the
coast, as for to keep the rock, that Cacus should not come down, they laid
them down upon the grass, in such wise as they were accustomed, when they
were in war, and so slept and passed that night.

On the morrow Hercules parted the host in twain, and sent Hispan with one of
them into Arragon and Navarre, and he abode there with the other. Hispan in
the name of Hercules was joyfully received of the Nauarroys and of the
Arragonoys. And they made to him all obeisance, acknowledging Hercules to be
their Lord, and the most virtuous prince that was in the West. When Hispan had
all subdued as is said, he returned unto Hercules. Hercules lay yet still
before Monchaio, and there held Cacus in such subjection that he might not
issue. Cacus and his folk were then in great want of vittaile, and they wist
not what to eat nor to drink. They deferred as long as they might, hoping
that Hercules would be weary to be there so long. But in the end when their
vittaile failed, and they saw that they mu^t needs adventure themselves to come
down, Cacus by his science made certain secret things to go down into their
stomachs, and after put thereto the fire and taught all the other to do so:
and then suddenly as they felt the fire issue out of their mouths, and the
fume and smoke in such abundance that it seemed all on a light fire; then by
the counsel of Cacus, they adventured themselves to descend down in running
and casting fire and fume so impetously, that Hercules and the Greeks thought
that it had been a tempest of lightning of the heaven, and had burnt the
mountain: so they made him place, for it was a thing for to make men sore
abashed: and thus they escaped the danger of Hercules at that time. For during
all that day the rock was full of smoke and fume that Cacus had made, and the
smoke was so material, that it seemed darkness.

When Cacus and his folk were thus escaped, and passed the host of Hercules
and of the Greeks, Hercules was then the most wise clerk that was in the
world: and all his pastimes he employed in study: he took his books, and
began to muse how and by what reason he was descended from the rock: he read
and turned many leaves, but all thing well considered he found not that this
fume came of natural things: whereof he had great marvel. Then he sent for
Athlas that always was lodged behind the host, for to be solitary. When Athlas
was come, he showed him the smoke and fume that yet dured. Then he told of the
lightning yt was passed by the host, and demanded of him his opinion. Athlas
knew incontinent the fume, and answered to Hercules. Certes my son, thou art
more sharp in science then I, for mine age may not attain to so high things
as thy youth. Howbeit, forasmuch as I know the growing of this thing long time
past: I will tell thee (that I shall say, thou shall find true as I suppose).
Thou shall understand that this fume is a thing artificial and made by the
craft of Vulcan that was father of Cacus, which was an excellent master in
this science, and was the inuenter thereof: he made certain mountains in
Cicille to burn, and shall always continually burn unto the end of the world.
Cacus, which can the art and craft of his father, has made this fume, and for
to escape from thy hands, he is descended with his company in the form of
lightening or tempest, and thus thy strength is deceived by his Science.

When Hercules understood this that Athlas had said to him, he greatly
marvelled of the science of Cacus, and might not believe it. Then for to know
the truth, he took his clubbe, and went up through the smoke or fume, unto
the top of the rock, seeking Cacus: but he found there neither beast nor man:
then he returned unto Athlas, and laughing, confessed to him that he had said
truth, and said that he would make no pursuit after him, for so much as he
was so gentleman-like escaped. This day they passed over in speaking and
communing of Cacus and of his father Vulcan. The day following when the smoke
and fume was gone and vanished away, Hercules began to behold the country, and
saw that it was commodious and fertile, and to the end that there should ever
be remembrance and memory of him, he founded there a city, which he named
Terracone, forasmuch as he gave this country to the son of the king of
Ancone, and there he made him dwell with his people and with them of Tire.
Hercules after this foundation, went to the city of Salamanque, and forasmuch
as it was well inhabited and peopled, he would make there a solemn study, and
did make there in the earth a great round hole in manner of a study, and he
set therein the seven sciences liberal with many other books. After he made
them of the country to come thither for to study, but they were so rude and
dull, that their wits could not comprise any cunning of science. And then
forasmuch as Hercules would depart on his voyage, and would also that this
study were maintained, he did make an Image or statue of gold unto his
semblance and likeness: Which he did set up on high in the midst of his
study upon a pillar: and made so by his craft and art, that all they that
came before this image for to have declaration of any science, to all purposes,
and of all sciences the Image answered, instructed, and taught the scholars
and students, in such wise as it had been Hercules in his proper person. The
renown of this study was great in all the country. And this study dured
after the time that saint James converted Spain unto the christian faith. From
Salamanque Hercules departed and went into Catalogne, and founded there the
city of Barseloigne, which is a right good city. And finally when he had
accomplished all these things, he sent Athlas home again into his country,
but he held by him all his writers, for he loved books above all the riches of
the world. After he would give leave unto Phylotes for to return unto his
country. But Phylotes refused his congie and leave, and said to him that he
would serve him all his life, and that he reputed his felicity more great to
be in his service, then for to govern the country that fortune had put in
his hand. Hercules after this, called Hispan, and said to him: Hispan, I know
thy wit and thy valiance. I have found thee always wise and true. Thou art a man
of authority and well known in these Coasts. I do now make and constitute
thee to be king over all this Country, and I do give unto thee none other
charge but to love virtue and to ensue honor and worship. When Hispan heard
the gift that Hercules made to him, he fell down at his feet and thanked him,
and after excused him of so great worship. But Hercules said to him, that he
would that it should be so, and delivered to him a certain number of people of
his company for to serve him. After he made him to depart, with great sighs
and sorrow. And Hispan went then by all the countries that Hercules had
conquered there from Gerion, and Cacus. And from thenceforth on, the country
was named Spaigne, after his name: Whereof I will now cease talking of this
conquest of Spaigne, and will come to speak of the deeds of arms that
Hercules did in Lombardy, and of the death of Cacus.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Hercules fought against the eleven Giantes of Cremona: and
how he vanquished them.
WHere be now the kings, the emperors, the souldans, and the princes that men
may speak of the virtuous liberality of them, equal or like unto that of
Hercules? The men at this day fight one against other, and make money conquests:
but they attribute them unto their singular profit. They resemble not
Hercules, that never fought but for the common weal of the world. O noble
Hercules. For to follow and pursue my matter. When he made Hispan king of all the region of Hesperie, that now is named Spaigne, he sent for his Oxen, his
kine and calves, and after departed from Barselone, and took his way into
Lombardie, he went so long on his iourny, that he came nigh to the city of
Cremona, which is but a days iourny from Millane. There were the^ in this city
xi. giants great out of measure. These eleven giants were all brethren, and
sons of Ne^e^ the son of Saturn. And they called themselves all kings of
this city. They held all estate royal, howbeit their rnoumes were but small and
little, and that because they were thieves and robbed their neighbo^r, and made
them always war. When then they knew that Hercules approached their city,
anon they assembled their council together, and demanded the one the other, if
they should suffer Hercules for to enter into their city? All were of one
opinion; that they should not receive him, and that they would send unto him
one of them, which was named Nestor, that he should not enter into Cremona,
unless he first had vanquished in battle the eleven brethren. Nestor at the
commandment of the giants departed from Cremona, and went to Hercules, whom
he found with his little army but three mile from Cremona. Then spoke he to
Hercules, and said unto him. Sir, I have ten brethren kings of Cremona, that
have sent me unto thee, forasmuch as they be advertised that thou entrest into
their dominion, and they charge thee by me, that they will give unto thee no
passage into Cremona, unless thou first overcome them one after another in
battle: and therefore choose whether thou will have the battle, or else to
return again, and leave this voyage. I advertise thee that they be all giants
more great and more puissant then I am. Sir knight, answered Hercules, I have
taken my way for to pass by Cremona: let the giants know that Hercules has
intention to speak unto them more near, as he that dreadeth not nor fears
their accustomed tyrannies, which I must deliver the world of, by feats of
arms. And forasmuch as to the end that they presume not that I have any doubt
or dread of them in any manner, ye shall say to them that I will not fight with
them ten, one after another, but all at once together, and you with them, if
you will accompany them: and for to do so, they shall find me raedy to morrow
early, by day light.

Hercules with these words made his people to abide, and rest there for that
night. And Nestor returned to his brethren, and said to them: My brethren, I
have spoken unto Hercules, and have told him your commandment: he has
answered unto me with a right high and plain courage, that he will fight with
us to morrow, not one after another, but with us all at once. And for to speak
plainly of him, he has the semblance of a man to be valourous in arms, and
furnished with prowess: he is a prince very modest, and of great courage.
Dispose you well, it behooves to furnish well the battle. Certes the battle
will be perilous, for he is mightily membred, and as great as one of us, but
me thinks that he may not compare nor prevail against us eleven, and that
he may not escape from our forces, but that we shall pearce him with our
swords whatsoever force or strength is in him. The giants so hearing him
praise Hercules, had great marvel of him, and might not believe Nestor of
that, that he had reported that he would fight with all together at once, for
there was none of them all, but he thought himself strong enough for
Hercules. Then they asked of Nestor, and demanded of him if he were sure to
have well understood that Hercules said unto him, that he would fight against
them all at once. Nestor answered, yea, and that he had heard him say it in his
proper person. With this answer they concluded, that on the morrow they
should arm them all, and that they would go to the field for to fight against
Hercules, if he came against them. One of the giants said then unto his
brethren, to morrow shall be the day of our glory and worship. We shall
vanquish the vanquisher of the monsters, let us make good cheer. Brother
(answered Nestor) therein is no doubt but that we shall overcome and bring to
the foil him that ye speak of, but so much shall our glory be the less, that
we shall be eleven against one. Well said the other, if in fighting against us
eleven, we shall have the less honor, let us every man fight for himself.
Brother, answered Nestor, if ye had seen and heard him as I have, ye would not
be so hardy as ye show semblance of: he is another manner of man then you ween.
Keep you at the offer that he has made, it is better to have the most
profit and less honor in such a case. In these conferences they passed all
that day, afterward they went to rest. When the hour was come on the morrow
early, they arose and made themselves ready in the best wise they could. After
they sent one of their men unto Hercules, for to know if he would say any
thing: but as soon as the messenger issued out of the gate, the first thing he
saw, was a giant, armed marueilously: the messenger abode then, and advised him
a little. After he had advised himself, he went unto the giant armed, and
asked him what he was. I am Hercules, said the giant. What will you say or
have, said the messenger. I will say, said Hercules, that the giants of
Cremona have no cause for to let me the passage of their city. And forasmuch
as they let me to understand yesterday, that if I would have passage, it
behooued me to vanquish them one after another in the field by battle: I am
come hither in hope to win the victory: and demand no other thing but for
to see them in arms for to fight with them all together at once, to the end to
have the sooner done. Wherefore I pray you to go to them, and signify unto
them my coming, and that they haste them.

The messenger with these words returned unto the giants, and told them all
what he had found. When the giants knew that Hercules was already come into
the field, they all took their swoordes and their furniture of war, and
departed from the city, addressing themselves against Hercules. Hercules was
then alone in the place. The men and women of Cremona went upon the walls and
towers for to see the battle. And Phylotes with other noble men of the Greeks
were upon an hill far enough from the place where Hercules was abiding the
giants. Certes, it was a fair sight to see the coming of the eleven giants.
They were all well appointed and well furnished with helmets enriched with gold
and stones. They were great and strong, all of one measure, they were bearded,
and had fierce countenances: they came on and marched stoutly, and with a great
courage. When they came nigh to Hercules within half a bow shoot, they menaced
him all to death, and made a cry so great that the walls of the city
redounded. After they ran against the assured prince, like as they had been
lions: Hercules hearing these cries, and seeing their course on foot, he
stayed for them, lifting up his clubbe over his head. When it came to meeting,
it seemed well that the giants would have all to bruised him with their
swords, for they smote upon him so vnmeasurably, that the pieces of their
swords flew into the air. Their strokes were great. Hercules suffered them,
and beheld what power they had: but when they had made their assaies upon him,
Hercules made his assay upon them, and with his clubbe smote one of the giants
upon his helm, so that he all to bruised not only his helm, but also his
head, that he fell down suddenly dead. When the other ten giants saw that
their brother was so dead of one stroke, they had great sorrow, and their blood
was much moved. Nature willed them to take vengeance. They did that in them
was, and assailed Hercules eagerly on all sides. And thus began the battle
between Hercules and the giants. Hercules dreaded not any stroke of sword, of
spear, ne pollax: his skin of the lion was hard and strong: his strength
was stable, and his clubbe bare all, and so it was need: great were the strokes
that they gave each other. The giants did all their endeavor, and gave strokes
enough to Hercules, but they could never pearce the skin of the lion, it was
so hard: but yet was his clubbe more harder. The giants marueiled of the
constance and puissance of Hercules. As Soon as Hercules had lift up his club
for to smite on them, his enemies that were there, leaped aside, and other
while brake his strokes: howbeit he did so much, that in less time then an
hour, he slew four of them, and the other seven fought afterward by such
vigor, that the more he smote them with his clubbe, the more furious he found
them and fierce, etc.

The battle was terrible and hard, for the giants were strong, and long had
used the skill of arms, and great pain had they to save themselves, and to
avenge the blood of their brethren, and for to have worship of the battle.
And they said, that they were unfortunate, seeing they might not overcome one
man alone, nor match him. In fighting, they helped and comforted each other, and
had all good courage. But what profited them the great number of brethren? and
what auailed them their courageous strokes, when they were approaching their
death? Hercules was always Hercules: he reioiced much in the plenty of his
enemies, he comforted himself in fortune: fortune helped him, he did
marueiles on all sides, well could he fight, and well defended he himself, all
that he did was well done: all that other did, and endeavored to do, was
naught worth: notwithstanding that they were mighty and hardy. But the luck
and good hap of Hercules was not to be broken, ne his clubbe could not be
foiled: but he triumphed, and more was his puissance to sustain the furies of
his adversaries, then their might was to charge him with their strokes. O
marvelous strength and might of a man. His puissance was not of a man, but of
an elephant: his skin of the lion, seemed that it had been tempered with quick
and hard steel: his body seemed more constant against the cutting swords of
all his ill willers, then is an anuill against the strokes of many hammers or
great sledges. There was no stroke of his enemy that grieved him: he took
great pleasure in the battle, seeing himself among so many giants. He still
greatly rejoiced, and there was nothing grieuing him, but the declining of the
day, which began to fail. At this hour, when the Sun withheld her rays, and
turned into the West, Hercules would make an end, and speed his battle. The
giants began to cease for to smite, for from the morning unto the evening, they
had fought without any ceasing: and Hercules behaved himself in such wise,
smiting upon one and other, being about him, hard and sharply, that it
befell so, that of some he overthrew and brake helmets and heads, and of
other, he brake arms and sides maruellously, and gave so many great strokes,
that finally; he beat down, and to bruised them all, except Nestor, which fled
away when he saw the discomfiture. And therein did he wisely, for all his
brethren were there slain by the hand of Hercules, etc.

When they of Cremona saw their Lords dead, they had soon made an end of
their weeping and sorrow, for they had been to them hard and troublesome. At
the end of this battle, they assembled to council, when they saw that
Hercules had woonne the battle, and concluded together, that they would yield
themselves to Hercules, and put themselves to his mercy. With this conclusion
they issued out of the gates in a great number, and came unto Hercules, which
was the conqueror of his enemies: first they kneeled before him down to the
ground: secondly, they prayed and required of him mercy: and thirdly, they
surrendered unto him their city and their goods, and said to him, they would
hold him for their lord during their lives. Hercules, that was pitiful and
gentle unto them that were meek, and humbled themselves, received the
Cremonians into his grace, and made them to rise and stand up, and after sent
for them of his host. When they were come, he brought them into Cremona, where
great joy was made unto them, for they were glad of the death of the giants.
And there was no man, nor woman, nor child, that thanked not the gods.

By this manner was Hercules king of Cremona and enriched with a new title of
victory. The first night that he entered into the city, he rested him and his
people: and then were they well refreshed and right well feasted and served
with vitaile. On the morrow he did cause to bring into the city the bodies of
the giants that were dead, and did bury them worshipfully. And after he founded
upon them a very great tower and high, and upon the tower he set xi. images or
statues of metal, after the fashion of the giants that he had slain, in
remembrance of his victory.

After the edification of this tower, Hercules left in Cremona, folk for to
govern them, and departed thence for to go further forth into the country.
He studied always, and was never idle: he studied so much, that he could make
the fire artificial, as well as Cacus: and found the remedies against the
same. What by arms and by his science, he gate a very great glory and praising
in Italy. He went into many places, and over all where he came or went, men
did him honor and reverence. What shall I make long process? with great good
adventure, he went so far, that he came to a city standing nigh the mount
Auentin, where reigned a king named Euander, which received him solemnly. It is
to be noted, that when Cacus fled from Monchayo (as is said) unto this mount,
he came into Italy all displeasant to have lost his seignorie. Then he gave
leave to depart from him to all his servants, and all despaired alone, he went
to the mount Auentin in an evening, where he was constrained to withdraw
himself, for he doubted much Hercules. When he was come above on this hill, he
found there a great cave, and there he went in without supper, and then he
began to be discomforted greatly and bitterly, and said: Alas, now am I exiled
and banished out of all my seignories and lordships. Now have I no succor nor
comfort of person. I dare not name me king, where I was wont by my name to make
kings to tremble, alas al is turned, and become vpside down. I have nothing to
eat, nor wot not where to lodge, unless it be with the beasts. O poor king:
where so any man so unhappy as I? I am so unfortunate and unhappy, that I dare
not be seen nor known. With these words he laid him down upon the bare
ground, and laid a stone under his head, and with great pain and grief fell
asleep: which dured not long, for his veins were strongly stirred, his heart
was not quiet, and his body was right euilly sustained. Anon he awoke, and went
out of the cave, for to look if it were nigh day: for the night troubled him,
and was to him too long. But when he was come into the air, he saw no day
appear, nor stars, nor moon shine, but he found it all dark, cloudy and
thick, and saw all the region of the air covered with clouds, whereat he was
greatly vexed and grieved. Then he went into the cave again, not into the
deepest, but at the mouth thereof, and there sorrowful and pensive abode
without any more sleeping till it was day.

When the day appeared, Cacus issued out of the cave, and went up unto the top
of the hill, and began to behold and see the country about. The country
seemed to him good and fair for to live there. After great pensiuenes, and
many thoughts, he concluded in himself, that he would abide there unto the
time that his fortune ceased, and would live there of booties, rapin and theft.
After he bethought himself, that he would go to king Pricus of Calidonie,
which was his cousin, for to have company to lead his wife with, that he had
chosen, and that he would ask and demand in marriage one of his daughters. With
this conclusion he departed from the mount Auentin, and took the way unto
Calidony, going apace til he came thither. Some say that Calidony is the
country that we call Calabrie. When Cacus was come to Calidonie, king Prycus
received him, as it apperteined to a king, forasmuch as he knew him, and was of
his lineage: and after demanded him of his tidings. Cacus began to sigh, when he
saw that he must tell his mishappe, and then told him and recounted from the
beginning to the end, how Hercules had taken from him his realms, and how he
had been besieged, and how he was escaped. And forasmuch (said he) as I dare
not abide in mine own country, I am come hither unto you for refuge, and to
tell and count my sorrows. And I have intention to hold me on the mount
Auentin in a Cave that is there until that time mine enemy Hercules shall
depart from mine heritage: and I will keep me there so secret that no man in
the world shall have knowledge thereof, to the end that Hercules know it not,
forasmuch as he has me in great hate, and he has more greater hap and fortune
in arms then I have. And if he knew that I were in any place, I am certain
that he would come thither for to destroy me. This considered, I have chosen
this cave for to hide me, as I have said: but for so much as I have more sorrow
in feacute;eling, then my taste requires, it is so that the eyes of a man
being in great trouble, rejoice in the visage and fight of a woman, for a woman
is a gladness and comfort of a man. Wherefore I require you, and pray you that
ye will give me to wife one of your daughters. And if it please you so to do,
certes ye shall do to me great pleasure, and the most friendship that I may
have for this present time. The king Pricus answered and said: Cacus ye be
come and descended of high gentleness, and have great lordship and seignory in
Hesperie. If fortune were against you this day, your highness ought not
therefore the worse to be esteemed. At this day I have four daughters, of whom
the one is named Yole. Take whom it pleases you, except Yole: for I will not
yet marry her. And if ye have any will to make any army against Hercules, tell
it me plainly, and I will succor you as a true friend. Cacus was right well
content with the answer of the king, and thanked him, saying that he would
make no army for this season, but he would pass his time in the cave, like
as he had purposed and concluded. Then the three daughters of king Pricus were
sent for, and Cacus choose one of them, which he wedded, and after lay with
her, and abode there two days. At the end of two days, he would depart, and
took leave of the king. The king would have delivered unto him ten knights
and ten Squires, for to have brought him on his way, but he refused them and
would none. Then he would have delivered to him certain ladies and damsels,
but of all them he took none, save the two sisters of his wife: which would by
force go with him. Thus then he departed from Calidonie, accompanied with three
sisters. He was always sorrowful and pensive, and from that time forth, thus
being in impatience for his mishappe, and casting out of his royalty, he
began to run out, and bathed his axe in the blood of the men, women and
children that he met, and put them al to death, etc.

Cacus began to exercise the deeds of fury and of tyranny, as he was going
unto the mount Auentin. Anon as he was come, he entered into the cave, the best
wife he could with his wives, and the most secretly. And of this place he made
a nest of theft, and a pit of sins. For the first night that he had lodged
his wives, he went into the village that stood there fast by, and beheld the
fairest house, where into he entered by a window that was open, and slew all
them that were therein: and after took all the goods, as much as he might
bear upon his shoulders, and bare them into the cave, whereas were his wives.

CHAP. XXV. How Cacus stole away the oxen and kine belonging to Hercules: and
how Hercules fought with him therefore, and slew him.
IN the morning Cacus found a right great stone of marble, which he took and
bare it unto his cave, and made therewith his door. The most part of that time
Cacus held him in his cave, and went never out but when he would do harm or
evil. When he went into the field, as is said, he slew al the^ that he met.
He robbed every man, he defloured women, he burnt houses and towns, and
shortly spoiled, and did so much harm in Italy, that they that passed in the
country, supposed it to be destroyed by the Gods, and could not know whereof,
nor from whence came these persecutions that Cacus made upon them. For to
return then to our talk of Hercules: he came unto the city of king Euander,
in the time that Cacus bedewed Italy with blood of men, and filled his cave
with continual stolen goods. After the coming of Hercules and of his men of
arms, his beefes, or oxen, were brought into the city, because the king
Euander should see them. The king took great pleasure to behold and see them:
for they were high and passing fair. After that the king had seen them,
Hercules demanded of him, whither he might send for to pastor them, for that
night? In truth Sir, said Euander, if ye will follow my council, ye shall
let them abide in this City, and not send them into the fields. Wherefore
said Hercules? Euander answered and said, forasmuch as when we send out our
beasts, we know not where they become. They have been stolen, and driven
away, and we cannot know who be the robbers, our servants been murdered, the
houses be burnt, the people that should labor in the field, be slain, the
women and maidens be violated and put to shame: and we cannot remedy it. For
we cannot have knowledge of the authors or doers thereof. Wherefore, some men
say, and will avouch it, that they be the Gods that thus punish us, for our
sins. Wherefore I pray you let your beasts abide in this city, to ye end
that they be not stolen. Sir, said Hercules, ye recount and tell to me a great
marvel: I believe well that those things that ye say be very true. But this
notwithstanding, since that the Gods have saved them unto this day, they will
keep them yet if it please them. For if they will have them, even as well they
will take them in the City, as in the fields. And if there be a robber or
thief in the country that will take them away, I suppose I shall find him,
and shall make Italy quite of him. With these words, Hercules sent his beasts
into the pasture, and there left them without any keepers. The day passed over,
the night came. In this night Cacus issued out of his cave, and went into the
country for to pill and rob if he might find any booty. Thus as he that is
unhappy seeks evil, and in the end he is paid at once for his trespasses,
the unhappy adventure brought him into the meadow, where as pastured the oxen
and kine of Hercules: it was nigh the morning, he had with him his three wives.
As Soon as he saw the beasts by the light of the moon that shone clear, he
knew them. Anon he was all abashed, and his blood changed in his visage, and
not without cause: for soon after his sorrows began to grow on him, and came to
the quickness of the heart, that he could not speak. His wives seeing that he
spoke no word, and that he beheld the beasts, as all a wondered, came to him,
and demanded of him what he ^iled? Alas, answered Cacus, since it is so that
ye must needs know: I tell you for certainty, that all the sorrow of the
world arises in my stomach, and enuironeth mine heart: for I here see the
oxen of the triumph of mine ennemy Hercules, and in beholding them, I remember
the losses that I have had by him, and the honors and worships that he has
made me for to loose, and also the realms that he has taken away from me,
and the great misery that I am now in. He must needs be hereby in some place.
Cursed be his coming, for I wot not what to do: but in sign of vengeance, I
will slay his oxen and his kine.

When the three sisters had heard yt Cacus so sorrowed, they councelled him
that he should not slay the beasts, Saying that if he slew them, Hercules
should leese nothing, for he should eat them. It were better said his wife,
that ye take and lead away as many as ye may, and bring them into our cave:
for if ye do so, Hercules shall have loss and displeasure, and ye shall have
pleasure and profit. Cacus believed that his wife said to him, yet he looked
in the meadow al aboutes, if any man had bin there to keep them, but he found
no man nor woman: And then he came to the beasts, and took eight of the best
that he could choose, four oxen and four kine, after he bound them together
with a cord by the tails, and put the cord about his neck, and drew them
so in that manner unto his cave, albeit that the beasts resisted strongly to go
backward in that manner. Cacus brought in this manner reculing, and going
backward, al those beasts that he stale, to the end that no man should follow
him by the traches of the feet of the beasts.

When he had put in his cave the beasts of Hercules, as said is, he shut the
door so well, that a man should never have known nor perceived that there had
been any door. Then weening that he had been sure, he laid him down and
slept. Anon after, the sun rising, and that it was day, Hercules that desired
much to hear tidings of his beasts, arose up, and did so use the matter that
the king Euander brought him unto the place, whereas his oxen and kine were.
When they were come into the meadow, Hercules found that he lacked four oxen
and as many kine: Whereat he was sore troubled, and for to know if the Gods
had taken them, or any thieves had stolen them, he commanded that they
should seek all about the medowe, and see if the traches or the printes of the
feet of the beasts might be seen or found. At this commandment, one and
other began to seek. Some there were that looked toward the mount Auentin, and
found the stepps and footing of the oxen, but they thought by that footing yt
the beasts were descended from the mount, for to come into the medowe. When al
they had sought long, and saw that they found nothing, they made their report
unto Hercules, and said to him, that they could not perceive on no side where
these oxen were issued out, and that on no side they could find any signs
nor tokens of beasts going out of the pasture. But right now said one, I have
found the steps and feet of certain oxen, and kine, that he descended from
the mountain into the meadow. When Hercules heard, yt from the mountain were
come oxe^ into the meadow, he called Euander, and demanded him, what people
dwelles on the mountain. Euander said to him, that thereon dwelled no man nor
beast: and that the mountain was not inhabited. Hercules would go to see the
footing: and went thither, and he thought well that thither might have passed
eight great beasts in that night, for the traces of the feet were great and
new. Then he would wete where they were become: but he found well that ye
footing of the beasts took their end there as they pastured. He was then right
sore a marvelled, forasmuch as there were no strange beasts, and began to
muse. When he had a little paused, he beheld the mount, and said, it must
needs be that the Gods have ravished mine oxen, or else that there is a thief
in this mountain, that is come and has stolen them, and has led them away
reculing backward. But forasmuch as I have less suspicion of the Gods, then of
the thief, I will never depart from hence until the time that I have searched
this mountain from one side to another, for my heart judges, that the beasts
be here, etc.

With this conclusion Hercules did cause to take diverse calves that were there,
and made them to fast till noone. During this while he sent for his harneis
and arms by Phylotes, and armed and made him ready to fight. Anon after
midday, as the calves began to cry and bleate for hunger, he caused them
then to be brought about the mountain. Thus as they passed by the place where
the cave was, and cried, it happened that the kine that were in the cave heard
them, and answered, crying so loud, that the sound passed by the holes of the
cave, and came to the ears of the calves, and also of Hercules, and of other.
When Hercules heard the cry of his kine, he abode there: his calves began
to cry again, but his kine cried no more, for Cacus by the force of their cries
was awaked, and as he that always doubted for to be discovered, rose up, and
cut the throats of the kine. The calves then naturally knowing their dammes,
cried very loud, and bleated as they that desired the milk for to live by.
Howbeit they could not so loud cry, that their dammes answered them: hereof
marvelled much Hercules. Then he approached the mount, and went unto the place
where him seemed that he had heard the kine, and was there full three hours
seeking if he could find any hole or cave or way to pass by. But howbeit
that he passed many times by the entry of the cave, he could never perceive
it. Some said, that the noise and bleating that they had heard of the kine, was
come by illusion. The other said, that Hercules lost his labor and travel,
and prayed him to leave to seek any more, for they thought them not
recouerable. In the end when Hercules had heard one and other, and saw that he
might not come to ye end of his desire, in a great anger he took in both arms
a great tree that grew there, and shook it three times with so great force,
that at ye third time he overthrew it root and all, in such wise that the root
that came out of the earth made a very great large hole so deep, that the
bottom of the cave was seen plainly.

When Hercules saw the great hole that the root of the tree had made, he was
right joyful and glad, and said: truly it is here that the great thief
dwells. I must see if he be here, and what marchantes inhabit in this
place. In saying these words, Hercules bowed down his head, and beheld on the
one side of the cave, where he saw Cacus. As Soon as he saw the thief, he
knew him anon, whereof he was more joyous than he was before, and called to
him, Cacus I see thee, thou have before this time troubled the realms of
Hesperie with innumerable trespasses and great sins that thou did commit
openly and manifestly. This was the cause of the destruction of thy seignory.
Now thou troublest the Italians with tyrannies secret and unknown. I know thy
life. Thou may not deny it, nor gainsay it. It behooves that thou die
therefore, and that I make the Italians frank and free from thine horrible and
odious thefts. O cursed man, if thy crowns, thy Diademes, thy Scepters, thy
renowns, thy royal men, might not maintain thee: Why then, and wherefore art
thou wrapped here still in sins, and amendest not, for all thy punishment
that thou have suffered, but yet still in the steed and place that thou
should dispose thee to that, that appertains to a king and a prince, thou
have been a thief. In steed to do justice, thou have been a murderer, and a
putter in of fire to burn villages and houses. And where thou should have
kept and saved women, thou have defloured them and done them villainy. O caitife
king, without coniuring or pining of thee, Certes, I see well, that thou art
he that the Italians know not, and that thou have persecuted the^. Thy malice
has been great and thy subtlety, seeing that this day thou were never
bewraied, and have done great mischief. But thy cunning is not so great, nor
have not thou so hid thee, but thou art right nigh peril, for thou shall yield
to me again my Oxen. And to conclude, thou shall put me to death, or thou
shall die by my hand, and thou shall not escape by running, nor by thy subtle
shifts.

When Cacus understood this sentence, he was exceedingly afraid, nevertheless
he lifted up his head, and seeing that he was found by Hercules, the only man
of the world that he most hated, he said to him: Alas Hercules, a man all
corrupted with covetousness: what cursed fortune has made thee to draw out
the tree whereof the profound and deep roots has covered the secret abode of
king Cacus late reigning, but now deprived from reigning, and banished from
all worldly prosperity? Suffiseth it not to thee, that I may have the use of
my natural forces to live by, when thou have taken al away from me, and that I
am forced to live of robbery and spoil, whereof the blame and fault ought to
redound upon thee: Why suffer thou not me to live and draw forth the
residue of my poor life, among the stones, among the rocks, and among the
worms of the earth? Consider now, what thou have done to this king, and seek
him no more. Thou have hurt and grieved him enough. Hercules answered Cacus.
In the deepest of thy depthes of wretchedness and miseries, thy demerites will
accuse thee: and I am right sorry and grieved to see a king in so woeful and
shameful estate: but seeing thou can not beautify thy days passed or
present with one only good deed, what remedy? thou have daily exercised
tyranny as well in prosperity as in adversity. I wot well that thou art the
new persecuter of the Italians, and that thy hand is all foul with their
blood. I seek thee not, nor the Italians can say nothing of thee. And for
as much as they complain not of thee, having cause to their prejudice, this
tree has spoken for them, and by his roots he has discovered thine ambush.
So behooves it that thou choose, whether thou will come and fight with me here
in the air at large, or else that I come and assail thee there within. For if
it be to me possible, I will deliver the world from thy tyrannies, etc.

By this answer, Cacus knew that there was no respite for his life. Then he
intended to save him as he had done aforetime, and made by his craft so great
a smoke and fume, that it seemed to come out of the hole that the tree had
made, as it had been a very pit of hell. And this fume was mingled with flames
burning as it was marvel. For all this fume Hercules left not Cacus, but
leapt into the Cave, in the middle of the flames and fume, as he that was
master of the craft, and was quickly purueied of remedies that thereto
appertained, and went in lustily and assailed Cacus, in such wise as he felt no
fume nor let: and then he gave him so great a stroke upon the helm with his
clubbe, that he made him to hit his head against the walls of the cave. Cacus
with the receiving of this stroke, let the fume disgorge out of his stomach,
seeing that by that manner he could not escape, and took his huge great axe,
that stood by him, for to defend him with. Hercules suffered him to take his
axe. Cacus smote upon him, for the cave was not large: and they fought long
therein. Unto the reskewe of Cacus came the three sisters, that made great
sorrow, and did cast stones upon Hercules in great abundance, and wept
bitterly.

These three damsels loved very well Cacus. Hercules and Cacus fought more then
a long hour without ceasing. At the end of the hour, they were both so sore
chafed, that they must needs rest them. Then Cacus took in himself a great
pride, for he was strong of body, and him seemed, when he had rested, that
Hercules was not so strong as he had been before times, and that he might never
vanquish him, forasmuch as he had not overcome at the beginning. By this
presumption he demanded of Hercules, if he would finish the battle without
the cave. Hercules answered, that he was content. With this answer Cacus
took away the stone that shut the cave, and went out, and in going after him,
Hercules espied his kine that were dead in a corner, and his oxen that were
bounden by the mussels unto a pillar: He was sorry when he saw his kine in that
case. Nevertheless he passed forth, and pursued Cacus, that reached out his
arms, and made him ready, and said to him: Thou cursed thief, thou have done
to me great displeasure to have slain my kine. Yea (cursed thief thou thy
self) answered Cacus, yet have thou done to me more displeasure, to have
slain my men and taken away my realms. Thou art only culpable of the evil
that I have done, and of the death of thy kine. I would it pleased the Gods,
that I had thee as well in my mercy, as I had them: be thou sure that thou
should never take away realm from no man: and now let us dispatch our
battle. At these words, Hercules and Cacus smote each other right sore, and
with great fury so as their strokes cleaued to their harneis, and made a great
noise. At this noise, the king Euander and the Greeks came to the battle,
for to see it, which they made before the entry of the cave, whereas were the
three sisters passing desolate. Cacus enforced him with all his puissance: For
he saw it was time, then or never to show and put forth all the force that he
might. He handled his axe right mightily, and well was him need so to do. He
was hard and boisterous: he gave many a stroke to Hercules. And him seemed
otherwhile that he should confound him unto the deep pit of the earth. But
Hercules on his side failed not, though he had a strong party against him: He
was also strong at the combat, and more strong then was good for ye health of
Cacus. He smote never Cacus, but he turned his eyes in his head, or made him
stoup, or kneel on the one side or the other, or to go back shamefully. This
battle by long during grieved the beholders, they so assailed each other, and
fought hard on both sides. Finally, they did so much that they were driven to
rest them, and that all their bodies swette all aboutes. When Hercules saw,
that yet was not the victory won, and that the night approached, he had great
shame in himself, that he had held so long battle. Then he began to lay on
Cacus so hard, and redoubled his strokes with such force upon Cacus so
fiercely, that at last he bare him down to the ground all astonished, and made
him to loose his axe, and then took off his helm. The three sisters fled
then into a forest named Oeta, all full of tears and cries. Many Greeks would
have gone after: but Hercules made them to return. After he called the king
Euander and his folk, and said to the king. Sir, lo here is he that was wont
to trouble the Italians with secret murders, covert theftes, and unknown
defiling of women. Give no more suspicion to the Gods. Lo here is the minister
and doer of these trespasses, I have intention to punish him, not only after
his desert, but unto the death.

Euander answered to Hercules and said: Prince excellent and worthy above all
worthies, and the most best accomplished of all men flourishing in arms: What
reverence is to thee due? thou deseruest not only humane reverence, but that
reverence that is of divine nature: I believe assuredly that thou art a God, or
the son of a God, or else a man deisied. Thou in especial have seen more in a
moment, then all the eyes in general of all the Italians have seen, not in a
whole year, but in an hundred years. O the bright resplendant sun of noble
men, and fair shining with glorious feats and deeds: how may we thank
thee, and give thee land for thy desert in this great work? Thou (by thy most
excellent labor) have disburdened us from darkness, and have given us light
of cleerenesse: thou have effected more then the great troops and all the
assemblies and men of arms of Italians would have been able to do. Thou have
gotten more triumph in chastising of this giant passing terrible, the^ we be
able to reward thee for. Truly if thou be not a god, thou have from the gods
their singular grace. I promise to thee, in remembrance of this labor, to
build a solemn temple in my city, where thou shall have an altar, and upon
the altar shall be thy representation of fine gold, and the representation of
this tyrant, in showing how thou have vanquished him, to the end that our
heirs and successors in time coming, may have thereof knowledge.

During these words, Cacus refreshed him, who was astonished of the stroke that
he had received, and thought to have fled: but Hercules ran after, and caught
hold of him, and embraced him in his arms, so hard that he could not stir
from him, and brought him again, and bare him unto a deep pit that was in the
cave, where he had cast in all ordures and filth. Hercules came unto this foul
pit that the Greeks had found, and put Cacus therein, his head downward from
on high unto the ordure beneath. Then the Italians came about the pit, and cast
so many stones upon him, that he died there miserably. Such was the end of the
poor king Cacus: he died in an hole full of ordure and of stinking filth.
When the king Euander saw that he was dead: by the consent of Hercules, he
made him to be drawn out of the pit, and caused him to be born into his city,
whereas Hercules was received so triumphantly, that no man can rehearse. The
feast was great that night in the palace of king Euander, and passed with great
joy. On the morrow the king Euander caused to be set forth the body in the
common view and sight of all the people, and afterward ordained certain folk
thereto ^it and meet, to carry this miserable corpse or body through all the
cities where he had done harm, and for to count and rehearse to them his life.
What shall I make long rehearsal? When the body was showed in the city of king
Euander, they that had the governance thereof, bare it into diverse places, and
always they praised Hercules. In remembrance of the nouelty of this victory, the
king Euander made to begin the Temple that he had promised to Hercules, and
required Hercules, that he would abide there in that country until the time
that his Temple should be fully made and finished. Hercules beheld how the
king Euander did labor about building his temple, with all diligence, and
agreed to his request, forasmuch as him seemed that the Temple would be shortly
made. And some books say, that long time before, the god Mars had promised to
Hercules, that there should be a temple made unto him: and for that cause he
was come into Italy, for to wit if his destiny should happen or no. And when
the Italians heard recount the birth of Hercules, they believed better, that he
was the son of god Jupiter, then of Amphitrion.

CHAP. XXVI. How the queen of Laurentia grew inamored of Hercules: and how the
king Pricus came into Italy with a great host, and sent to defy Hercules.
THe glorious deeds of Hercules were greatly recommended in Italy, as well for
that he had vanquished the giants of Cremona, as for the death of Cacus. So
great was his renoume, that during the building of his temple, all manner people
came thither, for to see him, and did to him divine honors, naming him the
son of god Jupiter. The kings and the lords came to him, for to give him
gifts and rich presents. Among all other, the queen of Laurentia came thither
from her city, with many chaires and chariots, filled and laden with jewels,
and presented them to Hercules. Hercules received into his grace this queen
and her presents, and thanked her greatly. This queen had to name Facua, and
was wife of the king Fanus, son of the king Pricus, the son of Saturn: she
was young, fresh, tender, and full of lustiness. She had not seen king Fanus
her husband in four year, for he was gone into a far country, and was not
in all this time come again. So it happened that after she first began to take
heed of and behold Hercules, and to mark him well, she began to desire his
company and acquaintance: and she loved him so sore and exceedingly, that she
could not turn her eyes nor her thoughts upon none other thing but upon
Hercules. In the beholding and seeing him, she said in her heart, that he was
the most well fauouored man, and proper without comparison, that ever she saw,
and that of right men should give him laud and praise, saying moreover, that
her seemed that her heart was entangled with the fire of his love: many
cogitations and thoughts ran in her mind. Now was she awaked and quickened
with a joyous spirit, and eftsoone all pensive. She passed so the first day
that she came in this manner with Hercules. When she was gone away for to rest,
she laid her down on a bed all clothed, and there she began to think on the
beauty of Hercules with so ardent desire, that she could not abstain from
weeping, and sore wished after him: whereof the end was such, that after many
imaginations, about the gray morning, she began to say unto her self: O
fortune, what man, what privy, what king have thou brought into this country?
This is not a king like other. This is an image singular, and like as if the
gods had made him by nature to exceed and triumph above all her other subtle
works and labors. All glory shines in him not only by his valiant prowess,
but by his simple and sacred perfection of body, to which may be made no
comparison. O clear image among the nobles, who is she seeing his eyes, that
with one only sight will not have her heart thoroughly pearsed? who is she that
will not covet and desire his grace? The most fortunate of al happy, and well
fortuned shall she be that may get his good will: he is humble, fair,
pleasant, and laughing: he is a treasure. O dear treasure: like as the gold
passes all other manner metals, in like sort he passes all other works of
nature in all prosperities: how then shall I not love him? As long as I shall
live, his name shall remain written in my memory, and his beauty shall not be
forgotten, but remain for a memorial eternal,

Great were then the praises that Facua uttered of Hercules: she forgate anon
the king Fanus, and put him all in neglect for the love of Hercules. She was
there a certain space of time, and always thought on Hercules. Hercules that
thought nothing of her, made unto her no semblance nor sign of love: howbeit
he talked often times with her, and with the wife of the king Euander, named
Carmenta. The more he conferred with them, the more was Facua in great pain by
the inflaming of love: some time she lost her color and countenance, but
certainly she covered it, and hid it so well, that no man took heed of it.
Then when she had been there eight days, bearing such grievous pain, she saw
that Hercules could not perceive the love that she had to him: for to come to
the end of her desire, she came on a day to Hercules, and humbly required him
that he would come and take the pains to come to her house, for to pass the
time, whiles the king Euander there finished his temple. Hercules accorded, and
agreed unto her request, whereat she had very great joy in her self. They then
disposed themselves for to go unto Laurencia, and took leave of the king
Euander, and of the queen, and so took their way. Thus then going, Hercules
was always by the side of Facua, who reasoned of many things by the way: and
always Facua had her amorous eyes fixed on the view of Hercules, that at last
Hercules began to take heed, and said to her softly thus: Lady, you do me
great worship to bring me into your house. Alas sir, answered Facua, I do to
you nothing but trouble you: for I have not the power to feast you and make you
cheer as I fain would. Lady (said Hercules) the good cheer that ye bestow on
me, is to me acceptable, so that from henceforth ye bind mine heart for to be
willing to fulfill your will in such wise that there is nothing that ye desire,
but I will accomplish it at your commandment, after my power, as to any the
most best accomplished lady that is in the West part. Facua with these words
began to smile, and answered. Sir, I have nothing done for you: and ye are not
so beholding to me as ye say. Howbeit I thank you for your good word. And
thereof I hold me right fortunate and happy, for that the most worthy man of
all ^en dayneth to accompany one so poor a lady as I am. Lady (answered
Hercules) I take not that to be attributed rightly to me, to say, that I am the
most worthy of men: for there have been many better then I am. But certes the
more ye speak, the more ye make me your subject. And since you do to me so
great honor, I request you as much as I may, that I may be your knight, and
that ye take power over me to command me to do your will and pleasure. Sir,
said Facua, will ye that it be so? Lady (answered Hercules) alas yea. I will
not command you, said Facua, but I will give you over me as much seignorie and
lordship as it shall please you to take. Hercules with the same word, would
feign have kissed the lady, and had done it, had it not been for the worship of
her, which he would keep. They had enough of other conferences. From that
day forth Hercules intended to please the lady more then he had done before.
And shortly he acquainted himself so with her, and she with him, that they
lay together secretly. And he begat on her a son that was named Latin, which
was afterward of great government.

During these things, whiles that Hercules and Facua had this good time in
Laurencia, tidinges came that the king Fanus was coming. Facua, that then
began first to joy in the love of Hercules, was passing sorry and heavy, when
she heard these tidings, for she firmly fixed her heart on Hercules. Suddenly
the tears all blubbered her eyes. And so weeping she came into a chamber where
as Hercules was: then she took him apart, and said to him. Alas my love, I
shall die for sorrow. Lady, said Hercules, wherefore? For So Much said she, as my
husband the king Fanus comes home: It is full four year since I heard of
him, I had supposed he had been dead, but he is not. His herbingours and
fourriers be come before, and say, that he will suppe here this day. Alas,
what evil adventure is this? we must needs now depart, and our communication
shall fail. With this word the lady embraced Hercules, and fell down in a
sown in his lap. Hercules took her up, and comforted her the best wise he
could, and said to her, that since it is so that she was married, it was
reason that she abode still with her husband. Whatsoever Hercules said unto
the Lady, she could not keep her from weeping, nor bewailing her love, and
her bewailinges were great. In the end she went into her chamber, and dried
her eyes, and brake off her dolorous weeping as much as she could, arraying and
apparrelling her in such wise, as if she had been joyous and glad of the
coming of her husband, who came soon after, and entered into his city with
great triumph.

Hercules and Facua went against the king Fanus. When the king Fanus saw
Hercules, he did to him as much honor and worship as he could do: Forasmuch
as he had heard say, and was advertised of the deeds of arms that he had done
against the giants of Cremona, and against Cacus: and thanked him, for so much as
he was come into his city. For conclusion, Hercules abode there four days
after that Fanus was come home: on the fifth day he considered, that he might
no more enjoy his love, and that he did nothing there but loose his time: so he
took leave of the king Fanus, and of the queen Facua, and returned unto the
house of the king Euander, where he held him, and abode unto the time that his
temple was made and accomplished. About the consummation of this temple, an
Herald of Calidonie, came to Hercules, and signified to him, that the king
Pricus came against him with a great puissance of men of arms, for to revenge
the blood of Cacus his cosen: and that he charged Hercules, that he had
without a cause (and cruelly put to death one so noble a king as Cacus was: and
said to him moreover that if he would maintain the contrary, on the morrow
early he should find the king Pricus in the same place where the blood of king
Cacus was shed: and that there, by mortal battle, by puissance against
puissance, he would prove it true that he said.

When Hercules had well heard, what the king Pricus had signified to him: he had
his heart all full of joy, and answered to the Herald, that the death that he
had made Cacus to die, was a work of justice, and that upon the quarrel, he
would furnish by battle the king Pricus, at the hour and place that he had
said. After this answer thus made, Hercules gave unto the Herald has gown
that he ware, and did him to be feasted right well, saying, that he had brought
him tidinges of pleasaunce. When the herald had had good cheer, and well
feasted, as Hercules had commanded: He returned unto the king Pricus, and told
him, what Hercules had answered to him, and that he should have on the morrow
the battle. The king Pricus, that supposed to have won all by advantage of
multitude, (for he had in his host mo then thirty thousand men) thanked the
Gods of these tidinges: and came and lodged him the same night, nigh unto the
mount Auentin, upon the river of Tyber. He made him ready then for to fight
this battle. And likewise Hercules: each man on his side thought on his
works. The night passed over, and on the morrow as soon as it began to dawn,
the king Pricus and Hercules began to sound their great tabours, and with that
sound, their men put them in arms to be ready, and after trained in battle
order. And so they came both parties, as well the one as the other, into the
same place where the blood of king Cacus had been shed, etc.

CHAP. XXVII. How Hercules fought against the king Pricus in battle: and how
he fled into the City, where Hercules alone slew him and many mo with him.
ABout five of the clock in the morning, Hercules and Pricus assembled at the
battle: from as far as Pricus saw Hercules, he made a marvelous cry.
With this cry, all the Calidoniens began to run against Hercules* and made so
great a noise that it seemed that there was not people enough in all the world
for them. But certainly like as a small rain abateth or lays down a great
wind, in likewise Hercules alone laid down their over great boasting and
vproare. For as soon as he saw his enemies run against him, about a quarter
of a mile off, he departed from his battle that was well set in order, and
after that he had commanded his folk that they should not haste for
nothing, he began to run against the Calidoniens swiftly, not like an
horse, but like an Heart that no man might overtake. The king Euander was all
abashed for to see in Hercules so great nimblenesse and swiftness. Pricus and
the Calidoniens, when they saw him move from the host, they supposed that it
had been a horse or other beast. In the end when Hercules was come nigh to
them, within the space of a bow shot, they knew that it was Hercules, whereat
they were sore abashed of his coming. Pricus cried to have set his men upon
him. They shot arrows, and casted darts and spears upon Hercules, against
all the parts of his body: nevertheless they could never pierce nor enter into
the skin of the Lion, and he never rested till he had accomplished his
course, thrusting him among his enemies so mightily, that overthrowing all
before him, like as it had been a tempest or thunder, he went into the midst
of the host, whereas there was the chief banner of the king Pricus.

Hercules abode and stayed there, but began to smite and lay on upon the one
side and the other, and to die his sword with the blood of the Calidoniens. His
sword was so heavy that no man might endure it, it al to bruised all that it
raught. It made the place red, whereas the blood of Cacus was shed, with
blood upon blood, and with dead men upon dead. Then was not the shame and
death of king Cacus avenged, but augmented upon the persons of his friends,
in abundance of slaughter and of murder. The cry arose greatly about
Hercules: he brake and all to rent the banners, and the recognisances of the
Calydoniens, and of their conductors: there was none so hardy, but he drove him
away: and there was none so resolute, but he was afraid and trembled. All the
best and hardiest fled before him. Then he made what spoil he would with his
enemies. Theseus, Euander, and other came then unto the battle. At this
conflict there was many a spear broken, many a halberd and many a helm broken,
and many a knight smitten in pieces. The Calidoniens were in great number, and
there were many of them strong and mighty. The battle was right strong and
mighty and fierce. The king Pricus set foremost before upon the Greeks, and
labored with his hand right cheualrously. And Hercules and Theseus did
worthily and deserving memory: they ran from rank to rank, and brake the
ranckes of their enemies. They comforted and encouraged their men, and showed
to them how they should do. Their feats and deeds were so great, that it is
impossible to recount and tell: for in little time they put their enemies in
despair. What shall I say? all the discomfiture was in the Calidoniens, for by
force of arms they abode upon the field for the most part. And then when the
king Pricus saw, that his people could no more fight, and that he lost on all
sides, and that fortune was against him in all points, after he had sore
labored, and that he had need of rest, he withdrew him out of the prease, and
sounded a retrait, and with the sound, the Calidoniens turned back, and fled
after king Pricus.

When Hercules saw that the Calidoniens withdrew themselves, he made in like
wise his Greeks to withdraw them: not for any need they had, but for to show
their emies, that they would well that they should rest them. In this wise
the battle ceased, Hercules supposing that the Calidoniens would assemble on
the morrow when they had rested them: but they withdrewe themselves, some
here and some there. The day passed, the night came on: then the king Pricus
assembled his folk, and showed to them their loss, and the strength and might
of the Greeks, and in especial of Hercules. After he said to them, that they
could never conquer them, and that they could no wiselier do then to withdraw
them, and to return into their country. The Calidoniens that dreaded Hercules
more then the death, or tempest, or thunder of the heaven: had great joy, when
they understood the will of king Pricus: and answered all with one accord, that
they were ready to go forth on the way. With this answer they concluded, that
they should leave their tents, their carts and armours, for to go lightly and
more secretly. After this they took their way, according to their conclusion,
and fair and softly they went their way without making stir or noise, and did
travel so much this night yt on the morrow they were far from Hercules. After
this, on ye morrow when Hercules espied that they were fled, he and his men
pursued after swiftly, howbeit they could not overtake them. For, to speed the
matter, the king Pricus returned into Calidonie. Hercules pursued him into his
city, which was strong with walls, and besieged him. During this siege, there
was never a Calidonien that durst come out. Hercules often times assaulted the
city, but he lost his labor. At length, when he saw that he could not get ne
win upon his enemies, he called his Greeks, and said to them: that man that
ventureth not wins nothing. We soiourne here without doing any thing worthy
of memory. Our enemies will not come against us, unless we fetch them, and
thus we shall have no end: shortly we must all win or loose. Wherefore I think
it best that I disguise me, and go unto the gate, and let the porters
understand that I have an errand unto the king: and hereupon, if I may enter,
I will go unto the king, and so deal, if it be possible, that he shall never
assault me any more in battle. And if it happen that I may so do, as I have
told you, I will that ye assail the city as soon as I shall be within, to
the end that the Calidonians may have to do with you as well as with me, and
that I have them not all at once upon me.

When Theseus and Euander understood well what Hercules would do, they
answered, that they were ready to obey all his commandments, and that they
would assault the city, after his saying. Then Hercules arrayed himself like
as he had been an ambassador, and Theseus and the Greeks disposed themselves
to make the assault. When al was ready, Hercules departed and came and knocked
at the gate of Calidonie: the porters looked out at a little window, to see who
knocked there, and seeing that there was but one man in a long gown, they
opened to him the gate, and asked him what he would have? Hercules answered,
that he sought the king. And what would ye with him, said one of the porters?
Hercules said, I would feign speak unto his person: and saying these words,
the porters saw that Hercules was armed under the gown: and then at few
words they cried, upon him, and laid at him before and behind, saying that
he was a traitor, and that he was come to epsy the city. When Hercules saw
him to set upon by the porters, he was there as he would be, and had great joy:
which he covered under simple countenance, and made at the beginning semblance
that he would have fled away and escaped: but he employed so little of his
strength, that the porters brought him unto the king Pricus, which sat in the
hall with his daughters and his princes, and presented him to him, saying: Sir,
lo here is a traitor, that is entered into your city for to epsy your
power. We have taken him: he said that he would speak unto your person, and
he is armed under his mantel as ye may see: it is a right evil token: for a
man desiring to speak to a king, should in no wise be armed privily nor
covertly.

When the king understood the accusation of the Porters, whiles they spoke, he
beheld Hercules, and knew him: Whereat he was so sore afraid, that he wist
not what to say. Hercules then bestirred himself and wrung himself out of the
holding of the porters, casting them down to the ground so hard and so
grievously, that they never after might relieve themselves. When the
Calydoniens that were in the hall, saw him so evil entreat the porters, they
threatened Hercules unto the death, and assailed him on all sides. His gown was
then anon rent off. In bickering he received many a stroke, and always he
defended himself without displaying of his power and of his strength, as he
that awaited for the tidings of the assault that was nigh. The affray was great
in the hall and in the city on al parts, the Calidoniens ran to the
palace, for to assail Hercules. King Pricus made him ready, and came with
other unto this fray. Then was Hercules assailed fiercely: but this assault was
dear to ye king: for to his welcome Hercules came to the tabernacle that
stood upon four great bars of iron, whereof he took the one, and beat
down the tabernacle. After he lifted up his arm with the bar, and smote the
king Pricus so vnmeasurably upon the ^o^ of his helmet, that notwithstanding
his strong harness and armours, he all to beat him down to the earth, and
smote him so sore broken and bruised, that he fell down dead between his two
porters.

At this time the cry arose great among the Calidonians. Not alonely there,
but also in the city (for he that kept the watch sounded to arms, forasmuch
as the Greeks assailed hastily the walls.) Calidony was then terribly
troubled, and the Calidonians wist not where to turn them, whether to
Hercules, or to the assault. All was full of heads armed, as well in the
palace as upon the walls. After this that Hercules had slain the king
Pricus, he began to smite upon his enemies, and his strokes were great, at
each stroke he slew two or three, so as shortly he bare himself there a
knightly, that in little while he covered all the pauement of the palace with
dead bodies of the Calidonians, lying one upon another, without that any man
might damage his armor. The Calidonians were of great courage, and had great
shame for that they might not overcome Hercules, that alone had done upon them
so great an exploit. They assailed him with great courage, and cast upon him
darts and sharp iauelines. His arms and his shoulders bare all, and he did so
great things with his bar, and gave so great strokes, that none of them might
resist his strength. The poor Calidonians came thither with great courage and
desire for to revenge the death of their king. Hercules put so many to death,
that he wist not where to set his foot, but it must be upon Calidonians.
Before the gate of the palace was a pitiful noise of weepings and of cries,
that women and children made. In the end, when the Calidonians knew and
perceived the virtue and the strength of Hercules, and that they labored in
vain, they ceased to assail him, and fled. Then Hercules issued out of the
palace with his bar all covered with blood. As Soon as the Calidonians saw
him, they set upon him passing furiously, and assailed him anew: they cast
stones and darts upon him, they shot arrows on him abundantly, as they that
were purueyed, and awaited for his passage. In this assault Hercules had much
to suffer: yet after receiving more strokes then can be numbered, he passed the
watch, that awaited to have stain him, and rested never till he came unto the
gate.

The Calidonians ran then after him, as men without dread of death, and
mightily swollen with pride and ire, began on anew to smite upon his
shoulders, and upon his back. When Hercules saw that, he turned his face upon
his evil willers, and smote upon them with his bar, on the right side, and
on the left side, so lustily, that he died his bar with new blood: and
maugre his enemies, he beat them down, and all to bruised them before him. He
made them then to recule and go back more then forty pases: and after came
to the gate. And the Calidonians pursued him again: but ere they came upon
him, he all to brake and bruised, and to frushed the locks, and the wickets,
and doors of the gate: and the Greeks assailed him with all their power, and
beat down the draw bridge. After he called the assailants, and they came unto
him, and with little resistance they entered the city, which was at that time
with great slaughter of the Calidonians that would not yield themselves, nor
put themselves to mercy, until the time that they saw their streets and houses
full of dead bodies. etc.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Hercules was enamoured on Yole the daughter of king Pricus:
and how he required her of love: and how she accorded unto him.
BY this manner was king Pricus slain, and his city taken by Hercules. After
the slaughter, when ye Calidoniens had humbled themselves, Hercules and Theseus
went to the palace, and they came thither so fitly, that they found the
daughters of king Pricus, with their ladies and gentlewome^, seeking the king
among the dead bodies. There were so many dead bodies, that they could not
find nor know him that they sought. Hercules at his coming began to behold
one and other, and especially among al other, he cast his eye upon Yole, the
daughter of the king: forasmuch as she was excellently glistering in beauty,
that in all the world was none like unto her. When he had a little beheld her,
by a secret commandment of love, he drew him unto her, weening for to have
comforted her. Anon, as the right desolate gentlewoman saw Hercules approaching
unto her, she trembled for dread, and fled unto her chamber, the ladies and the
gentlewomen followed her: and among them so did Hercules. What shall I say? he
entered into the chamber where she was, and sat down by her. She thought to
have risen for to have gone out of the way, but he held her by her clothes and
said unto her: Lady, ye may not fly my company. Yole spoke then and said: O
miserable tyrant, what seek thou me now for to trouble me more? Thou have
slain my father, let that suffice thee. Madame (answered Hercules) if the king
Pricus be dead, it is reason that he be not much bewailed nor wept: for he
thinking for to avenge the death of the tyrant Cacus, came not long since for
to assail me in Italy, saying: that I had unrightfully and without cause
slain him. In maintaining the contrary, I fought with him upon this quarrel:
the battle was not ended, nor put to utterance at that time, for he withdrew
himself with his people, and came into this city. and I have pursued him
hastily, albeit I could not overtake him. When I saw that, I laid my siege
about this city: he would not come to fight the battle during my siege,
wherefore I have this day willed to have an end. Fortune has been on my side,
and has put you in my power. Certes, it must needs be, that without remedy
ye be my lady and my love: for in seeing your singular beauty, love has
constrained me to be yours. Then I pray you as affectuously as I may or can,
that ye cease your sorrow, and that ye receive me as your friend and love.
The more ye weep the less ye get and win, continual tears or weepinges, nor
long lasting sighs may never raise your father again.

The fair Yole with these words was sore oppressed with hot and contrary
imaginations, that her heart failed her. It was a piteous thing to behold how
her friend Hercules would have taken her up and sustained her between his
arms. But a wise lady that had always governed her, came to him and said to him
kneeling on her knees: Sir, I pray you in the name of all the Gods, that ye
will cease to speak to this poor damsel for this time. She has this day
lost her father, it must needs be that nature acquit her. Ye may do with her
your own pleasure, if ye let her a little abide in her melancholy: all shall
be well if it please the Gods, as well for you as for her. At the request of
the Lady, Hercules was content to let her go for that time: he recommended
Yole unto the Gods, and went unto Theseus for to pass his time with him: but
to the end that Yole should not go away nor escape, he ordained twelve Greeks
to keep her, and commanded upon pains of death, that they should suffer no
woman to issue out of the chamber, without witting whither she went. In this
night Hercules did cause the dead bodies to be had out of the palace, and the
place to be made clean. And also he ordained that the body of the king Pricus
should be put in the sepulture. When these things were accomplished, Hercules
and Theseus with their men of arms, made good cheer with such as they found
there: and Yole was never out of ye remembrance of Hercules. Yole certainly at
this time was so discomforted, that it cannot be recounted. The lady that had
her in governance, traveled right sore for to comfort and cheer her. Then
when Hercules had left her in the chamber, as said is, she had many words to
her: and among all other she said to her: My daughter, you weep too much. Ha
madame (said Yole) how may I less do? when shall I have cause to weep and to
wail if I have not now? My father is dead: I have lost him that most loved me
of all the world. I may loose no more, ne no greater thing. Ought not then my
heart to be angry and sorrowful? My daughter (said the lady) I know well that
ye have the most apparent occasion of sorrow that any woman may have: but
since it must needs be that you pass by this infortune, what profit you your
grievous weepings? There may nothing proceed of them but augmentation of
melancoly, and hurting and appairing of your praised beauty. Ye be now fallen
into the hand of this prince. This is a man worthy and noble above all other,
he loves you: ye ought to thank the gods, and to give them praise for this
grace. For this is to you a good fortune, and an hap in your mishap. If ye will
be ruled by me, y^ shall take all this in good part. Better it is to suffer one
evil then two. He thinks ye ought to consider your estate. And if ye consider
it well, ye shall endeavor you to forget it. Madame (said Yole) Alas, and how
may that be, that I should have love or affinity or familiarity with him that
has done to me so much harm. He has not taken only from me a knight, an
uncle, nor a cousin: but mine only proper father. Let none speak to me
thereof. He is, and shall be my mortal enemy, as long as I live: and as long
as he shall live, he shall have no more of me, for prayer, promise, nor for
menace.

My daughter (said the lady) make not your self bond, whereas you be free: the
effects and deeds of love be subtle and sudden. Love is always in his secret
throne, that can do none other thing, but humiliate, and meeken the hard
hearted, and bow the strong. So hard nor so strong a heart is not amongst the
human creatures, but that it is right soon humbled and made meek when that
it is his pleasure. There is no tower so high, but it may be beaten down by
subtle mining. Neither is no wind so great, nor so rigorous, but it may be
tempered. There is no night so dark, but that it is surmounted with the day.
Ye hate Hercules now, but if you have a while kept company with him, and have
had communication with him, peradventure you will love him better then ever you
loved your father, your mother, or any other of your lineage. And that I may
prove by my self: for I had my husband in so great hate first, ere we loved
together, that I would feign have seen him die a shameful death. Shortly
after, when we had begun to be acquainted one with another, I loved him so
steadfastly, that if he had not been with me day and night, I had thought I
should have died for sorrow and grief. My daughter, such be the chances of
love, that often times I say, after great hate comes great love. The glory of
Hercules is so clear, that your heart ought to be delighted therewith: the
conquest that he has made in this city, shall be for you a singular
preparation to all good. Would you attain to a more greater weal, then for to
be fellow or love of him that is the subduer of kings, the most best wel-faring
man, and the most triumphant in arms? for to him is nothing impossible: he
has conquered the most part of the universal world. O my daughter, rejoice
you in fortune: shut not the door to prosperity that comes to you: it is to
be believed, that the desolation of this city, has been devised and ordained
by the parliament of the gods, in favor of you, that are the paragon, and none
like unto you, of all the daughters of the kings, for to give you in marriage
unto this man.

By these words the fair Yole had her stomach surprised with sundry
imaginations. She rose then up from that part, and entered into her guardrobe,
whereas was the presentation of the goddess Diana. When she was come thither,
she kneeled down in great humility before the image, and in abounding of
sighs, and weeping as sore as she had done any time of the day before, she
said: Goddess of virgins, what shall thy right simple servant and handmayden
do? Alas, lighten mine hope, behold mine affection, weigh my mishappe. Send
thine eyes into the secret of mine heart, and see the sorrow that I bear, and
in the favor of virgins keep my body, and preserve me from the hand of him
that would that I should be his wife. Since that he had caused in me the root
of mortal hate, which is not possible to be rooted out, as nature judges in
me (for it is not possible that I may love mine enemy) I am therefore
persuaded, and it is truth, that the hate that I have against this tyrant
Hercules, shall be ever abiding.

In these prayers and lamentations Yole abode until the dead of the night,
cursing Hercules, saying that she had rather die then to love or like him. Thus
disdaining the love of Hercules, without meat or drink she passed the whole
night. The day next following, Hercules returned unto her, and on a new prayed
her, that she would be his wife: saying, without respite, that she^ must needs
agree thereto. She was right sore displeasant of this request, and excused
herself in many fashions that were too long to rehearse at this time. But at
the end of the prayers and requests of Hercules, Love inspired in such wise
the gentlewoman, that she understood well that Hercules was of the root of
noble father and mother: wherefore she accorded to do his pleasure. What shall
I more say? Yole companied then with Hercules as his wife, and they lay
together, and they grew acquainted each with other. Love then inrooted in
their hearts, so that their two wills were locked and put in one will.
Hercules forgot Deianira, and Yole forgot the death of her father, and was so
much enamoured on Hercules, that she might rest in no place, but that she must
be always with him. O marvelous thing, the rancour and the hate that Yole had
yesterday unto Hercules, is now suddenly turned into love infallible. For to
speed the matter: during yet the first days of the love of Hercules and Yole,
at the prayer of Yole, Hercules gave her sisters in marriage to certain
knights of the Greeks, and left them there to govern the country and the
realm of Calidonie. After he departed from thence, and brought his oxen and
his kine with him, and sent again the king Euander into his dominion, thanking
him of his company, and of the honor that he had done to him.

Euander would gladly have accompanied Hercules into Greece: But Hercules
would in no wise yt he should have the travail. At last then Euander (with
great thankings of Hercules and of his army) departed: and Hercules with his
army went unto the sea, and he forgot not behind him the fairest Yole, but
he loved her soueraignly. All day he was with her, and she pleased him as
much as she might, doubting more to loose his love the^ she was sorry for the
death of her father. Then as they thus went by the sea, maintaining to their
power the amorous life, Hercules encountered on a day, nigh by an haven and a
good city, a gally of merchants. Hercules made the galley to tarry, and after
called the master, and asked of him what country he was, and from whence he
came? Certes sir (answered the master of the galley) I departed late from the
port of Thrace that is hereby: I see well that ye be a stranger, and that ye
know not the peril that ye be in: wherefore I have pity of you and of your
company, and do advertise you, and wish you, that at the next haven ye shall
find, in no wise ye tarry there, for nothing that may befall you: for all so
truly as ye be here, if ye go thither, ye shall take harm: for there is a
king, a tyrant the most cruel that is in all the world, named Diomedes, that
holds under him ten thousand thieves, and he makes war against all them
that he may find, and has a custom that he puts men to ransom such as it
pleases him: and if they that he puts to such misery, pay their ransom,
he lets them go quiet, and with that money and substance, he nourishes his
thieves, and his horses. And if they cannot furnishe their ransom, He himself
smites them to morsels, and gives them to his horses for to eat and devour.
But there is one thing good for you, for this morning he is gone to the chase,
for to hunt in a forest, which is a four mile from Thrace, and with him there
be an hundred of the strongest thieves that he has. And this know I of a
truth, for I have seen them depart not passing three hours ago, etc.

CHAP. XXIX. How Hercules fought against Diomedes, in the forest of Thrace: and
how he made his horse to eat him.
HErcules hearing these words that the master of the galley said to him, and
rehearsing the life of Diomedes, was passing joyous in his heart, more then he
had been since the death of the thief Cacus. He had in him that valor, that
where he might know a monster or tyrant to be, or any men molesting the weal,
thither he went, and such tyrants he destroyed: and to the end that men
should not say, that he did such works for couetise, he would never hold, nor
retain to his proper use nothing of their goods, but all that he conquered in
such wise he give it unto noble men, and praised nor sought nothing but
virtue. He would not make his seignorie to grow nor be enlarged, and take to
himself realm upon realm. He was content with that, that nature had given
him. And always he would labor for the commonweal. O noble heart? O right
well disposed courage? O most virtuous painym, there was none like to him of
all them that were before him, nor after him. For to hold on and go forward
with my matter: when the master had advertised him, as before is said, that the
tyrant Diomedes was gone on hunting into the forest, with his hundred thieves,
he enquired so much that the master showed him the situation of the forest,
and by what way and manner he might soonest come thither. After this, he gave
leave to the master to go his way. That done, he called his mariners, and made
them to seek the place. After, he assembled the Greeks, and told them, that
he would that they should abide him there, and that he himself without delay
would go into the forest, that the master had showed him, to seek Diomedes:
saying, that he would never return into Greece until the time that he had
delivered the country of this tyrant. Yole began then to weep, when she heard
the enterprise of Hercules, and prayed him, tenderly weeping, that he would
leave and depart from the hazard of so great peril. Hercules took no regard
nor heed to her prayers. He delivered to Phylotes his bow and his club, and
entered into a little galley finely made and light. Which he guided by the
help of Phylotes, right nigh the place where he would be: and took land two
bow shot off, from the forest, and so in setting foot on land, he heard the
cry and noise of the hunting, and had thereof great joy, and said that he was
well and where he would be. He took then his club, and left his bow with
Phylotes. After he entered into the forest, and had not far ranged in the
forest, when he found Dyomedes and his hundred thieves. Diomedes was the
first that from far espied Hercules, and knew that he was a stranger* and
called to him and said. Giant, what is it that thou seek in this forest?
Hercules answered, what art thou? Diomedes said, I am the king of Thrace: thou
art entered into my Dominion without my leave: it displeases me, and thou must
be my prisoner, wherefore yield thee to me. Hercules said then: king, since
thou art Diomedes the king of Thrace, thou art undoubtedly the tyrant that I
seek. And therefore I am not of purpose to yield me without stroke smiting,
and especially to an evil thief. Know thou, that I will defend me with this
club, with which I have been accustomed to destroy monsters, and am in hope
this day, to make thy horses eat and devour thy body, like as thou have taught
and used them to eat thy prisoners.

When Diomedes heard the answer of Hercules, he took a great axe, that one
of his thieves bare after him, and he lifted it up, threatening Hercules unto
the death, and discharged so hard, that if Hercules had not turned the stroke
with his club, he had been in great peril. Diomedes was of the greatness and
stature of Hercules, and had abundance of strength and puissance. When
Hercules had received the stroke, he lifted up his club, and failed not to
smite Diomedes, for he gave him such a stroke upon the stomach, and so heavy
that he turned him vpside down from his horse, and laid him all astonished in
the field. Then his hundred thieves bestirred them, and assailed Hercules on
all sides. Some of them there were yt recovered Diomedes, and set him on his
horse, ye other shot at Hercules: some brake their swords on him. All this
impaired nothing the arms of Hercules. His halberd and his helm were of fine
steel forged and tempered hard. He stood there among them like a mountain.
When he had suffered the first skirmishe and assault of the thieves, for to
show to them with whom they fought, he set upon them, and smote down right on
all sides with such valor, that suddenly he made the pieces of them fly into
the wood, and smote them down from their horses. Diomedes was at that time
risen, and with great fury and discontentednesse, with many of his accomplices
came unto the reskewe of his thieves, whom Hercules used as he would. And
whiles that some assailed him before, he came behind, and smote him with his
axe upon his helm, the stroke whereof was so great that the fire sprang out.
Diomedes had well thought to have murdered Hercules: yet Hercules moved not
for the stroke, but a little bowed his head. After this then he lift up his
clubbe, and smote among the thieves, and maugre them all, in less then an
hour he had so belabored the iron about their backs, that of the hundred he
slew sixty, and the other he al to bruised and frushed and put to flight with
Diomedes. But Hercules running more swiftly then an horse, among all other
pursued Diomedes so nigh, that he raught him by the leg, and pulled him
down from his horse, and cast him down against a tree unto the earth. After
he took him by the body, and by maine force, bare him unto the place where
the battle had been. There he dishelmed him and unarmed him with little
resistance. For Diomedes was then all to bruised, and might not help himself,
and when he had him thus at his will, he bound him by the feet and by the
hands. After this he assembled together twenty horses of the thieves, that
ran dispersed in the wood, and came to Diomedes, and said to him. O thou
cursed enemy, that have employed all thy time in tyranny, and did never
one good deed, but all thy days have lived in multiplying of sins and vices,
and have trobled the people by thefts and prays irreparable, and that have
nourished thy horses with man's flesh, and by this cruelty had supposed to
have made me to die: Certes I will do justice upon thee, and will do to thine
evil person, like as thou would have done to mine. Then Hercules laid the
tyrant in the midst of the horses, which had great hunger, and they anon
devoured him, for they loved man's flesh. And thus when Hercules had put the
tyrant to death, he took his arms, in sign of victory, and returned unto
Phylotes that abode him.

Philotes had great joy, when he saw Hercules return, he enquired of him
how he had done, and how he had borne him. And Hercules hid nor concealed
nothing from him. What shall I say? with great joy and gladness they returned
unto the Greeks, and did cause to disancre their ships, and sailed for to
arrive at the port or haven of Thrace. Then would Hercules make to be known,
and published in Thrace ye death of king Diomedes. Whereat was a great vproare.
This notwithstanding, Hercules took to Philotes the arms of Diomedes, and
sent him into the city for to summon them that governed it, and for to yield
it into his hands. Philotes went into the palace of Thrace, and made to be
assembled them that then were principal in the City. When they were
assembled, Phylotes did then open to them his charge and message, and summoned
the Thraciens, that they should deliver their city into the hands of
Hercules: Saying that Hercules was he that had put to death Diomedes for his
evil living, and for the love of the common weal: and that the city could do
no better but to receive him at his coming, for he would not pill it, but
he would only bring it to good policy. When he had done this summons, to the
end that they should believe him, he discovered and showed unto them the arms
of Diomedes.

When the Thraciens heard Phylotes, and saw the arms of Diomedes, some of the
accomplices and companions of Diomedes and thieves, were full of great rage, and
would have taken the arms from Phylotes. The other that were wise and notable
men, and that many years had desired the end of their king (seeing his arms)
knew assuredly that Diomedes was dead, and full of joy answered to Philotes.
Forasmuch as Hercules was a king of great renown and wisdom, and that he had
done a work of great merit in the death of Diomedes they would receive him
with good heart into the city. Without long discourses, the Thraciens went unto
the gate, and opened it. Phylotes returned then unto Hercules and told unto
him these tidinges. Hercules and the Greeks went out of their Galleys, and
entered into Thrace in space of time. The Thraciens brought them unto the
palace where were yet many thieves. Hercules put all the thieves to death, not
in the same night, but during the space of ten days that he soiourned there.
He set the city in good nature of policy. He delivered it from the evil
thieves, he made judges by election, at the pleasure of the people. And then
when he had done all these things, he departed from Thrace with great
thanks, as well of the old as of the young. He mounted upon the Sea, and after
by succession of time without any adventure to speak of, he did so much that
he came unto his realm of Lycie, into his palace, where he was received with
great joy of the inhabitants, and also of the neighbors. And there he abode
with the fair Yole, whom he loved above all temporal goods.

CHAP. XXX. How Deianira was full of sorrow, forasmuch as Hercules loved Yole,
etc.
THeseus then, after the return of Hercules, seeing that he would abide there,
and that there was no mention, that in all the world was any monster nor
tyrant, took leave of his fellow Hercules, of Yole, of Phylotes, and of other,
and went to Athens, and to Thebes. Likewise the Greeks took leave, and every
man returned into his country, and to his house, recounting and telling in all
the places where they went, the great adventures and the glorious works of
Hercules. Then the renown that runs and flies by realms and Empires as
swiftly as the wind, so swiftly came unto Iconie whereas Deianira soiourned,
and it was said to Deianira, that Hercules was returned from Spain, with great
glory and triumph, and that he was descended into Lycia. Dame Deianira for
this renown, was glad, and all ravished with a great and singular pleasure,
and concluded that she would go unto him. Yet she was abashed for that he
had not signified to her his coming, and that he had not sent for her, sore
pensive and doubting, that she should be fallen out of the grace of Hercules.
She made ready her company, and in right noble estate she departed from Iconie,
on a day, for to go into Lycia. In process of time, she came nigh unto Licia.
Then she tarried there for to attire and array her in the best and ye most
fairest wise she could or might, and called her squire named Lycas, and
commanded him that he should go into Licia, and signify to Hercules her
coming. At the commandment of Deianira, Lycas went forthwith into the City,
and that happened right at the gate, he encountered and met a man of his
acquaintance, a squire of Hercules. Lycas and the squire greeted and saluted
each other. After this, Lycas asked of the squire, and demanded him, where the
king was, and if he were in his palace? yea verily said the squire, he is
there, I wot well, and passes the time with his Lady Yole, the most
beautiful, and out of measure most replendissant Lady that is in all the
world, as great as it is. Each man allows her, and praises her a thousand
times more the^ Deianira. Hercules has her in so much grace, that continually
they be together. And whatsoever the Lady does, it is acceptable unto Hercules:
and there is no man that can say or tell the great love that they have together.

Lycas hearing these tidinges of the squire, took leave of him, and made
semblance to have let fall, or left behind him some of his gemmes or jewels:
forasmuch as he was of opinion in himself, that it was good that he had
advertised her for his estate. Pensive and simple he came to Deianira, where as
she was attyring her self pretiously, and said to her. Madame what do ye
here? Wherefore answered Deianira? Therefore said Lycas. Why is there any
thing, said Deianira? what tidinges? Lycas answered: hard tidings. I have heard
say and tell of Hercules, things full of such hardness, that certes it is
right grievous to me to say unto you. Howbeit since that ye become thus far,
and that ye must needs know, and understand them: I tell and say to you
certainly, that your Lord Hercules is in his palace right joyfully, and that
he has with him a Lady, fair by excellency, whom he loves and much
delights in above all things, for her beauty, which is so high and great,
that each man maruaileth, and say, she is the most sovereign in beauty, that
ever was seen with man's eye.

Behold, and advise you well, what ye will do, ere ye go any further: this
day it is needful to abide, and take council and advise.

At the hearing of these tidinges, Deianira was passing angry, and was all
bespread with a right great sorrow in all her veins. She began to quake and
tremble. Her fair hair that was finely dressed on her head, she all to tare
it with her hands in so furious manner, that she disatyred her, and smote her
self with her fist to great a stroke upon her breast, that she fell down
backward in a sown. The ladies and the gentlewomen that accompanied her
shriked, and cried dolorously, and were sore moved at seeing her blood. At
length Deianira came to her self again, all pale and wanne, and thinking on
the sorrow that engendered in her, and also on the sorrow that was coming to
her, she spoke, and said with a feeble and low voice. Poor Deianira what
shall thou do? or whither shall thou go? thou that find thy self forsaken
and put back from the love of thy lord Hercules? Alas, alas, is it possible
that the new coming of a lady, may take away my husband? The heart late joined
to Deianira, shall it be disioyned, by the finding of a woman of folly? shall
she make the separation? I hope verily it may not be: For Hercules is noble of
heart and loves virtue: and if he abandon and give me over, he shall do
against virtue and nobleness. I have affiance in him that he will be true to
me. Madame (said Lycas) ye fail nothing to say that Hercules is noble and full
of virtue: for he has employed all his time in virtuous things: howbeit, he
is a man, and has taken in love this new woman, for her beauty: affie not you
so much in his virtue, least your confidence beguile and deceive you: know well
that fortune entertaineth not long princes and princesses on the top above of
her wheel: there is none yet so high, but that he makes them sometime lie
beneath among them that suffer trouble. Behold and see well what ye have to
do. If ye go unto Hercules, and he receive you not as he has been
accustomed, that shall be to you a cause of despair. Men say, that he loves
sovereignty this new lady: It is apparent then, that he shall set but a little
store by your coming: and if ye go, the Lady will be evil content she has
renowm, and every man is glad to do her pleasure. There shall be no man so
hardy to welcome you, for the love of her. Go not thither then, the peril is
too great: I council you for the better, that ye return into Iconie, and that
ye hear this thing patiently, in attending and abiding until that the fire
and the fume of this lady be quenched. For, whereas Hercules is al another
manner of man then the most part of men be: so shall he leave the love of this
lady a little and a little, etc.

Deianira considering that Lycas councelled her truly, believed well this
council: and right sore weeping she returned into Iconie. When she was in the
house at Iconie, then she deprived her self of all worldly pleasure, and held
her solitarily, without going to feasts or to plays. Thus abiding in this
solitude, her grievous annoy grew more and more, by so great vexations, that
she was constrained to make infinite bewaylinges and sighs. The continual
comfort of her ladies might give to her no solace. The innumerable speeches
that they used unto her ears, for to make her pass the time might never take
away Hercules out of her mind. She passed and lived many days this life,
having always her ear open for to know if Hercules sent for her. In the end
when she had waited long, and saw that nothing came, and that neither man nor
woman was coming to bring her tidinges from the person of Hercules, she made
a letter, which she delivered to Lycas, for to bear unto Hercules, and charged
him to deliver it to no person, but to the proper hand of him that she sent it
unto. Lycas took the letter, and went unto Licie, and two mile from the city,
he met Hercules in a cross way. Hercules came from Archadie, where he had
newly slain a wild bore, so great that there was never none seen like to him.
When then Lycas saw Hercules, he made to him reverence, and presented his
letter to him, saluting him from Deianira. Hercules waxed red, and changed
color, when he heard speak of Deianira. He received the letter amiably and
read it, and found therein contained, as as here follows.

Hercules my Lord, the man of the world that I most desire, I humbly beseech
and earnestly entreat you, that you have regard to your true servant and
unworthy lover Deianira. Alas Hercules, alas. Where is become the love of the
time past? ye have now soiourned many days in Licie, and ye have let me
have no knowledge thereof. Certes, that is to me a right dolorous grief to
suffer and bear: for I desire not to be deified nor to mount into the
celestial mansions, with the sun, with the moon, nor with the stars, but
without faining or breaking of a free heart, I desire your solemn
communication. I may from henceforth no more feign. It is said to me that you
have another wife besides me. Alas Hercules have I made any fault against your
worthiness? wherefore give ye me over and abandone me? How may ye do so? men
name you the man virtuous. Ye abandon me and forsake me: and that is against
virtue. Though now ye do it, I have seen the time that ye were my husband,
in embracing us together, and kissing, you showed then to me semblance of good
liking and of joy. Now, let ye her alone that ye loved, as a poor castaway.
Alas where be ye witnesses of our marriage? where be the eternal vows and oaths
that we made one to another. Men be deaf and blind, but the Gods hear and
see: wherefore I pray you, that ye consider, that which ye ought to consider:
and that ye hold your good name more deerer, than ye do the love of your new
acquainted gossip that makes you to err against virtue, whereof ye have so
great a renowm, and I pray you hastily write to me your pleasure, etc.

When Hercules had read from the beginning to the end, the letter of
Deianira, as he yet beheld and saw it, Yole came unto him, with three hundred
gentlewomen, for to be merry, and to make cheer with Hercules. Hercules then
closed the letter, and returned into Licie, holding Yole by the hand: howbeit
when he was in his palace, he forgot not Deianira, but found means for to go
into his study, and there wrote a letter: and when it was finished, he took
it to Lycas, for to present it to Deianira. Lycas took the letter and returned
home again to Deianira. First he told her the tidinges, and of the state of
Yole. After he delivered to her the letter, containing, that he recommended him
unto her, and that he had none other wife but her, and that he prayed her
that she would not give her to think any evil, but to live in hope and in
patience, as a wise lady and noble ought, and is bound to do, for her honor
and credit. This letter little or naught comforted Deianira, she was so
vehemently attainted with jealousy. Her sorrow redoubled and grew. In this
redoubling, she wrote yet another letter, which she sent to Hercules, and that
contained these words that follow.

Hercules, alas and what avails me to be the wife of so noble a husband as ye
be? your nobleness is to me more hurtful then profitable. O fortune, I was
wont to rejoice, for all day I heard none other things but commendations and
praisinges of your prowesses and right glorious deeds and exploites, wherewith
the world was inlumined and shone. Now must I be angry and take displeasure in
your works that be foul and full of vices. All Greece murmureth at you, and
the people say, that ye were wont to be the vanquisher of all things, and no^
ye be vanquished by the foolish love of Yole. Alas Hercules, and how? shall I be
separated from you, and he holden the waiting drudge of the caitife Yole? She
is your Caitife, for ye have slain her father, and have taken her in the prise
of Calidonie, and yet now she has the place of your lawful wife. Alas, have
I said well, married? for to be named the fair daughter of Jupiter king of the
heaven and of the earth? Now shall I no more be called so, it is not always
happy to mount unto the most high estate. For from as much as I have mounted in
height, and was your fellow, from so far I feel my self fall into the more
great peril. O Hercules, if for my beauty ye took me to your wife, I may
well curse that beauty: for that is cause of the grievous shame, that is to me
all evident, for to prognosticate mine harm and ill to come. And that is to
come, cannot your astronomers see that? I would I knew that. I wot well your
beauty and my beauty have brought my heart into the strait prison of sorrow
without end. And I may not count them but for enemies, since by them all
sorrows come unto me. The ladies have joy in the pre-eminence of their
husbands, but I have ill fortune and mishappe. I see nothing but displeasure in
my marriage. O Hercules, I think all day on you, that ye go in great perils of
arms, and of fierce beasts, and tempests of the sea, and in the false perils
of the world. Mine heart trembles, and has right great fear of that I ought
to have comfort and hope of wealth. All that I remember in my mind, and think
on in the day, I dream on in the night: and then me thinks verily, that I
see the cutting sharp swords enter in me, and the heads of the spears: and
after me thinks, that I see issue out of the caves of the forests and
deserts, lions, and wild monsters, that ease my flesh. Since the beginning of
our aliance unto this day, I have had all the days and nights such pains for
you, and borne and suffered them. But alas, all these things are but little in
comparison of the pains that I now suffer and endure, forasmuch as ye maintein
strange women, and a woman of all folly. May she be called the mother of your
children, by whom the sparcles of foul renoume shall abide with you. With this
spot or vice is my pain redoubled, and it pearceth my soul. I am troubled
with the dishonor of your ample highness. The people say, that ye are made as
a woman, and live after the guise and manner of a woman, and spin on the rock:
where ye were wont to strangle lions with your hands, ye^ leave the exercise
of arms, and to be known in far countries and realms, in showing your
virtue, like as you were wont to do, for the only company of the caitife Yole,
that holds and abuses you. O cursed company and foul abuse. Speak to me
Hercules, if the right high and mighty men that thou have vanquished, as
Diomedes of Thrace, Antheon of Libie, Busire of Egypt, Gerion of Spain, and
Cacus the great thief saw thee thus holden to do naught, for the beauty of a
daughter that soon shall pass, what would they say? Certes they would not
repute them worthy to be vanquished of thee, and would show and point at
thee with their fingers, as at a man shamed, and made like a woman, living in
the lap of a woman. O how strong is Yole? when her hands that are not
worthy nor meet to thread a needle, has taken thy clubbe, and brandished thy
sword wherewith thou have put in fear all the earth? Alas Hercules, have you
not in remembrance that in your childhood, lying in your cradle, ye slew the
two serpents. You being a child were a man, and now when you have been a man,
are you become a woman, or a child? This is the work of a woman, to hold
himself always with a woman: or, it is the deed of a child, for to enamour
himself on a woman of folly. The truth must be said, you began better then
you end: your last deeds answer not the first, your labors shall never be
aunswerable nor worthy your praisings nor your lands. For all the
commendation and praising is in the end. Whosoever he be that begins a
work, whereof the beginning is fair, and the end foul, all is lost. Surely
Hercules, when I behold the glorious beginning that virtue made in you, and
see that you now be vicious, all my strength fails, and mine arms fall down
as a woman in a trance or a swoune, and without spirit: and it may not seem to
me true, that those arms (that bare away by force the sheep from the garden,
belonging to the daughters of Athlas) may fall into so great a fault, as for to
embrace and beclip fleshly another wife then his own. This notwithstanding, I
am assured of a truth, that you hold not caitife Yole, as a caitife, but as
your own wife: not in prison, but at her pleasure, in chamber finely be
decked, and in bed curteined and hanged: not disguised and secretly, as many
hold their concubines: but openly and with shameless face showing herself
right glorious to the people, and as that she may so do lawfully. For she
holds you prisoner and caitife, and she has put the fetters about your
neck, by her Italian iuglings and shifts, whereof I have great shame in my
self. But as for the amendment, I will discharge my mind, I cannot better it,
but pray to the gods that they will puruey for remedy.

CHAP. XXXI. How Deianira sent to Hercules a shirt enuenimed: and how Hercules
burned himself in the fire of his sacrifice: and how Deianira slew herself
when she knew that Hercules was dead, by the means of her ignorance, etc.
WHen Hercules had read this letter, he understood well what it contained, and
was smitten with remorse of conscience. By this remorse, he understood that
virtue was stained in him: he was then very pensive, and so much deprived from
all pleasure, that none durst come to him in a great while and space, save
only they that brought to him meat and drink. Neither Yole durst not go to
him, Licas that had brought this letter, was there waiting and attending the
answer long. No man could know whereof proceeded the pensiveness of Hercules,
nor the cause why he withdrew himself from the people. In the end, when
Hercules had been long pensive, and had thought upon all his affairs, and what
he had to do: for to withdraw himself, and to get himself from Yole, he
departed from his chamber on a day, saying, that he would go and make
sacrifice to the god Apollo, upon the mount named Oeta, and commanded, and
forbade, upon pain of death, that no man should follow him except Phylotes.
By adventure, as he issued out of his palace, accompanied only with Phylotes,
for to go upon the mount, he met Licas. Licas made to him reverence, and
demanded of him, if it pleased him any thing to send to Deianira. Hercules
answered to Licas, that he would go make his sacrifice to the god Apollo, and
that at his return and coming again, he would go unto her, or else he would
send unto her.

With this word Hercules and Phylotes passed forth, and went on their
pilgrimage. And Licas returned unto Deianira, and told to her the joyful
tidings that he had received of Hercules, and also what life Hercules had lead
since the day and the hour that he had presented to him her letter. Deianira
all comforted with these good tidings, went into her chamber, and thanked the
gods, and fortune. Anon after, she began to think on her estate, and thus
thinking, she remembered her of the poison that Nessus had given her, being at
the point of death, and how she had kept it in one of her coffers: and
forthwith incontinently she opened the coffer, and took the cursed poison, and
one of the shirts of Hercules: and as she that imagined by the virtue of the
poison to draw again to her the love of Hercules, like as Nessus had said
unto her, she made the shirt to be boiled with the poison, and gave the charge
thereof to one of her women. When the shirt was boiled enough, the woman took
the vessel, and set it to cool. After she took out the shirt openly, and
wrong it, but she could not so soon have wrung it, but the fire sprang in her
hands so vehemently, that as she cast it upon a perch to dry, she fell
down dead.

In process of time, Deianira desiring to have the shirt, and seeing the woman
that had charge thereof, brought it not, she went into the chamber where the
shirt had been boiled, and found the woman dead, whereof she had great
marvel. Nevertheless she passed the death lightly, and by one of her
damsels she made take the shirt that hanged on the perch and was dry, and
commanded her that she should fold it and wind it in a handkerchiefe.

At the commandment of Deianira the damsel folded and wrapped the shirt.
But so doing, she was served with the poison in such wise that she lost her
speech, and died anon after. This notwithstanding Deianira that thought on
nothing, but for to come to her intention, took the shirt, and delivered it to
Lycas, and charged him that he should bear it to Hercules, praying him in her
name, that he would wear it. Lycas, that was ready to accomplish the will of
his mistress, took the charge of the dolorous shirt, and departed from
thence, and went into the mountain whereas Hercules was, and there he found
him in a forest, whereas was the temple of Diana: Hercules had no man with
him but Phylotes, which made ready for him a great fire for to sacrifice an
heart that Hercules had taken running at a course. Lycas then finding Hercules
in the temple, he kneeled down low to him, and said, Sir, here is a shirt
that your waiting woman and servant Deianira sends unto you. She
recommendeth her humbly unto your good grace, and prays you that ye will
receive this present in good part, as from your wife. Hercules was joyous of
these words, and anon vnclotheth him, for to do on this cursed shirt. Saying,
that verily she was his wife, and that he would for her sake wear this shirt.
In doing on this shirt, he felt a great dolor and pain in his body. This
notwithstanding, he did on his other clothes above, as he that thought none
evil. When he was clothed and the shirt was warm, his pain and sorrow grew
more and more. Then he began to think, and knew anon that his malady came of
his shirt, and feeling the pricking of the venim, without long tarrying, he
took off his robe, and supposed to have taken off his shirt from his back,
and to have rent it, and spoiled it. But he was not strong enough for to do
so, for the shirt held so sore, and cleaued so fast and terribly to his flesh,
and was so fastened to his skin, by the vigor of the sharp poison, in such
wise that he tare out his flesh, and bare away certain pieces thereof, when
he would have taken off his shirt, etc.

Hercules knew then, that he was hurt and wounded to the death. Death began to
fight against him, he began to resist by drawing of his shirt from his body
with pieces of his flesh and of his blood, but al might not avail. He al to
rent and tare his back, his thies, his body unto his entrails and guts, his
arms, his shoulders unto the bones, and still his dolor and pain grew and
enlarged to be more and more. Thus as he returned, in the force of his great
dolorous pain, he beheld Lycas and another fellow that he had brought with
him, that were all abashed of this adventure. Then he went to them, and said
unto Lycas. Thou cursed and unhappy man: what thing has moved thee to come
hither under the false friendship of Deianira, to bring me into the chance of
this misfortune: What think thou, that thou have done? Thou have served me
with a shirt intoxicate with mortal venim. Who has introduced thee to do
this? thou must needs receive thy desert. And saying these words, Hercules
caught by the head poor Lycas, that wist not what to say, and threw him
against a rock so fiersly, that he to frushed and all to brake his bones, and
so slew him. The fellow of Licas fled, and hid him in a bushe. Phylotes was
so afraid, that he will not what to do. At the hour that Hercules was in this
case, much people came into the temple. The entrails of Hercules were
troubled. His blood boiled in all his veins, the poison pierced unto his
heart, his sinowes shrunk and withdrewe them. When he felt himself in this
misery, and that death hasted his end by terrible pain, as he that could
not take away the repugnance of his virtuous force, striving against the malice
of venom, he began to run, over hill, and over valey, up and down the
forest, and pulled up the great trees and overthrew them. After, he began to
rent off his shirt, with the flesh that was sodden and broiled. When he had
long lead this life, he returned unto the temple, all assured of death, and
lift up his hands and eyes unto the heaven, and said: Alas, alas ^ust it be
that fortune laugh at me for this miserable destiny coming of the accusation
of mad ie^^dulle and sorcerie of that woman that in the world I held and
reputed most wise and most virtuous? O Deianira, unnatural woman without wit,
without shame, and without honor, with an heart of a tyrant, all besotted with
jealousy: how have thou been able to contriue against me this fury and treason
enuenomed? false feminine will unnatural, out of rule and out of order, thou
had never so much honor and worship as thou now have deserved blame: not
only for thee alone, but for all the women that do, or ever shall be in the
world. For if it happen that kings or princes acquaint them with ladies or
gentlewomen, for the multipliance of mankind, they will never have credit,
nor affiance in their proper wives. O Deianira, what have thou done? The women
present, and they that be in the wombes of their mothers, all shall spit at
thee in thy face, and shall curse thee without end, for the reproach by thee
turning upon them infinite: and men will have dread for to be ferued with the
like shirt, etc.

Alas Deianira, what shall Calcedonie now do that glorified her in thy glory,
and put and set thee in the front of their honor, as a carbuncle for the
decking of their precious things? In steed to set thee in the front, they
shall cast thee under feet, and in steed to have glory of thee, they shall
have shame: hereof they may not fail, for by impiety and diverse engines, and
by conspired and swollen cruelty, thou have conspired my death, and have
broched and unfolded, not recurable misfortune, for thee and me, and for our
friends and kinsmen. O Deianira, thy malice as an unhappy and most cursed
serpent, has wrought this malicious and reproachful murder. Thy false jealousy
has more power to extermine my life, then have had all the monsters of the
world. By thine offense and by thy mischievous slight hid and covert, where
from I could not keep me, I must die and pass out of this world. Since it is
so, I thank fortune, and ask of the Gods no vengeance of thee: but certes to
the end it be not said, that the vanquisher of man, he not vanquished by a
woman, I will not pass the bitter passage of death by thy mortal sorce^ies
full of abomination: but by the fire that is neat and clear, and the most
excellent of the elements.

These dolorous, and sorrowful words accomplished, Hercules took his clubbe,
and cast it in the fire, that was made ready for to make his sacrifice. After
he gave to Philotes his bow and his arrows, and then he prayed him, that he
would recommend him to Yole, and to his friends: and then feeling that his
life had no longer for to soiourne, he took leave of Phylotes and then, as
all burnt and sodden, he laid him down in the fire, lifting his hands and
his eyes unto the heaven, and there consummated the course of his glorious
life: When Phylotes saw the end of his master Hercules, he burnt his body to
ashes, and kept those ashes in intention to bear them to the temple that the
king Euander had caused to make. After, he departed from thence, and returned
into Licia, greatly discomforted: and with a great fountain of tears he
recounted to Yole and to his friends the pitious death of Hercules. No man
could recount the great sorrow that Yole made, and they of Licia, as well the
students as rural people. All the world fell in tears, in sighs, and in
bewailinges for his death. So much abounded Yole in tears and weepinges,
that her heart was as drowned, and forthwith departed her soul from the body
by the bitter water of her weeping. Each body cursed and spoke shame of
Deianira. Finally, Deianira advertised by the fellow of Lycas of the mischief
that was come by the shirt, she fell in despair, and made many bewailinges:
and among all other she said, What have I done? Alas, what have I done? The
most notable man of men, shining among the clerks, he that trauersed the
strange coasts of the earth and hell: he that bodily conuersed among men,
and spiritually among the sun, the moon and the stars, and that sustained
the circumference of the heavens, is dead, by my cause, and by my fault, and
without my fault. He is dead by my fault: for I have sent to him the shirt that
has given to him the taste of death. But this is without my fault: for I knew
nothing of the poison. O mortal poison. By me is he deprived of his life, of
whom I loved the life as much as I did mine own. He that bodily dwelled among
the men here on earth, and spiritually above with the sun, the moon and
celestial bodies: He that was the fountain of Science, by whom the Atheniens
arrowsed and bedewed their wits and skils: he that made the monsters of the
sea to tremble in their abismes and swallows, and destroyed the monsters of
hell: He confounded the monsters of the earth, the tyrants he corrected, the
insolent and proud he humbled and meeked: The humble and meek he enhaunsed and
exalted: He that made no treasour but of virtue: he that subdued all the nations
of the world and conquered the^ with his club: and he that if he had would, by
ambition of seignorie might have attained to be king of the East, of the West,
of the South and of the North, of the seas and of the mountains: of all these
he might have named him king and Lord by good right, if he had would. Alas,
alas, what am I own ^^ all unhappy time? when so high and so mighty a prince
is dead by my simpleness: he was the glory of men. There was never to him
none like: nor never shall be. Ought I to live after him? Nay certes, that shall
I never do. For, to the end that among the Ladies I be not showed nor pointed
with the finger, and that I fall not into strangers hands, for to be punished
forasmuch as I have deserved shame and blame by this death, I will do the
vengeance on my self. And with that she took a knife, and saying, I feel my
self, and know that I am innocent of the death of my Lord Hercules, with the
point of the knife, she ended her desperate life. Whereat Phylotes was all
abashed: and so were all they of Greece, that long wept and bewailed Hercules,
and his death. And they of Athens bewailed him exceedingly, some for his
science, and other for his virtues, whereof I will now cease speaking,
beseeching her that is cause of this translation out of French, into this
simple and rude English, that is to wit, my right redoubted lady Margaret by
the grace of God Duchess of Burgoine and of Brabant, Sister to my sovereign
Lord the king of England and of France, etc. that she will receive my rude
labor, acceptably and in good liking.

Thus ends the second book of the Collection of histories of Troy. Which
books were late translated into French out of Latin, by the labor of the
venerable person Raoulle Feure priest, as before is said, and by me, unfit and
unworthy, translated into this rude English, by the commandment of my said
redoubted Lady Duchess of Burgoine. And forasmuch as I suppose the said two
books have not been had before this time in our English language: therefore I
had the better will to accomplish this said work, which work was begun in
Bruges, and continued in Gaunt, and finished in Colein, in the time of the
troublous world, and of the great divisions being and reigning, as well in the
realms of England and France, as in all other places universally through the
world, that is to wit, the year of our Lord a thousand four hundred seventy
and one. And as for the third book which treats of the general and last
destruction of Troy: It needs not to translate it into English, forasmuch as
that worshipful and religious man John Lidgate moonk of Bury did translate it
but late, after whose work, I fear to take upon me (that am not worthy to
bear this penner and inke-horne after him) to meddle at all in that work. But
yet, forasmuch as I am bound to obey and please my said ladies good grace: and
also that his work is in rhyme: and as far as I know it is not had in prose
in our tongue: and also peradventure, he translated it after some other
author then this is: and, forasmuch as diverse men be of diverse desires, some
to read in rhyme and meeter, and some in prose: and also, because that I have
now good leisure, being in Coleine, and having none other thing to do at this
time: to eschew idleness, mother of all vices, I have deliberated in my self,
for the contemplation of my said redoubted Lady, to take this labor in hand,
by the sufferance and help of almighty God, whom I meekly beseech to give me
grace to accomplish it, to the pleasure of her that that is causer thereof: and
that she receive it in gree, of me her faithful, true and most humble servant,
etc.

The end of the second Book.
The table for the second book^ of the Collection of the historoyes of Troy.
How Hercules fought against thre^ Lions in the forest of Nemee: and how he
slew them and took their skin (...) Chap. 1. page ^45 How Juno sent Hercules
into Egypt (...) to be slain of the tyrant Bul^^^ of how Hercules slew the
tyrant, against the hope of ^^no. Chap. 2. ^^^ How Hercules espoused Megara,
and how he (...) knight in Thebes. Chap. 3. ^^^ How the Centaures ravished
Hypodamia at the wedding of Pyrothus: and how Hercules recovered her aga^^^^
vanquished the Centaures in battle. Chap. 4. ^^^ How Pluto ravished
Proserpine: and how Orpheus (...) for her into hell, and the queen Ceres came
(...) wedding of Pyrothus: and Theseus and Pyroth^^ fought with Cerberus porter
of the said hell. Chap. 5. page 265 How Hercules found Pyrothus dead at hell
gates, and Theseus in danger: and how Hercules vanquished Cerberus, and how
he conquered Proserpine from Plato. Chap. 6. 27^ How Andromeda delivered
Lyncus from his enemies: and how he slew in battle the king Creon, and took
the city of Thebes. Chap. 7. 279 How Hercules entered into Thebes in an
unknown habit. ^ bite and how^ he put to death the giant Lincus, and his
accomplices, and his wife Megara Chap. 8, 283 How Hercules put to death the king
Laomedon, and destroyed Troie the second time. Chap. 9. 287 How Hercules and
Asser assailed by battle the giant Antheon, and how they vanquished him in
battle the first time. Chap. 10. 291 How Hercules took the king Athlas, and
he studied astronomy, and the seven liberal sciences. Chap. 11. 295 How
Hercules assembled his battle against Antheon, king of the Libians, whom he
put to flight: and how he killed the king of Cothuly. Chap. 12. 300 How
Hercules fought again, against king Antheon, and put him unto death. Chap. 13.
302 How Hercules and Theseus fought together against the two damsels of
Scithie. Chap. 14. 304 How Hercules began to wax amorous of Deianira: and how
Achelous and Hercules had battle the one against the other and how Achelous
was vanquished. Chap. 15 page 308 How Hercules put to foil the king Achelous:
and how (...) espoused Deianira. Chap. 16. 323 How Nessus ravished Deianira
from Hercules, when he passed with her over the river: and how Hercules slew
Nessus with an arrow. Chap. 17. 328 How Hercules fought against the serpent of
Palus of of Learn, and slew him. Chap. 18. 331 How Hercules went into Spain,
and fought on the Sea against king Gerion, and vanquished him: and how he took
the city of Megidda and entered therein. Cha. 19. 336 How Gerion assailed
Hercules the second time before Megidda: and how Hercules slew his brethren,
and vanquished his army, and constrained Gerion to flee. Chap. 20. 341 How
Hercules pursued Gerion: and how he went and vanquished him, and put him to
death at the port of Corogne. Chap. 21. 349 How Hercules founded the City of
the Corogne upon the Tomb of Gerion. Chap. 22. 352 How Hercules assailed the
king Cacus, and overcame him, and how Cacus began to tyrannise in Italy.
Chap. 23. 354 How Hercules fought against the 11. giantes of Cremona, and
vanquished them. chap. 24. 364 How Cacus stale away the oxen and kine of
Hercules: and how Hercules fought with him therefore, and slew him. chap. 25.
375 How the queen of Laurentia was enamoured of Hercules: and how king
Pricus came into Italy with a great host, and sent to defy Hercules. chap.
26. 386 How Hercules fought against the king Pricus, which fled into his city,
where Hercules alone slew him and many mo with him. chap 27. 392 How Hercules
was enamoured on Yole the daughter of king Pricus, and required her of love,
and she accorded unto him. chap 28. 399 How Hercules fought against Diomedes,
in the forest of Thrace: and how he made his horse to eat him. Chap. 29.
405 How Deianira was full of sorrow, forasmuch as Hercules loved Yole, chap.
30. 411 How Deianira sent to Hercules a shirt enuenomed: and how Hercules burnt
himself in the fire of his sacrifice: and how Deianira slew her self, when
she knew that Hercules was dead by the means of her ignorance. chap. 31. 419
FINIS.
In these two Books precedent, we have (by the help of God) treated of the
two first destructions of Troy, with the noble acts and deeds of the strong and
puissant Hercules, that undertook and did so many wonders, that the wit and
skill of all men may well marvel.

And also how he slew the king Laomedon, beat down, and put his city of Troy
to ruin. Now in the third and last book (God assisting, we will tell how the
said City was by Priamus son of the said king Laomedon reedified, and repaired
more strong and more fortified then ever it was before.

And afterward, how for the rauishment of of dame Helene, wife of king
Menelaus of Greece, the said city was totally destroyed, and Priamus with
Hector and al his sons slain, with nobles out of number: as it shall appear in
the process of the Chapters.

Imprinted at London by Valentine Simmes. 1597.

The third Book of the destruction of Troy.
CHAP. I. How the king Priamus reedified the city of Troy more strong then
ever it was before: and of his sons and daughters. And how after many
councels he sent Anthenor and Polydamas into Greece, for to demand his sister
Exione, that Ajax maintained.
FOr to enter then into the matter, ye have heard heretofore of the second
destruction of Troy, how Hercules had taken prisoner Priamus the son of king
Laomedon, and had put him in prison. Howbeit Dares of Frigte says, that his
father had sen^ him to move war in a strange country, where he had been
right-long, wherefore he was not at that discomfiture. This Priamus had
espoused and wedded a very noble Lady, daughter of Egyptius, king of Thrace,
by whom he had five sons and three daughters of great beauty, The first of
the sons was named Hector, the most worthy and best knight of the world. The
second son was named Paris, and by surname Alexander, the which was the
fairest knight of the world, and the best shooter and drawer of a bow. The
third was called Deiphobus, right hardy and discreet. The fourth was named
He^enus, a man of great science, and knew all the arts liberal. The fifth and
the last was called Troylus, that was one of the best knights and puissant that
was in his time.

Virgill recounteth, that he had two other sons by his wife, of whom the
one was named Polidorus. This Polydorus was sent by king Priamus with great
plenty of gold, unto a king his friend, for to have aid against the Greeks.
But this king seeing that king Priamus was in deadly strife against the
Greeks, and also being moved with couetise, slew Polydorus, and buried him in
an Isle of the Sea. The other son was named Gan^medes, who^ Jupiter stole
away, and made him his bottle carrier, in the steed of Hebe the daughter of
Juno, whom he put out of that said office. The eldest of the daughters of
king Priamus was named C^eusa, which was wife to Eneas: and this Eneas was
son of Anchyses and of Venus, of Numidia. The second daughter was named
Cassandra: and was a right noble Virgin, adorned and learned with Sciences,
and knew things that were for to come. And the third was named Polixena, that
was the fairest daughter, and the best formed that was known in all the
world. Yet above these children heretofore rehearsed, king Priamus had thirty
bastard sons by diverse women, that were valiant knights, noble and hardy.

When then king Priamus was in a strange Country, he was occupied and very
much employed in the sense and profession of war, the Queen and her children
were there with him. The tidinges and news came to him that the king Laomedon
his father was slain, his City was destroyed, and his noble men were put to
death, their daughters brought in servitude, and also his sister Exione.

At these sorrowful tidinges he was greatly grieved, and wept abundantly,
and made (...) lamentations. And anon incontinent her left his siege, and
finished his war, and returned hastily (...) and when he found it so
destroyed, he beg^^^ to make the most ^^row of the world that (...). And after
he had (...) sell to make again the (...). Then he began to ^^^^^ie the
city so great and so strong, that he never ought to doubt his enemies: and did
close it with right high walls, and with great Towers of Marble. The city was
so great that the circ^^se was (...) journey. And at that time in all the world
was none so great, nor no^e so fair nor so excellently compassed.

In this City were six principal gates, of which the one was named Dardane,
the second Timbria, the th^^^ Helias, the fourth Chetas, the (...) Troyen, and
the (...) Antenorides. These gates were right great and fa^re, and of strong
defense. And there were in the city rich ^^^ces, without number, the fairest
that ever were, and the fairest houses, rich and well compassed. Also there
were in many parts of the city, diverse fair places and pleasant for the
citizens to sport and play in. In this City were men of all Crafts, and
Merchants that went and came from all the parts of the world. In the middle
of the city ran a great river named Paucus, which bare ships, and did
bring great profit and solace unto the inhabitants.

When the City was thus made, the king Priamus did cause to come all the
people and inhabitauntes of the country there aboutes, and made them dwell in
the city. And there came so many, that there was never (...) ^^ter furnished
with people and with noble men and ^^^^ns, then it was. There were found many
ga^^es and (...) richest Palaces and strongest that ever was in all the world.
And it was of height five hundred pases, besides the height of the Towers,
whereof was great plenty, and so high that it seemed to them that saw them
from far they raught unto the heaven. And in this rich palace, the king
Priamus did make the richest hall that was at that time in the world: within
which was his rich Throne, and the table whereupon he did eat and held his
estate among his Lords and Barons: and all that longed thereto, was of gold
and of silver, of precious stones, and of Iuorie.

In this hall, at one corner, was an altar of gold and precious stones, which
was consecrated in the name and worship of Jupiter their God, to which altar
went men up twenty degrees or steps. And upon the altar was the Image of
Jupiter of fifteen foot of height, all beset and and arraied with precious
stones. For in that God Jupiter was all the hope and trust of the king Priamus,
for to hold his reign long, and in all prosperity, etc.

When he saw that he had so fair a City, so strong and so well peopled,
and with that so rich of goods, he began to take some displeasure at the
wrongs that the Greeks had done unto him, and thought long how he might
revenge him. Then he assembled on a certain day all his Barons, and held a
rich Court. At this Court Hector his eldest son was not, for he was in the
parties of Pannony, on the affairs and certain works of his father, forasmuch
as Pannonie was subject unto the king Priamus. When king Priamus saw all his
folk assembled and gathered before him, he began to speak, saying in this
manner. O men and true friends, that be partners of my great injuries to me
done by the Greeks, for so little a cause or trespass: Ye know how the
Greeks by their pride have come into this country, and have slain cruelly
your parents and friends, and also mine. And how they have taken and led
away, and hold in servitude Exione my sister, that is so fair and noble, and
yet they hold her as a common woman. Ye know well, how they have beaten down,
and destroyed this City, overthrown the walls, the Palaces and houses, unto
the foundations, and have borne away the great riches, whereof the City was
full. And for these things I think it should be reason, that by the help of
the Gods, who resist those that be insolent and proud, we altogether by a
common accord should take vengeance of these injuries. Ye know what City we
have, and how it is peopled with good men of arms, and fighters: and garnished
with all manner of goods and riches.

Also ye know well, the alliances that we have with many right great Lords,
that with good will will help us, if need he. Wherefore, me seems, that it
should be good for us to revenge us of this shame. But yet forasmuch as the
adventures of the wars be right doubtful and dangerous, and that no man
knows what may come thereof (albeit that the injury be great, and that they
hold my sister in so great dishonor) yet will I not begin the war: But
first, if ye think good, I will send of the most sage and prudent men that I
have, to pray and require them, that they render and yield again my sister
Exione: and I will be content to pardon all the other injuries, etc.

When the king had thus finished his words, all allowed and praised his
advise, and it seemed to them good. And then the king Priamus immediately
called one of his Princes, named Anthenor, and earnestly desired him, and used
courteous and gentle persuasions, that he would enterprise this embassage
forthwith into Greece. And Athenor with all humility answered him, that he
was always ready to do his good pleasure. Then was there a ship made ready,
and all that belongs and was convenient to bring Anthenor into Greece. He
entered into the ship, and his men, and sailed so long, that they arrived at
the port of Thessaly, whereas was then by adventure the king Peleus, that
received right joyfully enough Anthenor, and demanded of him, wherefore he
was come into those parts. Anthenor answered to him in this manner. Sir, said
he, I am a messenger of the king Priamus, that has sent me to you, and has
commanded me to say to you and other, that he is well remembered of the great
injuries that ye and other have done to him, that for so little cause or
occasion, have slain his father, destroyed his city, and his people some dead
and some in servitude. And yet that is worse to hold his sister foully as a
concubin, and yet at least he ought to have wedded her. And forasmuch as ye be
a man of great wit and discretion, the king my lord wishes you and warns
you, that from henceforth ye cease the rage and the great slanders that may
come for this cause, that all good men ought to eschew to their power and that
his sister be safely delivered again to him: and he will pardon the residue,
and will hold it as a thing that never had happened, etc.

When the king Peleus had heard Anthenor so speak, he chafed with him anon in
great anger and ire, and began to blame the king Priamus, and said, that his
wit was light. And after, menaced Anthenor, and commanded him that he should
go anon out of his land: for if he tarried long there, he would flea him
with great torments.

Anthenor tarried not long after, but entered into his ship without taking
leave of king Peleus, and sailed so far by the sea, that he arrived at
Salamine, where the king Thelamon soiourned. Then Anthenor went unto him, and
declared to him the cause of his coming in this manner. Sir (said he) the king
Priamus requesteth effectuously your nobleness, that his sister Exione, whom
ye hold in your service so foully, ye would restore unto him. For it is not
fitting nor seemly unto your glory nor renown, to use so the daughter and
sister of a king, and that is issued of a more noble ligne then ye be. And in
case that ye will restore to him his sister, he will hold all things as not
done, as well the damages, as the dishonours that by you and other have been
done unto him.

When the king Thelamon had heard Anthenor so speak, he began to wax
passing angry, and answered to him right fiersly, saying: My friend (said
he) whatsoever thou be, I have much marvel of the simpleness of thy king,
to whom I bear none amity, neither he to me. And therefore I ought not to
hearken unto his prayer nor request. Thy king ought to know that I and other
have been there for to revenge an injury, that his father Laomedon did late to
some of our friends, And forasmuch as I then entered first into the city of
Troy with great travail and effusion of my blood, Exione of whom thou
speak, which is right fair, was given unto me for the guerdon of my
victory, for to do with her my will.

And for so much as she is so well to my pleasure as she that is of great
beauty, and replenished with all Sciences: it is not to me so light a thing to
render and deliver again a thing that is so fair and delightful, which I
have conquered with so great pain and danger. But thou shall say to thy king,
that he may never recover her, but by the point of the sword: but as for me, I
repute thee for a fool, that ever would enterprise this message, wherein
lies thy great peril: for thou art come among people that vehemently hate
thee and thy like: therefore go thy way hastily out of this country. For if
thou abide any more here, I will make thee die by cruel and hateful death, etc.

When Anthenor heard Thelamon so speak, he entered right hastily into his
ship, and sailed so far, that he arrived in Thessalie, where the king Castor
and the king Polux his brother soiourned. He went a shore speedily from his
ship, and declared his message, like as he had done to the other. And the
king answered to him in great ire, and said to him thus. Friend (what that thou
art) I will that thou know, that we think not to have iniuried the king
Priamus without cause: for it is so that the king Laomedon his father then
began the folly, wherefore he was slain. For he wronged first certain of
the Nobles of Greece, and therefore we desire more the evil will of thy king
Priamus, then his good love or peace. And certes it seems well yt he had not
thee in any good reckoning when he sent thee hither to do this message in
this country: wherefore I wish thee, see well that thou abide not here long,
for if thou go not incontinent, thou shall die villanously. Then Anthenor
departed without leave, and entered into his ship, and sailed till he came
to Pilon, where the duke Nestor soiourned, with a great company of noble men.
Anthenor went unto him and said, that he was messenger of the king Priamus,
and told and counted to him his message, in such wise as he had said to
the other before. And if the other were angry, this Nestor chafed in himself
more against Anthenor, and said to him. Ha, ha, vile varlet, who made thee so
hardy for to say such things before me? Certes, if it were not, that my
nobleness refrain me, I would anon cause thy tongue to be plucked out of thy
head, and in despite of thy king, I would by force of horse cause to draw thy
members one from an other. Go thy way hastily out of my sight: or by my Gods, I
will cause to be done, all that I have here said, etc.

Then Anthenor was all abashed, at the horrible words of Duke Nestor, and
doubting the fury of his tyranny, returned unto the Sea, and set him on his
return to Troy ward. And he had not been long on the Sea, when a great
tempest arose, and the air began to wax dark, and to rain and to thunder
right maruellously, and there rose great winds contrary, and waxed thick and
horrible mistie, and his ship was borne on the waves, one time high, and
another time low, in great peril, and there was not a man in the said
ship, but supposed to die, and that made not special promises and vows to
their Gods, and in these perilles were they three days, and on the fourth day
the tempest ceased, and and the air waxed all clear, and became peaceable.
Then they comforted themselves, and sailed so far that they came to the port
of Troy, and went strait to their Temples, to give then thanks to their Gods
for that they had escaped so many perilles as they had been in. And after
Anthenor went with a great company of noble men before the king Priamus, and
when all the Barons were assembled, and all the sons of the king present,
then Anthenor told all by order, what he had done in Greece, like as it is
contained heretofore. At these tidinges was king Priamus sore troubled, and
grieved for the opprobrious tauntes that they had offered to his messenger in
Greece. And then he had no more hope nor trust to recover his sister.

CHAP. II. How the king Priamus assembled all his barons, for to know whom he
might send into Greece, for to get again his sister Exione. And how Hector
answered: and of his good council: and how Paris declared to his father, the
visions and the promise of the Goddess Venus, etc.
WHen the king Priamus was thus acertained of the hate of the Greeks, and by
no far means he could recover his sister, he was moved with great ire,
and thought that he would send a great Navy into Greece, for to hurt and
damage the Greckes. Alas king Priamus, tell me, what misaduenture is this, that
has given to thee so great hardiness of courage, for to cast out thy self
from thy wealth and rest? Why may not thou refrain the first moouinges of
thy courage? albeit that it was not in thy puissance, yet thou ought to have
and take good council and advise, and to have in thy mind that men say
commonly: Some man thinks to revenge his sorrow, and he increases it.

It had been a more sure thing to thee, to have remembered the proverb that
says, that he that sits well, let him not move. Or else, he that is well
at his ease, let him keep therein. All things may be suffered save wealth: a
man that goes upon plain ground, has nothing to stumble at. In this manner
the aforesaid king Priamus thought long, and after he assembled on a day all
his noble men in his palace of Ilion, and said unto them. Ye know, how by
your council, Anthenor was sent into Greece for to recover my sister Exione,
and that by fair means. Ye do very well know also, how that he is returned
and come back, and also what wrongs and opprobries he has found? And me
seems that the Greeks make little account of the injuries that they have done
unto us, at the least, they by their words repent them not, but yet they
menace us more strongly then ever they did. God forbid that ever it should
come unto us, like as they menace us. But I pray the gods to give us power to
avenge us to their loss. And as for me, me seems, that we be more puissant
and strong then they are, and also we have the most surest city, and the best
furnished in the world: and also we have of great lords very great plenty
alied to us, for to help and aid us at our need: and I think for conclusion,
that we have well the puissance for to damage and hurt our enemies in many
manners, and valor to defend us from them. And so should it be good, for to
begin to show to them what puissance we have, to grieve them withal. If ye
think it good, we will send our men secretly, that shall do to them great
damage, ere that they shall be ready for to defend themselves. And for that
ye ought every one to employ your selves to take vengeance of these injuries,
and that ye have no doubt for any thing, inasmuch as they had the first
victory: for it happens often times that the conquerours be vanquished of
them that were vanquished, etc.

Then all they that were present, allowed the advice of the king, and offered
every man by himself, to employ themselves to the same with all the power they
could: whereat the king Priamus had great joy. And after that he had given
them thanks, he let every man depart and go home to their own houses,
excepting only his sons legitimate, and the bastardes whom he held in his
palace, and told to them his complaint of the Greeks with weeping tears, in
this manner: My sons, ye have well in your memory the death of your
Grandfather, the servitude of your Aunt Exione, that they hold by your life in
manner of a common woman. And you be so puissant, me seems that reason should
instruct you, for to employ your self to revenge this great injury and shame.
And if this move you not thereto, yet ye ought to do it to satisfy my will
and pleasure: for I am ready to die for sorrow and anguish, which ye ought and
be bound for to remedy to your power, that have caused you so well to be
nourished and brought forth. And thou Hector, my right dear son, that art
the eldest of thy brethren, the most wise and the most strong, I pray thee
first, that thou enterprise to put in execution this my will. And that thou be
duke and prince of thy brethren in this work, and all the other will obey
gladly unto thee. And in like manner shall all they do of this realm, for the
great prowess that they know in thee. And know, that from this day forth I
discharge me of all this work, and put it upon thee that art the most strong
and mighty to maintain battles: for I am ancient and old, and may not from
henceforth help my self, so well as I was wont to do, etc.

To these words answered Hector right soberly and sweetly, saying, my father,
and my right dear and Sovereign Lord, there is none of all your sons, but
that it seems to him a thing humane, to desire vengeance of these injuries,
and to us that be of high nobleness, a little injury ought to be great. As it
is so that the quality of the person grows and diminishes, so ought the
quality of the injury. And if we be desirous and have appetite to take
vengeance of our injuries, we forsake not, nor leave therein the nature of men:
for in like manner do and use the dumb beasts to boo, and nature it self
teaches and guides them thereto. My right dear Lord and father, there is
none of all your sons that ought more to desire the vengeance of the injury
and death of our Lord and graundfather, then I that am the eldest. But I will
(if it please you) that ye consider in this enterprise, not only the
beginning, but also the middle and the end, to what peril we may come
hereafter, for otherwhile little profit some things well begun that come to
an evil end.

Then me thinks, that it is much more allowable for a man to abstain him for
to begin things whereof the ends be dangerous, and when of may come more
evil men good: for any thing is not said to be fortunate or happy until the
time that it come unto a good end. I say not these things for any evil
meaning or cowardice: but only to the end that ye begin not a thing, and
specially that thing that ye have in your heart to put in practice, but that
ye first be well counseled. Ye know well that all Affricke and Europe be
subjects unto the Greeks. How be they furnished with knights, worthy, hardy,
and rich right marvelous? Cortes, at this day the force and strength of us
here, is not to be compared unto them, in force, nor in valiance. Wherefore, if
we begin the war against them, we might lightly come to a mischievous and
shameful end. We that be in so great rest and ease amongst our selves, what
shall we seek for to trouble our prosperity, and welfare? Exione is not of so
high prise, that it behooves all us to put us in peril and danger of death
for her: she has been now long time there, where she is yet. It were better
that she spend forth her time, that I think has but little time to live, then
we should put us all in such perils. And meekly* I beseech you, not to suppose
in any wise, that I say these things for cowardice: But I doubt the chances of
fortune, and least that under the shadow of this thing she confound and
destroy your great seignorie, and least that we should begin things that
we ought to leave, for to eschew more great mischief, etc.

When Hector had made an end of his answer, Paris was nothing well content
therewith: he stood upon his feet, and said in this wise. My right dear
Lord; I beseech you to hear me say, to what end ye may come, if ye begin the
war against the Greeks. How, be not we garnished with so mighty and noble
chivalry as they be? Certes that be we, which in all the world is none that
may discomfit: and therefore begin ye hardly that enterprise that ye have
thought of, and send some of your ships and of your people to run into
Greece, and to take their people, and damage the country. And if it please
you to send me, I will do it with a good will and heart, for I am persuaded,
that if ye send me, I will do great damage unto the Greeks, and I will take
some noble lady of Greece, and bring her with me into this realm, and by
commutation of her, you may recover your sister Exione. And if ye will
understand and know, how I am persuaded of this thing, I will say to you, that
the gods have promised it to me. It happened of late (said Paris) in the time
that by your commandment I was in the lesser India, at the beginning of the
Summer, that upon a Friday, I went to hunt in a forest very early, and that
morning I found nothing that turned me to any pleasure: and then after midday
I found a great Heart. that I put to the chase so swiftly, that I left all my
company behind, and followed the Heart into the most desert place of all the
Forest, which forest was named Ida. And so long I followed him, that I came
unto a place that was passing obscure and dark: and then I saw no more the
Heart that I chased. I felt the^ my selffore weary, and my horse also that
might no further go, he swet so on all sides. So I lighted down to the ground,
and tied my horse to a tree, and laid me down upon the grass, and put under
my head my Bow bent, in sted of a pillowe and anon I fell asleep. Then came
to me in a vision the god Mercury, and in his company three goddesses, that is
to wit, Venus, Pallas, and Juno. He lest the goddesses a little from me, and
after he approached, and said unto me in this manner: Paris, I have brought here
these three goddesses unto thee, for a great strife, or controversy that is
fallen between them. They have all chosen thee to be judge, and to determine
after thy will. Their controversy or strife is such, that as they did eat the
other day together in a place, suddenly was cast among them an apple of so
marvelous form of fairness and beauty, that never was seen none such
before amongst them. And there was written about this foresaid apple in Greekish
language, Be it given to the fairest. And so anon each of them would have it,
for any thing in the world, saying each her self to be most fair, and fairer
then the other, and so they might not agree. Wherefore they have put it to thy
judgment, and each of them promises thee certainly a gift for thy reward, that
thou shall have without fail for the judgment of the apple. If thou judge
that Juno be the fairest, she shall make thee the most noble man in the world
in magnificence. If thou judge for Pallas, she shall make thee the most wisest
man of all the world in all sciences. If thou judge that Venus be the fairest,
she shall give unto thee the most noble lady of Greece. When I heard Mercurius
thus speak to me, I said unto him, that I could not give true judgment,
unless I saw them all naked before me, for to see the fashions of their bodies
the better, and so for to give a true judgment. And then incontinent Mercurius
did cause them to unclothe themselves all naked: and then I beheld them long,
and me thought all three passing fair: but yet me seemed that Venus exceeded
the beauty of the other: and therefore I judged that the apple apperteined to
her. And then Venus greatly rejoicing at my judgment, confirmed unto me the
promise that Mercury had made before in the favor of her: and after I awoke
straight way. Ween ye then, my right dear father, that the gods fail of any
thing that they promise? Nay verily. So then I say to you still, it is best
that ye send me into Greece, and that you may have joy of that I shall do
there. etc.

After Paris, spoke Deiphebus in this manner: My right dear Lord, if in all the
works that men should begin, they should be advised ever in the
particularities and singular things that might happen or fall, they should never
enterprise nor do valiant act by hardiness. If the laborers should leave to
ear and sow the land, for the seed that the birds pick up and gather, they
should never labor. And therefore (right dear father) let us make ready for
to send into Greece of your ships. Ye may not believe better counsel then
that counsel that Paris has given to you: for if he bring any noble lady, ye
may easily, for to yield her again, have again your sister Exione, for whom
we all suffer shame enough. After this spoke Helenus, the fourth son of king
Priamus, that said thus: Ha, ha, right puissant king, and right sovereign
dominatour over us your humble subjects, and obedient sons. Beware that
covetousness of vengeance put not in you such danger as lies herein. Ye know
very well, how I understand and can the science to know the things future and
to come, as ye have proved many times without finding fault: the gods
forbid, that it ever come that Paris be sent into Greece. For know ye for
certain, that if he go to make any assault, ye shall see this noble and
honorable city destroyed by the Greeks, the Troyans slain, and we all that
be your children. And therefore dissuade your self from these things, whereof
the end shall be sorrow and great desolation with right bitter death, the
which you your self, and your wife, and we, we, that be your sons may not
escape. For truly if Paris go into Greece, all these evils shall come thereof.

When the king heard Helenus thus speak, he was all abashed, and began to
counterpoyse and think of the matter, and held his peace, and spoke not of a
great while: and so did all the other. Then arose up on his feet, Troylus
the yoongest son of king Priamus, and began to speak in this manner. O
noble men and hardy, how be ye abashed for the words of this coward priest
here? Is it not the custom of Priests for to dread the battles by
pusillanimitie, and for to love good cheer and pleasures, and to fill their
bellies with good wines and with good meats? who is he that believes that any
man may know the things to come, unless the gods do show it him by revelation?
It is but folly for to tarry upon this, or to believe such things. If Helenus
be afraid, let him go into the Temple, and sing the divine Service, and let the
other take revenge of their injuries by strength and force of arms. O right
dear father and lord, wherefore art thou so troubled for these words? send
thy ships into Greece, and thy knights wise and hardy, that may make
requital to the Greeks for their injuries that they have done unto us. All
they that heard Troylus thus speak, allowed him, saying, that he had very
well spoken. And thus they finished their parliament, and went to dinner.

After dinner the king Priamus called Paris and Deiphebus, and commanded them
expressly, that they should go into the parties of Pannonie, hastily to fetch
and assemble knights wise and hardy, for to take with them to Greece. And
then that same day Paris and Deiphebus departed from the city of Troy, for to
perform and accomplish the will of their father. The day following, the king
assembled to counsel all the citizens of the city of Troy, and said unto them
after this manner: O my loving friends and true citizens, ye all do know
notoriously, how the Greeks by their pride and insolency have done to us
great wrongs, and innumerable damages, as it is very well known in the al
whole world. And ye know also, how they hold Exione my sister in servitude,
wherefore I live in great sorrow: and also ye be remembered, how I sent
Anthenor into Greece, that has nothing done: wherefore my sorrow is doubled.
And forasmuch as by iron he cured the wounds insanable, I have purposed to
send Paris my son with men of arms and puissance into Greece, for to invade
and assail our enemies by strength, and for to do them great damages, and for
to assay if they might take any noble lady of Greece, and to send her into the
city: and that by the commutation of her, I might get again my sister Exione.
And for so much as I will not begin this thing, but that it may come to your
knowledge first, I pray you that you say to me your advise: for without you I
will not proceed further therein, forasmuch as it touches you all as well as
me.

When the king had thus finished his speeches, and that each man held himself
silent a great while, then stood up a knight named Pantheus, that was the son
of Deuphrobe the Philosopher, and said: O right noble king, as I am your true
servant and vassaile, I will declare to you my advice in this matter also,
truly as a vassaile and subject is bound to counsel his lord. Ye have had well
in knowledge Deuphrobe the great Philosopher my father, that lived whole and
sound more then nine score and ten years, and was so wise in Philosophy,
that he knew the science of things to come hereafter: he said unto me many
times, and affirmed for truth, that if Paris your son went into Greece, for
to take any noble lady by violence, that this noble city should be destroyed
and burnt unto ashes by the Greeks, and that ye and all yours should be slain
cruelly. And therefore, right sage and wise king, pleases if your nobleness to
hear my words, and believe that the wise men have said, and be persuaded in
that thing that ye may not loose by if ye leave it, and whereof great sorrows
may ensue, if ye persevere in opinion. Wherefore will ye seek to entrap the
good estates of your rest, and put your tranquillity under the dangerous
adventures of fortune? Leave this, and dissuade your self, if it please you,
from this folly, and finish and end your life in rest happily, and suffer not
Paris to go into Greece in Arms. And if ye will algase, send ye another then
Paris.

At these words of Pantheus grew and arose great murmuring of the hearers.
Some reproved the prophesies of Deuphrobe the Philosopher, and some held it
for mockery and a fable: and they were of the greatest number, insomuch that
by the consent of the more part, Paris was appointed for to go into Greece with
men of arms: and the parliament finished, each man went home into his house,
and to his place.

When this conclusion was known of Cassandra daughter of king Priamus, she
began to make so great sorrow, as if she had been foolish or out of her right
mind, and began to cry on high, saying: Ha, ha, right noble City of Troy, what
Faierie has moved thee to be brought to such perils, for which thou shall in
short times be beaten down, and thy high Towers be ouerthrown and destroyed
unto the ground? Ha, ha, queen Hecuba, for what sin have thou deserved the
death of thy children, which shall be cruel and horrible wherefore with hold
not thou Paris from going into Greece? which shall be cause of this evil
adventure? And when she had so cried, she went unto her father the king, and
with weeping drowned in tears, prayed him that he would be persuaded for to
leave off his enterprise, saying: that she wist by her science the great evils
and harms that were coming by this mean. But neither for the disswasions of
Hector, neither admonition nor warning of Cassandra, the king would not change
his purpose, nor for Helenus his son, nor Pantheus, etc.

CHAP. III. How Paris and Deyphebus, Eneas, Anthenor, and Polidamus, were sent
into Greece: and how they ravished Helene out of the temple of Venus, with
many prisoners and richesse, and brought them to Troy, where Paris espoused,
the said Helene.
AT the entry of the month of May, when the earth is attyred and adorned with
diverse sloures, Paris and Deiphebus returned from Panonie, and brought with
them three thousand knights right hardy and wise. Then they made ready two
and twenty great ships, and charged and laid in them all that was
convenient for them. Then ye king Priamus called Eneas, Anthenor, and Polidamas
that was the son of Anthenor, and prayed them and commanded, that they
should go into Greece with Paris and Deyphebus: and they offered themselves to
go with a good will. And when they were all ready and assembled for to go into
their ships, the king Priamus spoke to them in this manner. It needs not to
use many words, for ye know well enough, for what cause I send you into
Greece, and how well that I have cause for to avenge me of the wrongs that
the Greeks have done unto us, But the principal cause is, to recover my
sister Exione, that lives in so great thraldom. And for to do so ye ought
to employ you: wherefore I pray you, and admonish you, that ye bend all your
endeavor and diligence that I may recover my sister. And be ye certain, if ye
have want of need or succor, I will succor you with so great a strength,
that the Greeks shall not be able to bear. And I will that in this voyage ye
hold Paris my son Duke and conductor of this battle of Eneas and Anthenor.

After these words, Paris and all the other took leave of the king, and
entered into their ships, and hoysed up sails, and recommended them to the
guiding of Jupiter and Venus, and sailed so far by the deep Sea, that they
arriving in the parts of Greece, in coasting the country, it happened them on
a day, that they met a ship, in the which was one of the greatest kings
of Greece, named Menelaus, that went unto the City of Epyre, unto the duke
Nestor that had sent for him. This Menelaus was brother of Agame^non, and was
married unto the queen Helene, that was the fairest Lady in the world, that
men knew of in her time: and she was sister of king Castor, and Pollux, that
dwelled then together in ye city of Samestare, and nourishing with the^
Hermione their niece daughter of the said Helene, Menelaus made a little cross
his ship, and to turn out of the right way: and so the one did not know the
other. And the Troyans sailed so far, that they arrived at the Isle of Cithar
in Greece, and there they ancred their ships and went a land. In this I Will was
a temple of Venus passing ancient, and of great beauty, full of all richesse:
for the inhabitants also of the country had their devotion specially unto
Venus the Goddess, and kept and solemnized her feasts each year, and she
gave to them aunsweres of their demaundes. Then when the Troyans were arrived,
they hallowed the most principal feast of Venus: and for this cause were there
assembled men and women of the country there about, that made great cheer,
etc.

When Paris knew this feast, he took his best clothes and did them on, also
the best faring and cleanliest men that he had, and he went into the temple,
and entered therein by fair and pleasant manner, and made his oblation and
offering of gold and silver with great liberality.

Then was Paris much beholden on all sides of them ye were there, for his
beauty a for he was one of the fairest knights of the world, and was so
richly and so queintly clothed and docked, that it gave great pleasure unto all
them that beheld him, and every man desired to know what he was, and whence
he came. And they demanded of the Troyans, that told them, that it was Paris,
son of king Priamus of Troy, that was come into Greece, by the commandment
of his father, for to require amiably that they would render and yield again
Exione his sister, that they had given to king Thelamon. So far went the
tidinges of the coming of these Troyans, and of their beauty and rich
clothing, that the queen Helene heard speak thereof: and then alter the
custom of women, she had great desire to know by experience, if it were truth
that she heard speak of: and disposed her to go unto the temple under the
color of devotion, for to accomplish her desire. O how great folly is it,
unto honest women to will go oftentimes unto the feasts and sportes of young
people, that little or nothing do there, but muse and devise how they may
come to their desire, and care not what mischief may follow in body and in
soul? The ship should never perish, if it abode always in the port, and were
not sent out into perils of the Sea.

It is a good thing and a precious jewel, to have a good woman that holds
her honestly in her house. O how great damage came unto the Greeks and to the
Troyans of this City, that Helene went so lightly to see the Troyans: that
ought not so to do, and specially in the absence of her husband? But as it is
the custom of women to be wilful to bring their desire to the end, Helene
incontinent did make ready horse and all that was convenient, for to go unto
the temple: and she did them to understand, that she went for devotion: for
this temple was not far from the place where she dwelled. When all was
ready, and she clothed in habit royal, she rode with her company unto the
Isle of Cythar, and entered into a vessel that brought her nigh to the temple,
where she was received with great worship of them of the country, as their
Lady. She entered into the Temple right stately, and made there her devotions
and her oblations with right great liberality, etc.

When Paris knew that the queen Helene, that was wife of king Menelaus, one
of the most noble kings of Greece, was come unto this temple, he arraied him
in the most gentlemanliest wise that he could (and his company) and went into
the temple, for he had long time before heard speak of her great bravery. And
then, as he was come and saw her, he was greatly surprised with her love,
and began earnestly to behold her, and to desire to see the fashion of her
body, that was so fair and well shapen in all things, and in such wise, that
it seemed properly to them that saw her, that nature had made her to be
beholden and seen: for in her was nothing, but that it served to manifest all
the beauty that might be found in a woman. Wherefore Paris might not forbear
to behold her, saying in himself, that he had never seen, nor heard tell
of any so fair and so well formed. And as he beheld her, in likewise she
beheld him, as many times and often, and her seemed that he was more fairer a
great deal then had been reported to her: and still she said in her self,
that she never saw man of so great beauty, nor that pleased her so well to
behold: and so she left all her devotion and all other thoughts, and gave no
heed, nor respect to any thing, save only for to behold Paris.

When Paris knew and saw this, he had great joy, and beheld her sweetly more
and more, and she him. By which sight they showed enough of their desires, the
one to the other: and thought diverse times, by what occasion they might speak
together. And so long they beheld each other, that by likelihoode, Helene made
a token or sign to Paris, that he approached to her, and anon Paris sat down
beside her, whiles that the people played in the temple, and spoke unto her
with a soft voice right sweetly, and she to him, and declared each to other
how they were surprised with the love of the one and of the other, and reasoned
how they might come to the end of their desire. And when they had spoken enough
of their hot l^^e, Paris took leave of her, and issued out of the temple, he
and his company: and Helene sent after him her eyes as far as the might.

When Paris was come to his ship, he called to him the most noble and
greatest of his company, and said to him in this manner. My friends, ye
know well wherefore the king my father has sent us unto Greece: that is to
wit, for to recover Exione his sister: and if we may not recover her, that we
should do damage unto the Greeks. We may not recover Exione, for she is in
over strong an hand: and also it should be to our great danger and damage,
since it is so that the king Thelamon, that holds her and loves her
heartily, is more puissant then we, and is in his own proper heritage. We be
nothing so puissant for to take in Greece any noble City, the country is so
full of people, and of many valiant folk. Then me seems good, that the
fair gift and notable that the Gods have sent unto us, we refuse not. We see
in this I Will come to that feast the most greatest citizens, and the temple
replenished with the most noble women of this province, and also the queen
Helene, that is lady of this country and wife of king Menelaus. This temple is
also full of all riches: if we might take them alive that be in the Temple,
and bring them prisoners with us, and take the Gods that there be of gold and
of silver, we shall have conquered a great gain, and so may get other riches
that we may go fetch in some other places.

If ye think good, I am of the opinion, that now this night we will enter
into the temple all armed, and ^ee will take men and women, and all that we
shall find and bring into our ships, and principally Helene: for if we may
bring her into Troy, the king Priamus may lightly enough have again his sister
Exione for her: therefore advise you speedily what is best to be done, whiles
the matter is hot, and before they escape us. Some of them blamed this thing,
and some allowed it: and finally, they concluded after many councels, that
they would do as Paris had devised.

Now it happened that when the night was come, and the Moon was nigh gone down,
the Troyans armed them in the most secret wise that they could, and left some
of them for to keep their ships, and the other went privily unto the Temple,
and entered therein, so armed as they were, and with little defense, took all
them that they found in the temple, and all the riches that were therein. And
Paris with his own hand took Helene, and them of her company, and brought
into their ships all the best, and put them in sure guard, and after returned
to the booty. Then began the noise passing great within the temple, of the
prisoners, and of some that had leauer suffer to be slain then for to be
taken prisoners. The noise was heard far, in such wise that they of the
castle that stood thereby heard it: and incontinent they arose and armed them,
and came to assail the Troyans, as valiant as they were. Then began the
skirmish right fierce and mortal: but the Troyans (that were four against
one, slew many of them, and the other fled and retired into their castle: and
then the Troyans took as much as they could find of goods, and bare it unto
their ships, and entered into them, and hoised up their sails, and sailed so
long, that on the 7. day they came and arrived at the port of Troy, their ships
full of good prisoners and of good riches: and they abode at the port of
Tenedon, yt was but 3 mile from Troy: and there were received with joy. And
then Paris sent a proper messenger unto his father the king Priamus to let him
have knowledge of his coming, and of all that that he had done in Greece. Of
these tidings the king was greatly reioysed, and commanded in all the City to
make a feast solemnly for these tidinges, etc.

Whiles that Helene was with the other prisoners in the ship of Paris, she
made great sorrow, and ceased not to weep nor to bewail with great sighs
her husband, her brethren, her daughter, her country and her friends, and was
in so great sorrow, that she left to eat and drink. And Paris comforted her the
most sweetly that he could: but she might not suffer to forbear weeping, and
then Paris said to her in this manner. How Lady: Wherefore make ye this sorrow
day and night without rest? What man or woman is it, that might long endure and
suffer this? Know not ye that this sorrow hurts your health? Yes verily lady,
ye make too much thereof: Wherefore from henceforth, I pray you to leave and
take rest, for in this realm ye shall lack nothing, and no more shall those
prisoners that ye will have recommended: and ye shall be the most renowned lady
of this Realm and the most rich, and your meanie that be here shall want
nothing. To these words answered Helene to Paris in this manner: I know well
(said thee) that will I, or I will not) I must needs do as ye will, since that
I am your prisoner: and if any good be done to me and to the prisoners, I hope
the Gods shall thank, and reward them that so do. Ha, ha, said Paris, doubt
you not, for me, I will do to you and them all that shall please you to
command. And then he took her by the hand and brought her into a more secret
place, and said unto her: Madame, think ye, forasmuch as it has pleased the
Gods for to suffer you to be brought by me into this province and kingdom,
that ye be lost, and undone, and that ye shall not be more rich and more
honored then ye have been, and that the Realm of Troy is not more rich, then
the Realm of Achay* yes verily that it is. Think ye that I will maintain
you dishonestly? certes nay, but will take you to my wife, and so shall ye be
more honored then ye have been with your husband, and more praised: for your
husband is not issued out of so noble a house as I am, nor so valiant: nor he
loved you never so well as I will do. Therefore cease ye from henceforth to
make such sorrow, and believe me of this that I have said to you Ha, ha, said
she, who can abstain her from making of sorrow being in the state that I am
in? alas, this case happened me never before: but since it must be none
otherwise, sore vexed and grieved, I will do that thing which ye require of
me, forasmuch as I have no ability to resist it. Thus was Helene recomforted a
little: and Paris did please her to the uttermost of his power, etc.

When the morrow came, betime he did cause to clothe her, and array her the
most honorably that he might, and made her to sit upon a Palfrey richly
arraied and decked: and so did he other prisoners, each after his degree: and
after he went to horse back himself, and Doyphebus his brother, Eneas,
Anthenor, and Polydamus, with a great company of noble men, and accompanied the
queen Helene, and departed from Tnedon, and went to Troy ward. And there came
against them without the town the king Priamus with a great company of noble
men, and received his children, and his friends with great joy: and after came
to Helene, and bowed rightly sweetly to her, and did to her great joy and
worship. And when they came nigh the city, they sound great store of people
glad of their coming with many sorts of instruments of Music: and in such
joy came unto the Palace of king Priamus: and he himself lighted down and
help Helene down from her palfrey, and ^^d her by the hand unto the Hall, and
there they made right great joy, all the night, throughout all the City, for
these tidinges. And then when it came unto the morrow, Paris (by the agreement
and consent of his father) took Helene to his wife, and wedded her in the
temple of Palace: and therefore the feast was lengthened throughout all the
city, and there was joy that endured yet after eight days whole, etc.

When Cassandra knew for truth that Paris her brother had wedded Helene, she
began to make great sorrow, to cry and bray as a woman out of her wit, and
said thus.

O unhappy Troyans, wherefore rejoice ye of the wedding of Paris, whereof so
many evils shall come and follow? And wherefore see not ye the death of your
selves, and of your sons that shall be slain before your eyes and their
husbands before their wives with great sorrow? Ha, ha, noble city of Troy,
how shall thou be destroyed and put to naught? Ha, ha, unhappy mothers, what
sorrow shall ye see, when ye shall see your little children taken and
dismembered before you? Ha ha Hecuba caitife and unhappy, where shall thou take
the water yt thou shall weep for the death of thy children. Ha, ha, people
blind and foolish, why send not ye incontinent Helene home again, and yield
her unto her right husband, before that the swords of your enemies come, and
flea you with great sorrow? Ween ye that this prince (the husband of Helene)
will dwell at home without grievous vengeance? Certes that shall be your dolorous
destruction and end. Ha ha, unhappy Helene, thou shall do us much sorrow. As
Cassandra spoke and cried thus with high voice, and with great sorrow, the king
Priamus knew it, and did her to be taken prisoner, and sent to her, and did
pray her, that she would cease, but she would not. And then he commanded,
that she should be fast shut in prison, and in yrons, where she was kept
many days. O what pity was it, that the Troyans believed not this warning and
admonition? For if they had believed it, they had eschewed ye right great
en^^ that came after unto them, which shall be told in tables and made plain
and manfest to them that will hear them unto the end of the world, etc.

CHAP. III. How Menelaus was sore troubled for the rauishing of Helene his
wife. And how Castor and Pollux brethren of her, pursued Paris in the sea: and
of their death: and of the condition and manner of the Lords, as well Greeks
as Troyans.
AS these things were done, as is said, Menelaus (that soiourned at Epyre
with the Duke Nestor) heard tell the truth of the prise and taking of his
wife, and of his people, whereat he was sore angry, and much abashed, and was
so greeeued and sorrowful, that he fell to the ground in a sownd. And then
when he was come to himself again, he began sore to complain him, and
make the greatest sorrow of the world. And above all other things he was most
sorry for his wife, and bewailed her beauty, and her solace, and might by no
way be comforted. When the duke Nestor heard say thereof, he came to him
hastily, and comforted him the most best wise he could, for he loved him with
great love. But Menelaus could not leave his sorrow: but took his way unto his
country, and the duke Nestor brought him on his way with a great compane of
noble men.

He sent unto the king Agamemnon his brother that he should come and speak
with him. And also he sent unto Castor and Pollux, the brothers of Helene, yt
they should come also to him. And anon, as they had heard the message, they came
unto him. When Agamenon saw his brother make such sorrow and heaviness, he
said to him, ah my brother, wherefore have thou such sorrow? suppose that the
cause be just, yet a wise man ought not to show such semblance outward: it
causes his friends to be sorrowful, and his enemies to be joyous. And
therefore, feign thy sorrow and alay thy rage, and make semblance as though
thou regardest nothing this that is befallen: for by weeping nor by using of
sorrow, thou may never come to honor nor vengeance, but only by the force
of the naked sword: thou shall therefore awake thy courage, and so shall thou
take revenge of the harms that be done to thee. Thou know what puissance
we have, and what helpers and ayders we shall find for to avenge us: for this
injury touches all the kings and princes of Greece, and as soon as we shall
require them of help, there shall not be one but he will help us with all
his power, and then we will go with great puissance before Troy, and will slay
our enemies, and do what we list, and will destroy the City. And if it happen
that we may take Paris, that is actor of these hurtes and illes, we will hang
him, and make him die an evil death. Cease then thy sorrow, and let us make to
be known to all the kings and princes of Greece this injury, and require them
that they will help for to take vengeance. Then was Menelaus recomforted with
the words of his brother, and anon they sent their letters unto all the barons
of Greece: and at their sending they came all, first Achilles, Patroclus,
Diomedes, and many other. And as soon as they knew wherefore they were sent
for, they said, that they would go to Troy with all their strength, for to
avenge this shame, and recover Helene. So they chose them Agemenon chief and
Prince of their host, as he that was wise and prudent, and of good council.

Now it happened that the king Castor and the king Pollux that were brethren
of the Queen Helene, as soon as they heard say, that their sister was
ravished, they entered into their ships, and went after the Troyans with a
great company of men of arms, for to see if they might recover her. On the
third day that they were on ye sea, there rose so great a tempest in the sea,
and therewith came so great a rain, and thunder, that their ships were cast by
the waves, one here, another there, the masts broken, their sails rent, and
finally they were all perished and drowned, that never was none seen of them.
And the Paynims say, that these two brethren were translated with the gods,
into the heaven or zodiaque, and returned into the sign of two beasts,
forasmuch as they were brethren germans. And thus ended their lives, by the
occasion of the taking of their sister. Some Poets feign, that these brethren
be translated into two stars, that is, the North star, and the South
star, which be named after them Castor and Pollux.

In this place declares Dares, in his book, the fashions of the Greeks that
were before Troy, of the most notable of them, as he that saw them and beheld
them many times during the truce that was often times between both parties,
during the siege before the city. And he began to speak of Helen, and says,
that she was so fair, that in the world no man could find no fairer woman,
nor better formed of all members. Agame^non was long and white of body, strong
of members, and well formed, loving labor, discreet, hardy, and passing well
bespoken. Menelaus was of mean stature, hardy in arms, and courageous.
Achilles was of right great beauty, blonke hairs and crispe, gray eyes and
great, of amiable sight, large breasts, and broad shoulders, great arms, his
reins high enough, an high man of great stature, and had no equal nor like to
him among all the Greeks, desirous to fight, large in gifts, and outrageous in
spending. Tantalus was great of body, and right strong, faithful, humble,
flying quarrels if they were not just and true. Ajax was of great stature,
great and large in the shoulders, great arms, and always was well clothed, and
very richly: and was of no great enterprise, and spoke very quick. Thelamon
Ajax was a marvelous fair knight, he had black hairs, and had great
pleasure in song, and he sang himself very well: he was of great prowess, and
a good man of war, and without pomp. Ulysses was the most fair man amongst
all the Greeks, but was very deceitful and subtle, and delivered his
speeches joyfully: he was a very great lier, and was so well bespoken, that he
had no fellow nor any like unto him. Diomedes was great, and had a broad
breast, and marvelous strong, of a fierce regard and fight, false in his
promises, worthy in arms, desirous of victory, dread and redoubted: for he
was greatly injurious to his servants, and luxurious, wherefore he suffered
many pains. The Duke Nestor was of great members and long, and well bespoken,
discreet and very thriftie, and gave always good counsel, quickly and soon
he would be very angry, and straightway pleased again: he was the most true
friend in the world. Prothesilaus was fair, and of goodly stature, right noble
and active in arms. Neoptolemus was great, black hair and great eyes, but
joyous and well cheered, his eiebrowes smooth, stammering in his words, but he
was wise in the law. Palamedes son of king Naulus, was of right fair shape
and lean, stout and amiable, a good man and liberal. Polydarius, was passing
great, fat and swollen, hardy, high minded, and proud, without truth.
Mathaon was of mean stature, proud and hardy, and one that little slept by
night. Brisayda, daughter of Calcas, was passing fair, of mean stature, white
and meddled with read, and well made, sweet and pitiful, and whom many men
loved for her beauty: for the love of her came the king of Persia into the aid
of the Greeks, unto the siege before Troy.

Of them that were within Troy, the same Dares says, first of king Priamus,
that he was long, grisly and fair, and had a low voice, right hardy, and
that he did gladly eat early in the morning, a man without dread, and that
hated flattery: he was upright, and a good iusticer, and had great delight to
hear singing and soundes of music, and earnestly loved his servants, and much
enriched them. Of all his sons, there was none so hardy as was Hector, the
eldest son of king Priamus. This was he that passed in his time all other
knights in puissance, and stuttered a little: he was great, and had hard
members, and could endure much pain, and was much hairie, curled, and lisped:
there never issued out of Troy so strong a man, nor so worthy: nor never came
there a villainous word out of his mouth: he was never weary of fighting in
battle: there was never knight better beloved of his people, then he was.
Paris was a passing fair knight, and strong, soft haired, and true, swift, and
sweet of speech tutmouthed, well drawing a bow, wise and hardy in battle,
very resolute, and covetous of lordshippe. Deiphebus and Helenus were both
passing like of fashion, in such wise that a man could not very well know the
one from the other, and also they resembled passing well the king Priamus their
Father. Deiphebus was very wise and hardy in arms. And Helenus was a
marvelous wise Clerk. Troylus was great and of stout courage, well manered,
and well beloved of young maidens: in strength and merinesse he resembled and
was much like unto Hector, and was the second after him in prowess: and there
was not in all the whole realm a more strong nor more hardy young man. Eneas
had a great body: he was marueilouslie discreet in his works, well bespoken
and very courteous in his words, full of good counsel, and of skillful
cunning. He had his visage joyous, and the eyes clear and gray, and was the
richest man of Troy, next the king Priamus, in towns and castles. Anthenor was
long and lean, and spoke much, but he was discreet, and of great industry,
and one whom the king Priamus loved greatly, and that gladly played among his
company, and was a right wise man. Polydamas his son was a goodly young man
and a fair, hardy, and of good manners, long and lean like his father, brown,
and was strong in puissance of arms, and of good and courteous words. The king
Menon was great, and a goodly knight, he had large shoulders, and great arms,
he was hard in the breast, and of great prowess, and one that brought many
knights unto Troy. The queen Hecuba was a strong big woman, and seemed better
a man then a woman: she was a noble woman, passing wise, courteous and honest,
and loving the works of charity. Andromache the wife of Hector, was a passing
fair woman, and white, and that had fair eyes, and fair hair: she was among
all other women right honest and civil in her works. Cassandra was of a fair
stature, and clear, round mouthed, wise, of shining eyes, she loved
virginity, and knew much of things to come, by Astronomy and other sciences.
Polixena was a very fair daughter, and tender, and was the very ray of
beauty, in whom nature failed nothing, save only that she made her mortal:
and she was the fairest maid that was in her time, and the best formed. Many
mo were within the town and without, during the fiege: but these were the
principal and greatest of name. And therefore Dares declares the fashion of
them, and rehearses not of the other.

CHAP. V. How the kings, dukes, earls, and Barons of Greece assembled al,
with their navy before the city of Athens, for to come to Troy: and how many
ships each man brought unto the help of the king Menelaus.
WHen it came unto the end of February, that the winter was passed, the kings
and princes of all the provinces of Greece, assembled them together at the
port of Athens for to go to Troy. It is not in the remembrance of any man
since the beginning of the world, that so many ships and knights were
assembled, as there were at that time. For first Agamemnon, that was chief and
prince of all the host of the Greeks, brought from his realm of Michmas an
hundred ships full of armed knights. The king Menelaus his brother brought
from his realm of Sparta, forty ships. Archelaus and Prothenor from the
realm of Boecie, fifty ships. The Duke Ascalapus and the Earl Helmius,
from the province of Orconemy, thirty ships.

The king Epistrophus, and the king Sedius, from the realm of Focide, thirty
ships: and in his company were the Duke Theuter, Duke Amphimacus, the Earl
Polixene, and the Earl Thebus, and many other noble men.

The ancient duke Nestor, for his province of Pilon, fifty ships. The king
Thoas of Tholy, fifty ships. The king Doxunois, fifty ships. The king
Thelamon Thyleus, six and thirty ships. Polibetes and Amphimacus from his
province of Calidonie, two and thirty ships. The king Idumeus and the king
Mereon of Crete, four score and two ships. The king Ulysses of Trace, two
and fifty ships.

The Duke Tynelus, from his City of Friges twelve ships.

Prothocathus and Prothesilaus the dukes of Philaca, brought with them two and
fifty ships. Collesis brought four and twenty ships from the realms of
Cresome, and then brought king Machaon, and the king Pollydris his son, three
and thirty ships. Achilles brought from his noble City of Phaces, two and
twenty ships.

The king Thephalus brought from Rhodes two and thirty ships. Eruphilus from
Orchomenie, two and fifty ships. The duke Anthipus, and the duke Amphimacus,
of Rusticane, thirteen ships. The king Polibetes of Rithe, and the duke
Lopins his brother in law, that had wedded his sister, threescore and two
ships. The king Diomedes of Arges, four score and two ships, and had in
his company Thelamus and Eurialus: the king Poliphebus, nine ships, the king
Fureus, thirteen ships, the king Prothoylus of Chemenense, two and fifty
ships. The king Carpenor of Carpadie, two and fifty ships. Theorius of
Breisse, four and twenty ships. The sum of kings and dukes that were
come thither, were sixty and nine. And there assembled at the Port of Athens
twelve hundred and four and twenty ships, without comprising the ships of
duke Palamedes, the son of king Naulus that came after on with his estate, as
shall be said hereafter, etc.

CHAP. VI. How the Greeks sent Achilles unto Delphos, to the God Apollo, for
to know the end of their war: and how he found Calchas sent from the
Troyans, that went with him to Athens.
WHen the king and the Princes were thus assembled at the Port of Athens, the
king Agamemnon, that was chief of all the host, and taught always to conduct
this host orderly, assembled unto the counsel on a plain without the City
all the noble men of their host. And when they were all assembled about him in
seats that he had made, he said to them in this manner. O ye noble men, that
by one will and mind be here assembled in this host with so great
puissance, ye knew very well, that it is not in the remembrance of any man,
that he saw ever so many noble men assembled, for to achieue any work, nor so
many young knights, and active in arms, for to assail^ their enemies. Is not
he then out of his mind, that presumes to raise himself against us, and to
begin war? verily I doubt not but one of an hundred that is in this company,
is sufficient enough to bring this work to an end, for which we be all
assembled. It is well known to each of you, the great injuries and the great
damages that the Troyans have done to us: wherefore we have just cause to take
vengeance by force of arms, to the end that from henceforth they, nor any
other enterprise never against us in any manner: for if we should suffer such
injuries by dissimulation, they might yet grieve us more then they have done.
And it is not the custom of the noble men of Greece, to let pass such wrongs
in dissimulation. and therefore it should be to us great shame, that be so many,
and yt have assembled so great strength, to dissemble in this quarrel, and
(yet that more is) there is no nation in the world, but that breadeth our
puissance, save only these foolish people of Troy, that by evil counsel
have moved them against us, and also have enterprised war upon us: as first
the king Laomedon, that iniuried some of our people for little occasion:
wherefore he received death for his reward, and his city was destroyed, and
his people slain, and soon brought in servitude, where they he yet. Certes,
it is not so difficile and hard to us that he more puissant, to take vengeance
on the Trojans, as it was to four Princes of less puissance, that came to get
the better of them. For So Much then, as the Troyans know verily that we be
assembled for to go upon them, and that they be strongly furnished with men of
arms against our coming, and of all such things as behooves them for to
defend them with; it seems me good, if it please you, that ere we depart
from this port here, we send into the Isle of Delphos our special
messengers, for to have answer of our God Apollo, of this that we will do and
enterprise.

Then was there none but he allowed and approved the words of Agamemnon, and
chose incontinent Achilles and Patroclus, for to go into this I Will, to hear the
answer of Apollo: and anon they departed and went and came soon thither: for
the said Isle is as it were in the midst of the Isles of Ciclades, where
Locana, Enfanta, Apollo and Diana be. And there was a rich temple, in the which
the God of the Paynims was worshipped, and gave answer to the people of such
things as they demanded of him. This I Will was first called Delos, that is as
much to say in Greek, as manifestation: forasmuch as in this I Will the Paynims
saw first the sun and the moon after the deluge: and therefore they supposed
that they had been borne there of their mother: for Apollo is the Sun, and
Diana is the Moon, in their languag^,

Some call this I Will Ortigie: forasmuch as the birds that men call Ortiges, in
English they be Quails, were first seen there. The Paynims gave to Apollo
diverse names after the diverse operations of the sun. In this temple was a
great Image, composed and made all of fine gold in the worship of God Apollo.
And albeit that the Image was deaf and dumb, yet every where Idolatry
reigned in such wise at that time in the world, that the devil put him in the
Image* and gave answer to the Paynims of the things that they demanded of
him. And this did the devil, for to abuse the foolish people, that at that
time believed that this Image was very God, etc.

Upon this part the author declares, from whence came first Idolatry. We
find in Historia ecclesiastica, that when Herod was deceived by the three
kings that returned not again to him, but worshipped our Lord Jesus Christ as
is contained in the Gospel, and afterward departed by another way, etc. that
Herodes purposed to have slain the child Jesus, and therefore the glorious
Virgins our Lady Saint Mary his mother, and Joseph bare him to Egypt. And as
soon as our Lady entered into Egypt, all the Idolles of Egypt fell down to
the earth all to be broken and bruised, according to the prophecy of Esaias that
said thus. Ascendet dominus in nubem leuem, and ingredietur Egyptum, and
mouebuntur simulacra Egypt. Showing that at the coming of our savior Jesus
Christ, all Idolatry should have an end. And among the Jews, Ismael was the
first that made an Idol, and that was of earth.

And Promotheus made the first among the Paynims, and taught other the manner
how to make them: but the right beginning of Idolatry came of Belus king of
Assirie, that was father of king Ninus, the which Belus when he was dead, his
son Ninus did bury him in a rich sepulture, and did make an Image of fine
gold, to the semblaunce and likeness of his father, for to have consolation
and memory of him, and worshipped him as his god, and compelled his folk to
worship him: and anon an evil spirit entered within the Image, and gave to
the people answers of their demaundes. And thus by the example of him, the
painims made other, in the worship of their friends, and worshipped them: and
thus proceeded they in Idolatry, and there were none but that they had their
proper gods that gave to them their answer of their demaundes, by the devise
of the ennemy, that so deceived them, and brought to damnation by the envy that
he had, and yet has upon the ligne of men, that God made to fulfill the
places of Paradise, from whence he was cast out for his pride into this
horror and darkness, and after the day of Judgment to abide in Hell for
evermore, in the company of the damned men.

Whenas Achilles and Patroclus were arrived in the Isle of Delphos, they went
with great devotion into the Temple of Apollo, and there made their oblations
with great liberality, and demanded of him answer of their affairs and
works. Then answered Apollo with a low voice. Achilles, return unto the
Greeks that have sent thee hither, and say unto them, that it is to come, and
shall happen for certainetie, that they shall go safely to Troy, and there
they shall make many battles. But in the tenth year they shall have victory,
and destroy the city, and they shall slay the king Priamus, his wife, and his
children, and the most great of the country. And there shall none escape, save
they only whom they will save.

Of this aforesaid answer was Achilles passing joyous: And it chanced
whilst they were yet in this Temple, that a Bishop of Troy named Calchas
son of a man named Thistram which was a passing wise man entered into this
Temple: and he was sent also from the king Priamus, for to have answer of
Apollo, for them of Troy.

As he then had made his oblations, and demaundes for them of Troy, Apollo
answered to him: Calchas, Calchas, beware that thou return not again to Troy:
but go thou with Achilles unto the Greeks, and depart never from them, for the
Greeks shall have victory of the Troyans, by the agreement of the Gods, and
thou shall be to them right necessary in counsel, and in doctrine. Anon as
Calchas knew Achilles, that was in the temple, he approached to him, and made
acquaintance to him, and accompanied together, by faith and oath, they told
each to other what the Idol had said to them. Whereof Achilles had great joy,
and made right great cheer and countenance to Calchas, and took him with him,
and sailed so long, that they arrived at the port of Athens safely: and when
they issued out of their ships, Achilles took Calchas by the hand, and
presented him to the king Agamemnon, and to other, and told to them the truth
of the answer of Apollo: How they should have victory of the Troyans, and
how Apollo bad him that he should not return again to Troy, but hold him
with the Greeks during the war. Of these tidings were the Greeks greatly
reioysed, and made a solemn feast, and received Calchas into their company,
by faith and by oath, and they promised him to reward him well, and do him
good, etc.

CHAP. VI. How the Greeks, with a great navy, went and sailed toward Troy:
and how they arrived at the Port of Tenedon, three mile from Troy, which they
conquered, and beat down to the earth.
AFter this feast that the Greeks had made, for the good answers of Apollo,
Calchas went in a morning in the company of Achilles and of Patroclus unto the
tent of Agamemnon, where all the most nobles of the host were assembled, and
he saluted them right courteously, saying: O noble kings and princes, that be
here assembled for vengeance of the great injuries to you done by the Troyans,
wherefore tarry ye now here, after the Gods have given their answer? ween
ye not that the king Priamus has his espies among you, and that whiles ye
soiourne, he furnishes not his country and city with vittaile, with horses,
and with other necessaries? Is not a great part of the Summer passed, and ye
have yet nothing enterprised upon your enemies. Beware that ye be not unkind
and ingrate, at the answer of the Gods: and that by your negligence they
change not their answer into the contrary. Therefore tarry ye no longer, but
ship you and your horse, and go ye to the sea, and cease not until the time
that the promises of the Gods be accomplished. And when Calchas had thus
spoken, each man said, that he had well said and spoken. And then Agamemnon
sent unto all the host, and commanded with a trumpet, that every man should
make him ready to remove. And anon they entered into their ships, and
disancred, and drew up their sails, and went all unto the Sea: and they had
not long sailed, not passing a mile from Athens, but the air that was before
very clear and fair, began to wax troublous and thick, and there began
a right great tempest in the sea, of wind, of rain, and of thunder: insomuch
that there was none so hardy but he had fear, and we end to have died, for
their ships were cast by the sea, the one here, and the other there, and they
supposed none other for certain, but to have been drowned. Then said Calcas to
them that were with him, that the cause of the tempest was forasmuch as Diana
their Goddess was wroth and angry against them, because they departed from
Athens and made to her no sacrifice: and, for to appease this wrath, it
behooued that the king Agamemnon sacrifice to her with his own hand Iphiginie
his daughter a young virgin, and tender of age, and that otherwise the tempest
should never cease. And for to speed this sacrifice, he counseled to turn
the navy, and to apply it to the I Will of Andill, where the temple of the
Goddess Diana was, etc. When the king Agamemnon understood this thing, he
was all grieved and passing sorrowful in his mind, for he loved his daughter
Iphigenie with great love: and on the other side, he was prayed and required
of all the other kings and princes of Greece, that he would make no delay to
this that was so great a matter, or to withstand the sacrifice: wherefore he
was vanquished by the said Princes, and for the love of his country, he
took his said daughter Iphigenie, and in the presence of great kings and
princes, sacrificed her unto the goddess Diana: and anon the tempest ceased,
and the air became neat and clear, and the sea well quieted and in
tranquillity and peace. And then he went again into his ship, and all the
other in like manner, drew up their sails, and sailed before the wind, so
far that they arrived at a port of the realm of Troy, nigh unto a Castle
called Sarrabana. Dares puts not down determinately, what was the cause
wherefore King ye Agamemnon made his Sacrifice unto Diana. But Ovid (in the
twelfth book of Methamorphose) says that it was Iphigenie his daughter, as
above is said. And when they of the castle saw the great Navy at their port,
they armed them, and came unto the port, weening to defend their land against
the Greeks, and assailed them that then were come a land, that were yet weary
of the travail of the Sea. But the Greeks issued anon out of their ships in
great plenty all armed, and slew them, and chased them unto their Castle, and
killed them with flying, and entered into the Castle with them, and there put
them all to death, and took the booties, and after beat down the castle unto
the earth, and then reentered into their ships again, and sailed so far,
that they arrived at the port of Tenedon, and there then they ancred their
ships, etc.

At this port was a passing strong Castle, well peopled and full of great
riches, and was three mile from Troy. When they of the castle saw the Greeks,
they ran to arms, and furnished their castle with good fighters, and the
other issued out and came unto the port, where they found the Greeks that were
then issued out of their ships all armed, and great plenty, and took all that
they could find. Thus began the battle between them right fierce and
mortal, and there were enough slain and dead of both parts: and many mo of
the Greeks then of the Trojans. But as soon as the great strength of the
Greeks were landed, the Troyans might no longer suffer nor abide, but put them
to flight, some to the castle, and the other fled unto Troy. Then the Greeks
bestirred them and belaid the castle round about, and assailed it on both
sides, and they within defended it passing well upon the walls, and slew many
by shot and by Engines, but the Greeks dressed their engines all about the
castle, and set their ladders unto the walls, and went upon all sides, and
they within defended them valiauntly, and made them fall down in their ditches,
some dead and some hurt. But the Greeks that were so great in number, sent
always new folk to the assault, whereof they within were so weary, that they
retired, and went back from their defense: and then the Greeks entered by
force into the castle, and there slew all them that they found, without
sparing of man or woman, and took and pilled all that they found that was good,
and after beat down the castle, and the houses unto the earth, and put in the
fire and burnt all up. And after they reentred into their ships joyous of
their gain that they had gotten in the Castle.

CHAP. VIII. How the Greeks did send Diomedes, and Ulysses, unto the king
Priamus, for to have again Helene, and the prisoners, and the answer that
they had.
WHen the Greeks had destroyed and beaten down thus the Castle and edifices
of Tenedon, and of Sarrabana, and that they refreshed them in the meadow of
Tenedon: then Agamemnon that had the charge of all the host, and to conduct
it well as a good captain ought to do, commanded that all the booty and gain
of these two castles should be brought forth. And so it was done anon, as he
had commanded: and he as a wise king distributed the gain, to each man after
his desert and quality. And after did cause to cry in all the host, that all
the noble men of the host should assemble them on the plain of Tenedon,
before the king Agamemnon: and when they were all come, the king Agamemnon
spoke and said in this manner. My friends and fellows, that be here now
assembled for so just a cause as each of you knows, and in so great
puissance, that there is and shall be tidinges thereof in all the world: yet
how strong that the puissance be) that it please the Gods that it be without
pride and felony: for it is so, that of the sin of pride grow all other
vices, and that the gods resist and withstand the insolent and proud people.
And therefore we ought to put away pride from our works: and in especial in
this work here now, and use the right way of justice, to the end that no man
may reprehend us, nor blame.

Ye know well, that we be come thus far, for to take vengeance of the
injuries and the wrongs that the king Priamus has done to us: and we have
done to him now great hurt and damage. Ye may well know for truth, that they
have assembled in the city of Troy great power, for to defend them against us:
and also the City is passing great and strong: and ye know well, that they be
upon their proper heritage, that is a thing that doubleth their force and
strength. For ye may take example of the Crow, that otherwhile defends well
her nest against the fawcon. I say not these things, for any doubt that I
have, but that we shall have victory, and that we shall destroy their City,
albeit that it is strong: but only for our worship, to the end that we be
recommended to have conducted this work by great discretion, and without
pride: for oftentimes, by our too hasty enterprise, a thing of great weight,
without advised council may come to a mischievous end. Ye know well, that it
is long ago that the king Priamus did require us, by his special messengers,
that we should render to him his sister Exione, and that by our hautinesse and
pride we would not deliver her again: and if we had delivered and sent her
home again, these euilles had never happned in the I Will of Cythar, as they now
be. And the queen Helene, that is of the most noble of Greece, had never been
ravished, nor lead away: and also we had not enterprised the pain nor the
labor, where we now be in. And there is none of us that knows what shall
happen to him good or evil: and therefore if ye seem good, that we might
return into our country, without suffering of more pain, with our honor and
worship, we will send unto the king Priamus our special messengers, and
bid him to send and deliver again to us Helene freely, and that he restore
unto us the damages that Paris has done in the I Will of Cythare: for if he will
so do, our return shall be honorable, and we may no more ask of him by right.
And if he refuse this, we shall have two things that shall fight for us, that
is, justice, and our true quarrel, and our puissance excused: and when men
shall hear of our offers, they will give the wrong and blame to the Troyans,
and to us the laud and praise: and we shall be excused of all the damages that
we shall do to them, after these offers. Therefore advise you among your
selves, what thing ye will do.

Then were there some badde people, that blamed this counsel, and some allowed
it: and finally, they concluded to do so as Agamemnon had said. Then they
chose for their messengers, Diomedes and Ulysses, for to go to Troy, and make
their legation: which took their horses, and went incontinently thither, and
came to Troy about midday, and they went straight to the Palace of king
Priamus, and took their horses to keep at the gate, and after went up into
the hall, and in going up, they marueiled greatly of the rich works that they
saw in all the palace, and specially of a tree that they saw in a plain, the
which was made by art Mathematike, marueilously composed, and of great
beauty, for the tronchon or stock beneath, was no greater but of the
greatness of a spear, and was passing long and high, and above had branches
of gold and of silver, and leaves that spread over the palace, and save a
little, it covered all: and the fruit of the same tree was of diverse precious
stones, that gave great light and brightness, and also did much please and
delight them that beheld it. They went so far forth that they came into the
great hall where the king Priamus was, accompanied with noble men. And then
without saluting the king nor the other, Ulysses said unto him in this manner.

King Priamus, marvel nothing, that we have not saluted thee, forasmuch as
thou art our most mortal enemy. The king Agamemnon (from whom we be
messengers) sends and commands thee by us, that thou deliver and send unto
him the queen Helen, whom thou have caused most vilely to be ravished and
taken from her husband, and that thou make satisfaction for all the damages
that Paris thy son has done in Greece: and if thou so do, I suppose thou
shall show thy self a wise man: but if thou do not, behold what evils may
come unto thee and thine: for thou shall die an evil death, and all thy men,
and this noble and famous city shall be destroyed. When the king Priamus heard
Ulysses thus speak, he answered incontinently (without demanding or asking any
counsel:) I marvel greatly of these thy words, that requirest of me that
thing that a man already vanquished and overcome, and one that might not
defend himself no more, with great pain would accord to thee. I believe not
that the Greeks have such puissance to do that thing which thou have said unto
me: they require of me amends, and I ought to demand the like of them Have not
they slain my father and my brethren, and lead away my sister in servitude,
whom they daigne not to marry honorably, but to hold her and use her as a
common woman? And for to have her again, I have sent unto them Anthenor, and
would have pardoned them the surplus: but ye know the villainies and menaces
that they did use toward my messenger: and therefore I ought not to hear
anything that ye say unto me: but had rather die valiantly, then to agree to
your request. And let Agamemnon know, that I desire never to have peace nor
love with the Greeks, that have done to me so many displeasures. And if it were
not that ye be messengers, I should make you die an evil death. Therefore go
ye your way anon, for I may not behold you without displeasure in mine heart.
Then began Diomedes to laugh for despite, and said thus: Ha king, if
without displeasure thou may not see us, that be but twain, then will thou
not be without displeasure all the days of thy life: for thou shall see from
henceforth before thine eyes great armies of Greeks, the which shall come
before the city, and shall not cease for to assail it continually: against
whom thou may not long defend thee, but that thou and thine finally shall
receive bitter death. Therefore thou should take better counsel in thy
doings if thou were well advised.

Then were there many Troyans that would have run upon the Greeks, and drew
their swords for to have slain them. But the king Priamus forbade them, and
said unto them, that they should let two fools utter their folly: and that it
was the nature of a fool to show folly, and to a wise man to suffer it. Ha,
ha, sir, said Eneas, what is that, that ye say? men must show to a fool his
foolishness: and truly, if it were not in your presence, this fellow that
has spoken so foolishly before you, should receive his death by mine own
hand. It apperteineth not unto him to say unto you such vile and venomous
words nor menaces: and therefore I advise him, that he go his way quickly,
unless he cease to speak foolishly. Diomedes, that of nothing was abashed,
answered to Eneas and said: Whatsoever thou be, thou show well by thy words,
that thou art right ill advised, and hot in thy words: and I wish and desire
that I may once find thee in a place convenient, that I may reward thee for
the words that thou have spoken of me. I see well that the king is fortunate
and happy to have such a counsailer as thou art, that gives him counsel to
do villainy. Then Ulysses brake the words of Diomedes right wisely, and prayed
him to hold his peace, and after said to king Priamus, we have understood all
that thou have said, and will go and report it unto our princes. And
incontinent they went, and took their horses, and returned unto their host,
where they found many assembled before the king Agamemnon, and told to them
the answer of king Priamus: whereof they had great marvel, and conferred
long together, for the well ordering of their affairs, since they were
acertained of the war of the Troyans.

CHAP. IX. How Agamemnon assembled to counsel the Greeks, for to have
vittailes: And how they sent Achilles and Telephus unto the realm of Mess,
where they slew the King Theutran in battle: And how Telephus was made
King: And of the Kings that came in the aid and help of King Priamus.
AFter these things, Agamemnon called his folks to counsel in the plain of
Tenedon, and said unto them among all other things. It behooves us
necessarily to be advised, how that during the siege before Troy, our host
shall be succored with vittaile: and therefore, if ye think good, we will
send unto the realm of Mess, to have from thence vittailes continually, for
it is a country right fertile and commodious: and they that shall go thither,
shall take surety of them of the country, that they fail not to send vittaile
to the host, so long as we shall be in this country. This counsel pleased
much the Greeks, and incontinent they chose Achilles, and Telephus the son
of Hercules, to furnish this message, and to go thither with a great company
of men of arms. In that province reigned a king that had to name Theutram, and
had long reigned in peace, for his country was peopled with good and hardy
knights. When Achilles and Telephus, with three thousand knights fierce and
hardy were arrived in the I Will of Mess, they issued out of their ships, and
went on land. Then came against them the king Theutran with a great company of
men of foot and on horseback.

Then began the battle right fiercely, and at the skirmish there were many
knights slain on both sides. And albeit that the Greeks were less in number
then the other were, they defended themselves well: but their defense had not
auailed them, had it not been for the great prowess of Achilles, that did
great marueiles with his body, as he that was the most strong and most valiant
of the Greeks: for whosoever he smote he died therefore, and there might no
man endure before him. When then Achilles had espied the king Theutram in the
mids of his people, that did great damage to his folk, he thrusted into
the greatest prease of his enemies, and beat down before him all that he
found until that he came unto the king Theutram: and he gave him so many
strokes, that he all to hewed his helm, and smote him down to the ground
sore wounded, and had slain him incontinently had not Telephus been, which
put himself between them, and prayed Achilles humbly, that he would not slay
him, nor do him any more harm then he had: and the king himself cried to
Achilles for mercy. Then said Achilles to Telephus, what moves thee to pity
our enemy mortal, that is come to assail us with so great fury: it is
reason that he fall into the pit that he made ready for us. Ha, ha, sir, said
Telephus, this king was very familiar with my father Hercules, and also did to
me on a time, great honor in this land, and therefore I may not suffer to see
him slain before mine eyes. Well then, said Achilles, take him, and do with
him what thou will. Then was the battle finished, and the Greeks ceased, and
the king Theutram was borne into his Palace as dead, for Achilles had sore
bruised him, and all to trushed him. And the king prayed Achilles and
Thelephus, that they would go with him: the which went, and were received with
great joy and honor.

It was not long after, that the king Theutram, that was wounded to the death,
by the wounds that Achilles had given him, sent for Achilles, and Thelephus,
and then said to them: My friends, I may not long live: and after said to
Thelephus. My friend, I may no longer live, and I have no lawful heirs of my
body, to whom I may leave this realm, that I have gotten with great labor,
and had lost long since, had it not been the most worthy of all worthies, thy
father Hercules, which warranted and was a shield to me against all them that
would have taken it from me: and he did often fight with them that would have
taken it. So thy father by his great prowess, slew them and chased them out,
and since I have kept it peaceably, not by my merit, but by the virtue of thy
father. And, since it is so that thy father has conquered this realm for me,
yt have no heirs, it is good right and reason that thou be heir of thy
father: and for so much as this is my last word, I leave to thee this Realm and
all mine other goods, wheresoever they be, and make thee mine heir, and pray
thee that thou do bury me honorably, as it appertains to a king. And as
soon as he had finished these words he died, and then Thelephus, and the
nobles of the country, did bury him honorably, and laid him in a very rich
Sepulture, whereupon was written this Epitaph: Here lies the king Theutram,
whom Achilles slew: the which left his realm to Thelephus.

This Thelephus, that before was but Duke, was made king of Mess: and all the
nobles of the Country did him homage, and all the people promised unto him
faith and service. Then Achilles did furnish his ships with vittaile, and
ordained that Thelephus should abide in his new realm (which he did being sore
grieved) and he prayed him, and also commanded in the name of the Greeks,
that he should do his diligence, to send unto the host of the Greeks
oftentimes vittailes: and he promised him that he so would do without any
default. And then Achilles took leave of him, and returned into his ships,
and sailed so long that he and his company arrived at the port of Tenedon
safely, where they found the host yet soiourning: and anon as he was landed,
he went strait unto the Tent of king Agamemnon, where all the princes and
kings were assembled: and there he was received with great joy, as he that
all the host loved much, for his great strength and prowess. Then Achilles
told to them, how he had arrived at Mess and of the battle, and how that
Thelephus was made king, and how he had promised to furnishe the host with
vittailes.

Of these tidinges the Greeks had great joy, and allowed and praised much the
valiance of Achilles: and after the Parliament each man went unto his
pauillion. Then was Achilles received with great joy of his Mirmidones, that
much loved him.

In this place here, the author names what kings and princes did come to
the help and aid of king Priamus to Troy: not of all, but of the most
notable. First came unto their aid, the king Pandorus, the king Galior, and
the king Adrastus with three thousand knights armed.

From the province of Tholoson came four Kings, with five thousand knights
armed, the King Carras, the king Amasius, the king Nestor, that was a mighty
strong man, and the King Amphimacus. From the Realm of Licie came the king
Glaucon, with three thousand knights, and his son Sarpedon, that was one of
the strongest knights of the world, and coosin of king Priamus. From the
realm of Licaon, came the king Ensemus, with three thousand knights right
expert in arms. From the realm of Larissa, came two kings with fifteen hundred
knights, the king Mistor that was a very great man, and the king Capidus. From
the realm of Thabory came the king Remus, with three thousand knights, and in
his company came four dukes and seven earls, that were in league with king
Priamus: they bare in their arms the color of azure without other sign, and
thereby was the king Remus and his people known in the battle. From the
realm of Thracie, came the king Pilex, and the duke Achanias, with xi. hundred
knights. From the realm of Panonie came the king Pessemus, and the duke
Stupex his coosin, with three thousand knights, right expert to ioust and
shoot with the bow. This is a marvelous wild country, of Forrestes and
Mountains, and where is but little people, and enough of wild beasts and of
birds. From the province of Boecie, came three dukes, with twelve hundred
knights, the duke Anserimus, the duke Fortunus, and the duke Sammus. From the
realm of Burtin, where as grow good spices, came two kings brethren, with a
thousand knights, the king Boetes, and the king Episteus. From the reign of
Paphagore, that is at the sun rising, in the East, full of all riches, came
the right rich king Philemeus, with three thousand knights, all their
shieldes of the hides of fishes all covered with gold and precious stones, and
this king was as great as a Giant. From the reign of Ethiope, came the king
Perseus, and the king of Thiction with him, that was right hardy and wise,
with three thousand knights, that had in their company many a Duke and many
an Earl.

And also there was with them, Simagon, the son of king Thiction. From the
realm of Cheres, came the king Theseus and Archilogus his son that was of
the affinity of king Priamus, and brought a thousand knights. From the I Will of
Argust, came two kings, of whom I have not the names, with twelve hundred
knights. From the reign of Eliane, that is beyond the realm of Amazon, came
an ancient king right wise and discrecte, named Epistropus, and brought a
thousand knights, and a marvelous beast that was called Sagittary, that
behind the midst was an horse, and before a man, this beast was hairie, like
an horse, and had his eyes red as a coal, and shot right well with a bow: and
this beast made the Greeks sore afraid, and slew many of them with his bow.
Thus were in number all the knights that came in aid of king Priamus two and
thirty thousand, besides them of the realm of Troy, and of India the lesser.
And it is not found by writing that since the creation of the world so many
noble knights were assembled in one place, and that prosecuted the quarrel for
so little occasion. O how the kings and princes ought to take heed, and be
well advised for to begin war, if they might amend it by another way.

CHAP. X. Of the coming of Duke Palamedes: and how the Greeks departed from
the port of Tenedon by the counsel of Diomedes, and came and took land before
the strong City of Troy: and how the Troyans received them with battle right
vigorously.
THe Greeks were not yet parted from Tenedon, when Palamedes the son of king
Naulus, came and arrived at this port of Tenedon, with thirty ships full of
knights armed, all noble and hardy men. And of his coming the Greeks had
great joy, and murmured before, because he tarried so long, whereof he excused
him by sickness that he had

This Palamedes was holden in great worship among the Greeks, and was the
second next king Agamemnon, puissant and discreet in arms, and very rich. And
at his coming, he was anon chosen to be counselor of the host. And thus
were the Greeks many a day and night at the port of Tenedon, oftentimes
assembled to counsel, for to advise them in the best manner to besiege the
city of Troy. And at length, after many opinions, they held them to the
counsel of Diomedes, that was this. Now said he, all ye Kings, Princes and
Barons, that be here assembled, we ought to have great shame and dislike,
seeing it is a year agone since we landed here in this country, and have not
yet been before Troy. Verily, in this we have given to our enemies great
advantage: for it is so, that this time during, they be purueied of great
aids, and all their city strongly fortified, and fenced with walls and
bulwarks, that they have good leisure to make: and verily they think that we
be not so hardy as to come unto them, and therefore the more that we delay to
go thither, the more increases our shame and damage: and I trow if we had
gone thither when we came first into the country, we should have more easily
gone ashore and taken land, then we shall do now: for they be better
furnished now then they were at that time, of all such things as them
behooued, for to defend them with: and therefore, I council you, that to
morrow betimes we put us on the way in good order, and let us lay the siege
firmly, and as hastily as we may. We ought to know, that we shall not so do
without great battle: Wherein it behooves each man to employ himself, and
to put behind all fear and dread. For by none other way we may prevail in
this matter, nor better nor more honorably, as I think, etc.

The counsel of Diomedes pleased all the Barons of the host, and on the
morrow early they reentered into their ships, and sailed strait unto the
port of Troy, and brought their ships by good order one after another.

In the first front they put an hundred ships right well furnished with
knights and banners, that waued in the wind, and after them they put another
hundred: and after, all the other by order, and they had not far sailed,
but that they saw the noble City of Troy, and approached thereto, as hastily
as they might. When the Troyans saw the Greeks approach the City, they ran
to arms, and mounted upon their horses all armed, and went forth without order
unto the port. Then when the Greeks saw the Troyans come in so great number,
for to defend their port, there was none so hardy but he was afraid. But
forasmuch as they could not go a land, but by force of arms, they armed them
incontinent, and did their best to take land by force, etc.

Of the first hundred ships, was chief and captain, the King Prothesalaus
of Philard, that endeavored with great pain and diligence to bring his ships
within the port: but the wind that was strong, blew them into the port so
strongly against the shore, that many of them brake and bruised, and many
Greeks were drowned, and they that might take land took it, and were anon
slain by the Troyans with great torments, and in so great number, that the
ground was red with their blood. It is not in the remembrance of any man that
ever any Navy wan land with so great damage as did the navy of the Greeks.
After this first hundred ships, the other came and arrived that followed
them: and they that were within, were well provided of great Arbalesters,
wherewith they did shoot and flew many of the Troyans, and constrained them to
go back.

And then with all speed took the Greeks land, and succored the first that
fought at great deadly hazard. Then began there a battle. The king
Prothesilaus, that was landed with the first, did great maruailes with his
body, and slew that day of the Troyans without number. And if he alone had not
been, all the Greeks that were gotten a land, had been slain. But what
might his defense help, when seven thousand Greeks fought against an hundred
thousand Troyans? And I say to you, that for the great danger wherein they
felt themselves, they sold their lives dear, abiding the succors of king
Archelaus, and the king Prothenor that anon arrived, and would the Troyans or
not, they went ashoare, took land, and succored their people valiantly, and
began again cruel battle, etc.

After that arrived the duke Nestor, and his folk, that thrusted in among their
ennemies right fiercely. There was many a spear broken, and many an arrow
shot: knights fell down dead on both sides, and the cry was so great, that
it was marvelous to hear. There were slain many Troyans by Archelaus and
Prothenor. After arrived the king Ascalus, and the king Aglaus with their ships,
and went aland, and assailed the Troyans with great fierceness, and by force
made them to retire and go back: and then came to the battle great plenty
of new Troyans. Then began the battle to be greater then it had been all
the day before, in so much that the Greeks were reculed by force unto their
ships, and then arrived Ulysses with a great company of knights which
thronged anon into the battle: and the Greeks recovered land at their
coming, and assailed on the Troyans. There made Ulysses great effusion of
blood of his ennemies, and immediately his ensign was known among them. King
Philomenus seeing that Ulysses slew so their people, he addressed himself to
him, and beat him off his horse a little wounded. Ulysses smote him again so
hard, that he wounded him in his throat, and cut asunder his original vein,
and smote him as half dead. And the Troyans ran and took him from the
Greeks, and bare him upon his shield into the city. And had not this
adventure of this king been, the Greeks had been discomfited. But the Troyans
labored much to save him. Then arrived the king Thoas, and the king Agamemnon,
the king Menelaus, and the king Thelamon Ajax, with all their power, and went a
land, and fought a battle very valiantly, and brake their spears, upon the
Troyans, and beat down many, some slain, and some hurt. At this skirmish
were many Troyans.

When the king Prothesilaus departed from the battle, where he had been since
the beginning, for to take breath, and when he came to the port, he found al
his men nigh dead, for whom he wept for pity, and took again his courage,
to avenge the death of his men, and went again unto the battle, and in his
great ire slew many Troyans, and wounded them, and smote down many of them off
their horses. Then came to the battle of the party of the Troyans, the king
Perses, with a great company of knights: at the coming of the Ethiopians
began the battle to be mortal, and there were many Greeks slain, and by
maine force they made them go back, and had without fail discomfited them,
had not the worthy Palamedes soon gone aland, for at his coming the Greeks
were recomforted. And also Palamedes did great maruells with his hand, and
addressed him against Sagamon the brother of king Memnon, and nephew of the
king of Perse, that sore grieved the Greeks: and he smote him so sore with his
spear, that he pierced him through the body, and smote him dead down to the
earth: afterward he thronged into the great prease, and beat down all that
he met, and each man that knew him, made him way. And then arose a cry
upon the Troyans, so that they might not bear the strength of Palamedes, who
were reculed by force, and had been all discomfited. But the most worthiest of
all worthies, Hector, when he heard the cry upon his people, he issued out of
the City, with a great company of knights, and entered into the battle,
armed in rich arms, and bare in his shield of gold, a Lion of Gules. His
strength was anon known among the Greeks: he encountered and met in his
coming the king Prothesilaus, that had not all day ceased to slay Troyans:
and he smote him with his sword, with so great might upon his helm, that he
cleft him unto the navel, notwithstanding his armor, whereof he fell down to
the ground. And after, Hector thrusted into the greatest prease, and as many
Greeks as he raught with his sword, he slew. Then each man fled from him,
making him way, and then demanded the Greeks one of another, what was he
that so grieved them, and straight they knew, that it was Hector the most
strong man of the world, and then was there none so hardy that durst abide his
stroke.

Then it happened, that Hector went out a little for to refresh him: whereupon
the Greeks took courage again against the Troyans: and this happened that
day, eight or ten times. It was about the hour of Euensong what time Hector
departed from the battle, and reentred into the City: for the Greeks were
withal discomfited, and then arrived the right strong Achilles with his maimed
ones, and entered anon into the battle with three thousand good knights that
were with him: and then were the Troyans on all sides beaten down and slain,
for against Achilles endured no man but he was beaten down to the earth, and
sore hurt.

Then were arrived all the Navy of the Greeks, and the knights gone a land,
and skirmished with the other in the battle: wherefore the Troyans had much
to suffer, so that they must needs flee into their city, and Achilles and the
other slew them flying: there was a great cry of the hurt men, and there was
Achilles al died with the blood of the Troyans that he had slain, and there
was great slaughter at the entry into the City. There saw the fathers their
children slain before their eyes: and the murder and the slaughter had been
more great, if Troylus, Paris and Deiphebus had not come with a great company
fierce and new, who came and issued out of the City, resisted the Greeks and
made the slaughter to cease, and for that the night was nigh, each man
withdrew him into his place.

The Troyans kept close their City, and did make good watch, and Achilles with
the Greeks, returned to their Tents with great glory, who were not yet
dressed: but the king Agamemnon did cause to dress them incontinent, and made
each man to take place meet after his estate. And they that had no tents nor
pauilions, lodged then under the leaves, the best wise that they could, both
themselves and their horses, and after ancred their ships as well as they
might, and took out of them all that was necessary to them. Thus made the
Greeks their siege this night, and set it before the City of Troy, and made
marvelous great fires in the host, that made it as light as it had bin day.
So were they lodged a night together, and made right good watch, although they
had none assaults this night: and they had all the nights Trumpets and
Minstrels great plenty, that Agamemnon ordained for to comfort the host. And
they rested this night all armed the best wise they could. This was the first
battle of the Greeks, and of the Troyans, at their coming, etc.

CHAP. XI. Of the second battle before Troy, in the which were many Kings
and great Barons, slain by the worthy Hector: and how the Troyans had been
victorious of of their enemies, had it not been for the prayer of Thelamon Ajax
coosin of Hector, etc.
ANd when the night was passed, Hector that had the charge of all them of the
City, ordered right early his battles in a great plain, that was in the
City, and put in the first battle two thousand good knights, which he
betook to lead and conduct to twain of his kinsmen, that is to wit, to
Glaucon the son of the king of Licie, and to Asiamolor his bastard brother,
and assigned to them the king Thesus of Trace, and Archilogus his brother that
was wise and valiant, and made them to issue out of the gate named Dardan, that
stood against the host of the Greeks: in the second battle he put three
thousand good knights and strong, whom he took to conduct to the king
Exampitus of Frigie, and to the king Alcanus that were knights of great
strength, and recommended them to the guard of the Gods, and made them issue
out after the other in good order.

The third battle he betook to Troilus his brother, for to conduct wild
three thousand knights, wise and hardy, and said to them at the departing.
My right dear brother, my heart puts me in doubt of thy great hardiness:
wherefore I pray thee that thou govern thee wisely in the battle, in such
wise that thou enterprise not such things as thou may not atchieue: and that
thou put not thy body in danger of death, by overmuch weening, whereby thou
might give joy to thine enemies and ours. Go thy way in the name of the
gods, who conduct and keep thee from peril and encumbrance. Ha, ha, sir
brother, answered Troylus, it needs you not to doubt of me, for I will do
that in me is, right as you have commanded: and then he went forth with his
company after the other, and bare in his shield three lions of gold.

Hector put in the fourth battle three thousand knights and seven hundred,
whom he took to conduct the king Huppon of Larissa. This king Huppon was
most strong of all the Troyans next Hector, and had in his company a valiant
knight, a bastard brother of Hector, wise and hardy, named Diamaicus. The
fifth battle Hector delivered to conduct to the king of Cisaine, with all his
folk, that were marvelous strong and great as giants, and the same king bare
in his shield all azure without any difference. And Hector put in commission
in this battle Polidamas his bastard brother with this king, and issued after
the other. The sixth battle lead the king Prenestus, that had his people well
instructed to shoot and draw the bow, and went without arms to battle,
mounted upon good light horses: and Hector commised Deiphebus his brother to
conduct them, and they issued after the other. With this battle joined Hector
all the chivalry of the realm of Agreste under the conduct of king Esdras,
and of king Philon. This king Philon had a marvelous chair, all of iuorie,
of gold and of silver, and of precious stones. This chair was drawn by two
strong knights. With these two kings, Hector put Epitagoren his bastard
brother, and they issued after the other. The seventh battle lead Eneas, and a
noble admiral named Eufrene, and they went after the other. The eight battle
lead the king of Perse named Perses, and Paris was chief and captain, and
Hector prayed Paris his brother, that he would not assemble unto the Greeks,
unto the time that he came himself, and that he would follow him anon. The
much battle and the last lead Hector himself, and ten of his bastard
brethren after him: and all the best knights of the city chosen, were in this
battle, to the number of five thousand, etc.

Then when Hector was richly arrayed, and armed with good harness and sure,
he mounted upon his horse named Galathe, that was one of the most great and
strongest horse of the world. And so (armed and mounted) he rode unto the king
his father, and said unto him: Right dear father, retain with you a thousand
and five hundred knights, and all the men of foot of this city, and hold
you without before the sight of the Greeks, and move you not, but if I send you
word: to the end, if we have necessity, that ye be our refuge. And I will send
you always among my messengers, that shall tell to you the state of the battle:
and take ye good heed, and keep good guard, that our enemies take not our
city by policy or treason. And the king answered him: My son, I will do
all as thou have said unto me: for next after the aid and help of the gods,
thou art all my hope and trust, and I have no confidence but in the virtue of
thine arms, and in the great discretion of thy wit. And I pray to the gods
right humbly, that they will keep thee whole and sound, and preserve thee from
incombrance.

After these words, Hector went forth after the other. This Hector was very
courageous, strong, and victorious in battle, and a right wise conductor of
men of arms. His shield was all of gold, and in the middle a Lion of gules,
and albeit that he was the last that issued out of his house or of the city,
yet passed he always all the battles, and came and put himself before in the
first battle. The women that were in the city, and all the other went upon
the walls for to behold the battles. There were the daughters of the king,
with the queen Helene, that had great doubt, and diverse imaginations in her
self.

Whiles that Hector had ordained his battles, the king Agamemnon was not idle,
but ordained right early of his people, six and twenty battles. He put in
the first battle Patroclus with his people, and with them the folk of
Achilles, which was not that day in the battle, for his wounds that he had,
and did stay to heal them in his tent. Thie Patroclus was a noble duke, and
rich, and loved so much Achilles, that they were both of one alliance. In the
second battle was the king Menon, and the king Idumeus with three thousand
knights: and there was the duke of Athens with all his people. The third
battle lead the king Achalaphis, and his son Phinenus with their people. The
fourth battle lead the king Archelaus, and the king Prothenor his brother, and
with him was Securidan the right strong knight with all the people of Boecie.
The fifth battle lead the king Menelaus, with all his people of Sparte. The
sixth battle lead the king Epistropus, and the king Celidus with all their
people. The seventh battle lead Thelamon Ajax with all his people of
Salamine, and he had four Earls with him, that is to wit Thesus, Amphymacus
Dorius, and Polidarius. The eight lead the king Thoas. The ninth lead Ajax
Aleus. The tenth lead the king Philotus. The eleventh the king Idumeus and the
king Neron. The twelfth the duke Nestor: the thirteenth lead the king Exiones.
The fourteenth the king Ulysses. The fifteenth the king Humerus. In the
sixteenth were the folk of Prothesilaus much despairing to avenge the death of
their Lord. The seventeenth lead the king Polidarius, and the king Machaon: The
eightteenth the king of Rhodes. The nineteenth the king Sampitus, and the king
Lidorus. The twentieth, the king Geripulus. The one and twentieth, the king
Phylot^tes of Larisse. The two and twentieth Diomedes: The three and twentieth
the king Oeneus of Cypres. The four and twentieth the king Prothalus. The five
and twentieth the king Carpenor. The six and twentieth, and the last battle
lead king Agamemnon, emperor of al ye host.

When all the battles were set in order on the one side and on the other, and
there was nothing to do but to meet, then advanced him Hector all the first,
and Partroclus came against him, as fast as his horse might run, and smote
him so strongly with his spear on his shield, that he pearsed it through out,
but more harm did it not. Then Hector assailed Patroclus with his sword, and
gave him so great a stroke upon his head, that he cleft it in two pieces: and
Patroclus fell down dead to the ground. When Hector saw him dead, he coueted
his arms, for they were right trim and rich, and lighted down off his horse
for to take them, but the king Menon came upon him with three thousand good
knights, for to defend the king Patroclus against Hector, and said to him thus.
Ha, ha, woolfe rauishing and insatiable, certes it behooves to seek thy pray
in some other place, for here gettest thou none. And then they assailed on all
sides, and would have taken from him Galathee his horse. But Hector by his
prowess remounted (would they or not) and meant to have avenged him on king
Menon, but the king Glaucion and the king Thesus and Archilogus his son, came
with three thousand fighting men: And then Hector laid on and beat down all
before him: and the first that he met he gave so great a stroke, that he slew
him, and after him many more he beat down, and flew.

Thus began the battle on both sides, and Hector came again to the body of
Patroclus, for to have his arms, but the king Idumeus of Crete, came against
him with two thousand fighting men, and the king Menon (that had always his
eyes to Hector) let him, and was so in the way, that Hector might not have
his arms that he most earnestly desired, and suffered great pain forasmuch
as he was on foot: but he enforced him with all his courage, and began to
slay man and horse, and to smite off heads, legs, feet and arms, and slew
fifteen of the strongest that assailed him. In this mean while, the king
Menon took the body of Patroclus before him, and bare it unto his tent. As the
Greeks contended to grieve Hector, and to take away his horse, there was among
the^ a strong knight, named Cre^ de la plerre, that grieved him most: then one
of the servants of Hector addressed him against this Creon, and gave him so
great a stroke with his spear, that he smote him down dead to the earth, and
after he smote down another, and cried to the Troyans right loud, that they
should come and succor Hector.

With this cry came first Securabor one of the bastard brethren of Hector, and
thrusted into the greatest prease so fiersly, that he came upon them that most
grieved Hector, who had slain more then thirty of them, and did so much
bestirre him, that by force he made the Greeks to recule: and then was Hector
remounted upon his horse, and thrusted in among them by great fierceness, and
slew great plenty of them, for displeasure that he might not have the arms
of Patroclus. Then he met with none but he slew him, or beat him down hurt,
and each man made him way and dreaded him, etc.

Then came to the battle Menesteus the duke of Athens, and came and joined
him to the battle whereas Troylus was, who did maruailes, and had with him
the king Sampitus, the king Machaon, and the king Alcanus. Then began fierce
battles, Menesteus addressed him against Troylus, and there fought against
him with so great force, that he beat him down of his horse, in the great
prease of the folk: and Menesteus labored with all his strength, insomuch
that he took him, and led him toward their tents with a great company of
knights. Then Miseres of Troy cried to the Troyans, that Troylus was prisoner,
and that they should be dishonored if they suffered him to be lead away. Then
the king Alcanus took his spear that was right strong, and addressed him unto
them that held Troylus, and smote the first down to the earth, and smote
another and sore wounded him, and did so much by the aid of his men that
Troylus was reskewed, and set again upon his horse, and also by the help of
king Sampitus that came on with all his people, he gave so great a stroke to
Menesteus overthwart, that if he had not been well armed, he had been slain.
And then cried Mnesteus to his people, and so began among them a mortal
battle, and there were many slain on the one side and the other.

Among these things, Mnesteus, that was sorry that he had lost his prisoner,
met Miseres, by whom he had lost him, and as soon as he knew him, he
addressed him to him and beat him down, and the same time smote down another
knight. Then came to the battle Hupon, and Hiripisus with two thousand
fighters, and against them came Menelaus and Prothenor with their folk, and
there began a mortal skirmish, etc.

Anon after came Polidamas the son of Anthenor with a great company, and
thrusted in on the other side among his enemies. After came the king Remus from
Troy with three thousand fighters, and against them came Menelaus with all his
people. The said Menelaus adressed him against king Remus, and they iusted
together, and smote each other to the ground. Then adressed him Polidamas, and
Remus against the nephew of Helene a young man twenty year old, and Remus
gave him so great a stroke with his spear, that he smote him down to the
earth, whereof Menelaus had great sorrow, for he loved him much, and in his
great ire, he gave so great a stroke to Remus with his sword, that he smote
him down as dead. And when the king Remus was so beaten down, his men had we
end that he had been dead, and would have fled had it not been for
Polidamas that retained them with great pain, and did so much that they took
their king so hurt as he was, and bare him home in safety. Then the king
Celidus, that was the most fair king of the world, adressed him to Polidamas,
and smote him with his spear, but he could not remove him, Polidamas gave him
so great a stroke with his sword, that he smote him down to the earth. Among
all these things Hector went and came beating down and slaying his enemies,
and made way before him in slaying of knights and beating down, so far that
he came upon them of Salamine that the king Thelamon conducted, who slew many
of the Troyans, and beat down by his prowess. Then the king Theuter gave so
great a stroke with his spear to Hector, that he made him a deep wound: and
Hector in his great ire encountered an admiral of the Greeks, and slew him
cruelly with his sword. Then was Hector closed with his ennemies on all parts:
there was of the Greeks the king Thesus, and he spoke to Hector and warned him
that he should go out of the battle, and said that it were damage for all
the world to loose such a knight: and Hector thanked him right courteously.

In this while Menelaus and Thelamon assailed Polidamas: and Thelamon that
adressed him first, smote him with his spear, and after gave many strokes,
insomuch that they brake the lace of his helm, and took him, and had lead him
away had not Hector been, which was not far off, who smote among them that
held him and slew and hurt many of them, and did so much by his valiaunce that
he slew thirty of them: and the other fled, and left Polydamas with him. Then
there put them together, the king Menelaus, and the king Thelamon, with all
their people, and smote in among ^he Troyans by so great fierceness, that they
made them go back maugre them, notwithstanding the great prowess of Hector
that was with the other that did maruels, in his person. And then was his
fierce and gallant warlike horse Galathe slain under him, and then he
defended himself on foot so maruellously that there was none so hardy of the
Greeks that durst approach him. When his brethren knew the right great danger
that he was in, they ran al to that part. Then was Thelamon sore hurt, and
Dinadorous one of the bastard brethren of Hector, gave so great a stroke to
Polixenus a noble man, that he slew him, and beat him down of a great and a
strong horse, whereupon he sat, and took the Steed to Hector, who mounted
upon him incontinent. There were maruailes of arms done by the bastards. Then
came on Deyphebus with all his host, wherein he had great store of Archers
that hurt and slew great store of the Greeks. And Deyphebus made and gave to
king Theuter a great wound in the visage. Then began the battle as mortal
as it had been in all the day. There was Thesus assailed by Quintelinus one of
the bastard brethren of Hector, and of king Moderus, and was taken and lead
away: but Hector delivered him all quite, for the courtesy that he had done to
him a little before.

Then came to the battle of the Greeks, the king Thoas, and the king Philotas:
but the king Thaos addressed him against Cassilanus one of the bastard brethren
of Hector, and gave him so great a stroke, that he slew him down to the
earth, seeing Hector, which then smote so angerly among the Greeks, that he
slew many, and put them all to flight. Then came to the battle Nestor with
six thousand knights: and the king Esdras, and the king Philon, that did
great maruels of arms, came against them.

At this assembly there were many knights slain, and beaten down, of the one
part and of the other. The king Philon, that did great maruailes in arms, was
enclosed with the Greeks on all sides, and had been slain, if Iecomas and
the king Esdras his father had not delivered him from their hands. Hector and
his brother did maruailes, with Polydamas, and had put all the Greeks to
flight, but Menelaus and Thelamon resisted them strongly.

Then came Eneas to the battle with all his host, and put him in with Hector
and the other, and by force put the Greeks to plain flight, whereof Ajax had
very great sorrow: and also as he beheld behind him, he saw the banners
that came to the battle that had not yet been there, and there was all the
flower of the chiualry of Greece. Then prayed he them that fled, that they
would abide, and recommence and begin a new battle. Ajax and Eneas
encountered so hardly, that they fell both to the earth. And then came Phylotes
with three thousand knights, and made the Troyans go back, and smote Hector
with his spear, but he might not remove him: and Hector gave him so great a
stroke with his sword, that he beat and sore hurt him. Then came to the
battle the king Humerus, and the king Ulysses with all their people, and the
king Humerus, and they had in their host ten thousand knights, the which
did the Troyans much sorrow that were very weary. To their succors came Paris
unto the battle, and in his coming smote so hard the king of Frigie, who was
coosin to Ulysses, that he slew him and beat him down, whereof the Greeks had
much sorrow: and Ulysses supposed to have smitten Paris with his spear, but
he smote his horse and slew him, and Paris fell to the earth. Then Troylus
gave to Ulysses so great a stroke, that he wounded him in the face, and made
the blood spring out like as the wine runs out of a tun, etc. and Ulysses
hurt him again. And truly the Troyans had then fled, had it not been for the
great prowess of Hector, and of his brethren: for Hector ceased not to put
himself in the greatest prease, here and there, and each man that knew him
made him way.

When he saw that his people might not suffer the great strength of the
Greeks, he withdrew them on a side, and told them what injuries the Greeks
had done to them, and what they will do if they come to their conquest, and
then admonished and warned them to do well, and after brought them by a valley
on the right side for to assail their enemies. There was great slaughter of
the Greeks: there was the king Thoas assailed of the bastard brethren of
Hector, for to avenge the death of Cassibelanus their brother, that he had
slain: they beat him down off his horse, and rased off his helm from his
head, and had slain him incontinent, if the duke of Athens had not come
on, that thrusted in among them, and gave so great a stroke to one of the
bastardes Quintilinus, that he fell down to the ground sore hurt: and Paris
smote the duke with an arrow in the side, and made him a great wound. But the
duke that was sore hurt, set not thereby, but maugre them all, he delivered the
king Thoas from their hands. Then Hector did endeavor to put the Greeks unto
flight, and then the king Humerus shot an arrow unto Hector, and hurt him in
the face, and Hector ran upon him by so great ire, that he smote him sore
upon the head, and cleft it unto the teeth, and he fell down dead. Then,
with blowing of an horn, came more then seven thousand Greeks for to assail
Hector that defended him against them merueilously. After this he went a little
off to his father, and took three thousand knights fresh and fierce, and
brought them to the battle, and at their coming he made very great
slaughter of the Greeks, etc.

Ajax and Hector iousted together, and fought each with other, Menelaus slew at
this joining an admiral of Troy. Celidonius slew Moles of Oreb the nephew of
King Thoas. Mandon smote out an eye of king Sedonius. Sadellus slew an admiral
of the Greeks. Thelamon beat Margareton and sore wounded him. Famuel beat
the king Prothenor to the earth. The king of Gaul iousted against Mnesteus, but
Mnesteus hurt him on the nose with his sword. Then Dianor seeing his brother
hurt, addressed him to Mnesteus, and smote him down to the earth: and then fell
upon him the three brethren that would have slain him, or taken him, but he
defended him valiantly, and anon he was succored by the king Theuter. But
Hector then assailed them both, and without fault they had not escaped, had not
Ajax the strong knight have come to the reskewe with a thousand knights that
he had in his company. Then came on the king of Perse with five thousand
knights that Paris lead: and so did all the other Troyans, and made the
Greeks recule, and go back by force. Dares writes in his book, that Hector
slew a thousand knights, only in this assault.

Among all other things Hector encountered the king Menon before a tent, and
said to him: ha, evil traitor, the hour is come that thou shall receive thy
reward for that thou let me to take the arms of Patroclus: and then he
smote him so great a stroke that he fell down to the ground. And after Hector
alighted down, and smote off his head, and would have taken his arms from
him: but Mnesteus let him, and smote upon Hector overthwart, by such force
that he gave him a great wound, and went his way without more carrying,
doubting the fury of Hector. Then Hector went out of the throng, and did bind
up his wound that it bled no more, and after went in again into the prease,
and slew in his coming many Greeks. And Dares says, that after he had bound
up his wound, he slew the same day a thousand knights, and there was none had
courage to avenge him against him or defend himself, but he put them al to
flight, and the Trojans entered into their tents and pilled and robbed them,
and took all the best that they could find, etc.

On this day had ye Troyans had victory of the Greeks, if fortune had
consented: for they might have slain the^ al, and eschewed great evils that
after came to the^. Certes it is not wisdom, when any man finds his ennemy
in great peril and fortune, to offer his power to deliver him thereof: for it
happens oftentimes, that he shall never recover to have his enemy in the same
case, but that fortune will turn her back: Thus it happened this day to the
unhappy Hector, that had the better of his ennemies, and might have slain
them all, if he had would, for they sought nothing but for to slay. When by
great misaduenture there came before him in an encounter Thelamon Ajax that was
son of king Thelamon, and Exion, that was coosin German of Hector and of
his brethren, which was wise and valiant, he addressed him against Hector, and
delivered to him a great assault, and Hector to him, as they that were valiant
both two: and as they were fighting, they spoke and talked together, and
thereby Hector knew that he was cousin German, son of his aunt: and then
Hector for courtesy embraced him in his arms, and made great cheer, and
offered to him to do all his pleasure, if he desired any thing of him, and
prayed him that he would come to Troy with him, for to see his lineage ot his
mothers side: but the said Thelamon, that intended to nothing but to his
advantage, said that he would not go at this time. But prayed Hector,
requesting that if he loved him so much as he said, he would for his sake, and
at his instance, cease the battle for that day, and that the Troyans should
leave the Greeks in peace. The unhappy Hector accorded to him his request, and
blewe a horn, and made all his people to withdraw into the City. Then had
the Troyans begun to put the fire in the ships of the Greeks, and had all
burnt them, had not Hector called them from thence: Wherefore the Troyans were
sorry of their repeal.

This was the cause wherefore the Troyans missed so have the victory, to the
which they might never after attain, nor come: for fortune was to them
contrary: and therefore Virgile says: Non est misericordia in bello, that that
is to say, that there is no mercy in battle. A man ought not to be too
merciful, but take the victory when he may get it.

CHAP. XII. Of the first truce of two months, demanded by the Greeks: and
of the three battles between them, in the which Hector beat Achilles to the
ground twice, and after slew the king Prothenor, and smote him with one stroke
in two parts.
WHen it was come to the morrow betimes, the Troyans armed them for to go and
assail the Greeks: but the Greeks sent betimes to king Priamus, and demanded
truce for two months: and he agreed to them the said truce. And then were
the dead bodies gathered, as well of the one part as of the other, and some
were buried and some burnt. Achilles was then so sorrowful for the death of
Patroclus, that he could in no wise be comforted: he made his body to be
buried in a fair rich Sepulture, and so did they of the other, as of the king
Prothesilaus, and other kings and princes that were slain: and they that were
hurt and wounded, they did cause to be healed, during the truce. Priamus the
king did bury his bastard son Cassibelanus right honorably, in the temple of
Venus and showed great sorrow for his death, and so did all the other, etc.

When Cassandra heard the grief and sorrow that the Troyans made for the death
of their friends, she cried and said: O ungracious Troyans, make sorrow for
your selves, for in likewise shall it happen and come to you as it is to your
friends, that is the death: alas why seek ye not peace of the Greeks,
before these evils come to you, and ere this noble city be destroyed? alas
why yield you not again Helene, that the king my father did cause to ravish
by force, wherefore ye shall all be destroyed? Among all these things,
Palamedes murmured greatly at the seignory of Agamemnon, saying that he was
not worthy to have so great domination above all the other, and that he
himself was more worthy to have the seignory of the host, then Agamemnon: and
that he had not the good will and consent of the princes, but only of three or
four: and then at that time there was nothing further proceeded.

When the truce failed, the king Agamemnon that had the charge of all the
host, ordered right early his battles, and gave the first to Achilles, and
the second to Diomedes, the third to Menelaus, the fourth to Menesteus the duke
of Athens, and over all the other he ordained good captains and conductors.
Hector ordered his battles in like wise, and set in the first Troylus, and in
all the other he set good captains and hardy, and made all the battles to
issue out: and he set himself in the front before. And when Achilles saw
him, he ran against him, so that they smote each other to the earth right
sore. Hector remounted first, and left Achilles lying on the earth, and smote
in among the other, in the greatest prease, and he raught no knight but he slew
him, or beat him down: and went throughout the battle all made red with the
blood of them that he had slain. When Achilles was remounted, he thrusted in
among the Troyans in the great prease, and slew many: and he went so far,
that he encountered Hector again, and he ran to him, and Hector to him, but
Achilles was borne down to the ground: and Hector would have taken his horse,
but he might not, for the great succors that Achilles had. When he was
remounted, he assailed Hector with his sword, and gave so great strokes to
Hector, that nigh he had beaten him: but Hector gave to him so great a stroke
upon the helm, that he overthrew him, and made the blood spring out of his
head. Thus was the battle mortal of the two knights: and if they had not
been parted the one from other, they had been slain: but their people put
asunder them. Then came Diomedes to the battle, and Troylus on the other
side, which smote each other to the earth. But Dyomedes remounted first, and
assailed Troylus, that was on foot, and defended himself valiantly, and slew
the horse of Dyomedes: but their men remounted them both two, by force, and
then they began again to skirmish. And Dyomedes had taken and lead away
Troylus, if the Troyans had not put them in peril of death, for to reskew him:
and many of them were slain. Then came to the battle Menelaus of the Greeks
side, and Paris on the other side: and thus going and coming Hector ceased
not to slay, and to beat down knights. Then there was a new knight named
Brietes that assailed him fiersly, but Hector by right great ire smote him upon
the Helm, so great a stroke, that he cleft his head unto the navel, and he
fell down dead: but Archilogus his coosin seeing that Hector would have taken
his horse, Archilogus defended him, as much as he might: and then Hector ran
upon him, and smote him so hard, that he smote his body in two pieces
notwithstanding his harneis. The king Prothenor addressed him to Hector that
then took no regard nor heed, and smote him down to the earth.

And Hector remounted anon upon his horse, and gave to king Prothenor so great
a stroke with all his might, that he cleft body in two halues: Achilles that
was his parent or coosin seeing that, had so great sorrow, that he and the
king Archelaus contended to revenge his death.

But the Troyans did come upon him with such courage and warlike strength,
that the Greeks fainted and must needs flee, and the Troyans followed them
unto their tents: and then the night came on, that made them to depart, and
the Troyans returned back into their City.

CHAP. XIII. How the Greeks held parliament, how they might slay the worthy
Hector: and how they returned to the fourth battle, in the which Paris and
Menelaus encountered, and the king Thoas was brought prisoner to Troy.
AFter this battle, when the night was come, all the kings, princes and
barons of the Greeks assembled at the Tent of king Agamemnon, and there held
they their parliament how they might slay Hector. And they said, that as long
as he were alive, and came to battle against them, they might never vanquish
the Troyans: but he should to them do great damage. And for to bring this
thing to the end, they requested Achilles, that he would take it upon him,
as well for his strength as for his wisdom. And Achilles enterprised it
gladly, as he that wist that Hector desired more his death, then the death of
any other: and also Hector was he, by whom he might soonest loose his life.
After this counsel they went to rest, till on the morrow betime they armed
them. And Hector was then issued out of the City with his battles well and
diligently ordered, and was himself before all other in the first battle.
And after him came Eneas, and then Paris, and then Deyphebus, and after him
Troylus, and after him the other following each in his order. Then joined all
the Troyans together, and were more then an hundred thousand fighting men. Then
began the battle horrible and mortal. Paris with them of Perse, that were
good knights, slew with shot many Greeks, and hurted them. Hector encountered
the king Agamemnon and beat him, and wounded him sore. And then Achilles
assailed Hector, and gave him so many strokes, that he brake his helm. Then
Eneas and Troylus came to the rescue of Hector, and Diomedes came upon that,
who addressed him to Eneas, and beat him, and said to him in mockery: Ha, ha,
good counselor, that gave counsel to thy king to offend and grieve me, know
thou for truth, that if thou come often into these battles, and that I may meet
with thee, thou shall not escape without death.

Among these things, Hector assailed Achilles, and gave to him so many strokes,
that he all to frushed and brake his helm, and weened to have taken him: but
the son of Guideus ran upon Hector, and gave him so great a stroke with his
sword, that he did hurt him very sore. And Hector in his ire encountered
Diomedes, and gave him so great a stroke, that he beat him down to the ground.
Then Troylus alighted, and descended down for to fight with Diomedes on foot:
but Diomedes defended himself so valiantly, that was marvel. And beside them
fought together Hector and Achilles. Then came to the skirmish all the kings
and princes of Greece, with a great company of men of arms: and from the
party of the Troyans came all the Barons that were come for to aid them.
There began marueilously the battle. The king Agamemnon and the king
Pandolus fought together, the king Menelaus encountered Paris, and they knew each
other well, and Menelaus smote him so hard with his spear, that he gave gim a
great wound, and smote him down, whereof Paris was all ashamed. Ulysses beat
the king Arastous, and took his horse that was very good, and sent it to his
tent. Polimites assailed Huppon the ancient, and slew him. Neoptolemus and the
king Archilogus fought together. Polidamas beat Palamedes, and wounded him very
sore, and after mocked him by reproach. The king Selenus, and the king Carras
encountered together, and Carras was sore beaten and wounded. Philomenus beat
Anthenor. Philoteas and the king Remus fought together. The king Thesus and the
king Enrialus fought together, and both were sore hurt. And the bastards of
king Priamus did marueiles, and slew mane Greeks, and hurt many kings. The king
Thelamon, and the king Sarpedon iousted so sore, the one against the other,
that they fell both sore hurt, and all astonished of the anguish that they had.
The king Thoas and Achilles that were cousins, assailed Hector, and gave him
many strokes, and drew off his helm from his head, and hurt him in many
places: and Hector gave to him so great a stroke with his sword, that he cut
off half his nose.

To the rescue of Hector came his bastard brethren, that slew many of the
Greeks, and took the king Thoas, and wounded and beat the king Agamemnon, in
such wise that he was borne to his tent as dead, and the king Thoas was lead
prisoner to Troy. Menelaus endeavored to grieve Paris, and Paris shot at him an
arrow enuenimed, and wounded him in such wise, that he was borne into his
tent, and as soon as Menelaus had bound up his wounds, he came again to the
battle for to assail Paris, if he had found him: and he found him, and
assailed him, but Eneas put himself between them both, forasmuch as Paris was
unarmed, and not able to prevent him: and so Eneas lead him into the city, to
the end that Menelaus should not slay him. Then Hector assailed Menelaus, and
weened to have taken him: but there came to the rescue great plenty of
chivalry of the Greeks: wherefore Hector might not come to his intent. And
then he thrust in, and smote among the other, and did so much, with help of
his folk, that the Greeks fled. And then the night came on, that made the
battle to cease.

CHAP. XIIII. How Priamus would that the king Thoas that was prisoner, should
have been hanged: and how they returned to the fifth battle, in the which
Hector slew with his hands three kings: and how Diomedes slew the Sagittary,
etc.
WHen it came on the morrow betimes, the king Priamus would not that they
should fight that day, but sent for his council, that is to wits, Hector,
Paris, Troylus and Deiphebus, Eneas, Anthenor, and Polidamas, and said unto
them: Ye know how we hold prisoner the king Thoas, that without any evil
that we have deserved, is come for to destroy us: and therefore me thinks
good, that we make him die an evil death. What say ye thereto? Ha sir, said
Eneas, the gods forbid that your nobles should do such a villainy, since it
is so that the king Thoas is one of the most noble kings of Greece, for that it
might happen that the Greeks might take one of ours, to whom they might do in
semblable wise, whereof ye might take the greatest grief and sorrow in the
world. So then it is better, as me thinks, that ye keep right well and
safe the king Thoas, without misdoing unto him, that if by fortune one of ours
were taken, we might make an exchange, and take the one for the other. This
counsel seemed good and pleasing to Hector, but the king Priamus said unto
them, Yet, if ye do thus, it shall seem to the Greeks that we doubt them,
and that we dare not put their folk to death: notwithstanding, I will do by
your counsel. This counsel finished, Eneas took Troylus and Anthenor, and
went to see Helene, whom they found in the great hall of Ilyon with the Queen
Hecuba, and many other noble Ladies, where she made great sorrow, and they
supposed then to have comforted her, and so did the Queen Hecuba, that said to
her that she should take no thought nor sorrow, and that they of the City
should well defend them.

Among these things the Greeks complained very sore of the death of their
friends that the Troyans slew thus, and held themselves very children that
they had put themselves in such danger, wherefrom they had well passed and been
delivered, if they had had good counsel: and yet it happened that same night,
that there came so great a wind, and so great a rain, that their Tents were
all turned vpside down to the earth, and it seemed that the world should have
ended by the great storm, whereat her sorrow was doubled. When it came to the
morning, that the tempest was passed, they armed themselves all thorowout the
host, and went against the Troyans, that then were issued to battle. Achilles
addressed himself first to Hupon, that was great as a Giant, and was king of
Larissa, and he smote him so sore with a spear in the breast, that he slew
him, and bare him down to the earth. Hector slew in his coming the king
Anthomeus. Diomedes slew the king Antipus. Then the king Epistropus, and the
king Cedus assailed Hector, and Epistropus iousted against Hector, and brake
his spear upon him, and said unto him many villainous words, whereat Hector
was wonderful angry, and in his exceeding great ire gave him such a stroke,
that he slew him, and afterward said unto him, that he should go and say his
villainous words to them that were dead, such as he was wont to say to living
men. Then was Cedus passing sorrowful for the death of his brother, and
admonished a thousand knights, that he meant for to slay Hector: and they
assailed him anon, and beat him off his horse, and they cried to the king Cedus
for to slay Hector. And when Hector perceived that, he gave him such a stroke
that he cut off his arm, wherewith he fell, for the anguish that he felt: and
anon Hector slew him. Eneas slew in this skirmish the king Amphymacus, and
then went together all the most puissant of Greeks, and assailed the Troyans,
and slew many of them, and they went with so great force that they put the
Troyans in a chase, in the which Achilles slew the king Philes, whereof Hector
had great sorrow: and in his ire he slew the king Dalpme and the king Doreus,
and thus by the puissance of Hector, the Troyans recovered the field, and flewe
many Greeks, etc.

Then issued out of Troy the king Epistropus with three thousand knights, and
they brake ranks, and thrusted among the Greeks, that reculed in their
coming: forasmuch as he brought with him a Sagittary, the same that before is
made mention of. This Sagittary was not armed, but he bare a strong bow and a
quiver that was full of arrows, and shot strongly. When the knights of the
Greeks saw this marvelous beast, they had no will to go forth, and they that
were before began to withdraw them, and went back. Among these things Hector
slew Polixenes, the noble duke that fought sore against him, for by the
strength of the Troyans and the horror of the Sagittary, ye Greeks were driven
back to their tents. It happened that Diomedes before one of the tents was
assailed of the Sagittary, and had this beast before him, and the Troyans on
his back, so that it behooued him there to show his puissance. The Sagittarie
had then shot an arrow to him, and Diomedes that was not well assured,
advanced him nigh unto him, and gave him so great a stroke with his sword,
who was not armed, that he slew him, and that time it was past midday, and then
the Greeks recovered the field, and made the Troyans to flee. And then
encountered Hector and Achilles, and with force of their spears they fought
both two and fell both to the earth: And as Achilles was first remounted, they
supposed to have lead away Galathe the good horse of Hector: but Hector cried
to his folk, that they should not suffer him to lead him away. Then they ran
upon Achilles, and did so much, that they recovered Galathe, and rendered him to
Hector, that was right glad of him. At this skirmish was Anthenor taken and
sent to their tents, notwithstanding that Polidamas his son did maruailes of
arms, for to reskew him, but he might not: and thus they fought to great
damage of the one party and of the other, until the night parted them.

CHAP. XV. Of the truce that were between them, after the which began battle
again from Morn to Even, with great damage of that one party and of that
other: but the Troyans lost more then the Greeks.
ON the morrow betime, the Greeks sent Diomedes and Ulysses unto the king
Priamus for to have truce for three months. The king Priamus assembled his
counsel upon this thing, and each man agreed save Hector, that said that the
Greeks fained that they would bury their dead bodies, by cautele, and they
lacked vittaile, and therefore required they truce, to the end that during this
time they puruey them of vittaile, and we daily wast ours, whereof we may soon
have scarcity: howbeit he would not abide only by his intent against the
opinion of so many wise men, but agreed with the other, and the truce was
accorded for three months. This truce during, the king Thoas was delivered in
the steed of Anthenor that they held prisoner, whom they sent to the Troyans.
Calcas that by the commandment of Apollo had left the Troyans, had a
passing fair daughter and wife named Briseyda. Chancer in his book that he
made of Troylus named her Cresida, for which daughter he prayed to king
Agamemnon and to the other princes, that they would require the king Priamus to
send Briseyda to him. They prayed enough to king Priamus at the instance of
Calcas: but the Troyans blamed sore Calcas, and called him evil and false
traitor, and worthy to die, that had left his own land, and his natural
Lord, for to go into the company of his mortal ennemies: yet at the petition
and earnest desire of the Greeks, the king Priamus sent Briseyda to her Father.

The truce during, Hector went on a day unto the tents of the Greeks, and
Achilles beheld him gladly, forasmuch as he had never seen him unarmed. And
at the request of Achilles, Hector went into his Tent, and as they spoke
together of many things, Achilles said to Hector, I have great pleasure to
see thee unarmed, forasmuch as I have never seen thee before. But yet I shall
have more pleasure, when the day shall come that thou shall die of my hand,
which thing I most desire. For I know thee to be very strong, and I have
oftentimes proved it, unto the effusion of my blood, whereof I have great
anger: and yet have much more great sorrow, forasmuch as thou slewest
Patroclus, him that I most loved of the world. Then thou may believe for
certain, that before this year be past, his death shall be avenged upon thee,
by my hand, and also I wot well, that thou desire to slay me.

Hector answered and said, Achilles, if I desire thy death, marvel thou
nothing thereof: forasmuch as thou deseruest to be mine ennemie mortal: thou
art come into our land for to destroy me and mine. I will that thou know,
that thy words fear me nothing at all, but yet I have hope that within two
year, if I live, and continue in health, and my sword fail me not, thou
shall die by the force and valor of mine hands, not thou alonely, but all the
most greatest of the Greeks, for among you ye have enterprised a great folly,
and it may none otherwise come to you thereby but death: and I am assured that
thou shall die of mine hand, ere I shall die by thine. And if thou think that
thou be so strong, that thou may defend thee against me, make it so that
all the barons of thine host promise and accord that we fight body against
body, and if it happen that thou vanquish me, that my friends and I shall be
banished out of this realm, and we shall leave it unto the Greeks, and
thereof I shall leave good pledge. And herein thou may profit to many
other, that may run in great danger, if they haunt the battle: and if it
happen that I vanquishe thee, make that all they of thy host depart hence, and
suffer us to live in peace. Achilles chafed sore with these words, and offered
him to fight this battle, and gave to Hector his gage, which Hector took and
received gladly, etc.

When Agamemnon knew of this offer and bargain, he went hastily unto the Tent
of Achilles, with a great company of noble men, which would in no wise accord
nor agree to this battle, saying that they would not submit them, so many
noble men under the strength of one man: and the Troyans said in like manner,
save only the king Priamus that would gladly agree, for the great strength that
he found in his son Hector. Thus was the fight broken, and Hector departed and
went again to Troy, from the Greeks.

When Troylus knew certainly that Briseyda should be sent to her father, he
made great sorrow, for she was his sovereign lady of love, and in semblable
wise Briseyda loved earnestly Troylus: and she made also the greatest sorrow
of the world for to leave her sovereign lord in love. There was never seen so
much sorrow made between two lovers at their departing. Who that list to hear
of al their love, let him read the book of Troylus that Chaucer made, wherein
he shall find the story whole, which were too long to write here: but
finally Briseyda was led unto the Greeks whom they received honorably.

Among them was Diomedes that anon was enflamed with the love of Briseyda, when
he saw her so fair, and in riding by her side he showed to her all his
mind, and made to her many promises, and especially desired her love: and then
when she knew the mind of Dyomedes. she excused her, saying, that she would
not agree to him, nor refuse him at that time, for her heart was not disposed
at that time to answer otherwise. Of this answers Diomedes had great joy,
forasmuch as he was not refused utterly, and he accompanied her unto the tent
of her father, and did help her down of her horse, and took from her one of
her gloves that she held in her hands, and she suffered him sweetly. Calcas
received her with great joy, and when they were in priuitie between them both,
Briseyda said to her father these and semblable words.

Ha, a, my father, how is thy wit failed that were wont to be so wise and the
most honored and beloved in the city of Troy, and gouernedst all that was
within, and had so many riches and possessions, and now have been traitor,
thou that ought to have kept thy riches, and defended thy country unto the
death? but thou love better to live in poverty and in exile among the mortal
enemies of thy country. O how shall this turn to thy great shame? Certes thou
shall never get so much honor, as thou have gotten reproach: and thou shall not
only be blamed in thy life, but thou shall also be ill spoken of after thy
death, and be damned in hell. And me seems yet, it had been better to have
dwelled out from the people upon some i will of the Sea, then to dwell here in
this dishonor and opproby: weenest thou that the Greeks hold thee for true
and faithful, that art openly false and untrue to thy people? Certes it was
not only the God Apollo that thus abused thee: but it was a company of devils.
And as she thus spoke to her father, she wept grievously for the displeasure
that she had, etc.

Ha, a, my daughter, said Calcas, think thou that it is a fit thing to
despite the answer of the gods, and specially in that thing that touches
my health? I know certainly by their answers that this war shall not dure
long, that the city shall be destroyed, and the nobles also, and the bourgeses,
and therefore it is the better for us to be here safe, then to be slain with
them: and then finished they their talk.

The coming of Briseyda pleased much to all the Greeks, and they came thither
and feasted her, and demanded of her tidinges of Troy, and of the king
Priamus, and of them that were within, and she said unto them as much as she
knew, courteously. Then all the greatest that were there, promised her to
keep her and hold her, as dear as their daughter: and then each man went into
his own Tent, and there was none of them, but gave to her a jewel at the
departing: and it pleased her well to abide and dwell with the Greeks, and she
forgot anon the noble City of Troy, and the love of noble Troylus. O how
soon is the purpose of a woman changed and turned? certes, more sooner then a
man can say or think, now late had Briseyda blamed her father of the vice of
treason, which she her self exercised in forgetting of her country and true
friend Troilus.

CHAP. XVI. How the Greeks and Troyans began the sixth battle, that dured by
the space of thirty days, in which were many kings and princes dead, of the
one side, and of the other: and how Diomedes smote down Troylus off his horse,
and sent it to Briseyda his love, that received it gladly, etc.
AFter the three months of truce passed, on the morrow betimes the Troyans
provided them to battle. And when Hector had ordered all his battles, he
issued out first, and took with him fifteen thousand fighting men, and
Troylus followed him with ten thousand knights: after him came Paris with
three thousand fighting men of good archers, and well horsed. After came
Deyphebus with three thousand fighters: after him came Eneas, and the other all
in order, so many, that there were this day of the party of the Troyans, more
then an hundred thousand good fighting men and hardy.

Of the party of the Greeks came there first Menelaus with seven thousand
knights, and after him Diomedes with as many, and then Achilles that lead also
aleuen thousand, the king Pampitus with a great multitude of knights, and the
other after, like as they were appointed. The king Philes advanced him the
first, and Hector came against him, so strongly that he slew him with his
spear. The^ there arose a great cry of his death among the Greeks, and the
murder and slaughter began so great, that it was an horrible sight to see, as
well of the one side, as of ye other. King Pampitus slew many Troyans, for to
avenge the death of his uncle, and assailed Hector: but Hector gave him so
sound a stroke that he slew him, and for to avenge his death the Greeks slew
many of the Troyans. Achilles slew many noble men, among the which he slew
the duke Byraon, and Euforbe, that was a great noble man. Hector was this day
sore hurt in the face, and bled great plenty of blood, and wist not who had
done it, and therefore the Troyans reculed unto the walls. And when Hector
apparently saw upon the walls, the queen Hecuba his mother, and his sisters,
he had great shame, and by great ire assailed the king Menon coosin of
Achilles, and gave him so many strokes with his sword upon his helm, that he
slew him in the sight of Achilles, that was like for to have been mad, and
took a strong spear, and ran against Hector, and brake his Spear upon him,
but he could not remove him: and Hector gave him with his sword so great a
stroke, that he made him to tumble under his horse, and said to him: Achilles,
Achilles, thou contendest to approach to me, know that thou approchest thy
death. And as Achilles would have answered to Hector, Troylus came between
them with a great number of knights, and put them in the midst of them. And
there were slain more then five hundred knights of Greece, and were put back
by force: and Menelaus came to the reskewe with three thousand fighting men.
And of the party of the Troyans, came the king Ademon, that iousted against
Menelaus, and smote him, and hurt him in the face: and he and Troylus took
him, and had lead him away, if Diomedes had not come the sooner with a great
company of knights, and fought with Troilus at his coming, and smote him
down, and took his horse, and sent it to Briseida, and did cause to say to
her by his servant, that it was Troylus horse, her love, and that he had
conquered him by his prowess, and prayed her from thenceforth yt she would
hold him for her love, etc.

Briseyda had great joy of these tidinges, and said to the servant, that he
should say unto his Lord, that she might not hate him that with so good heart
loved her. When Diomedes knew the answer, he was right joyous, and thrusted in
among his enemies: ^ut the Troyans that were stronger then they, made the
Greeks to go back and recule unto their tents, and had slain them all, if
the king Agamemnon had not succored them with right great strength. Then
began the battle horrible and mortal, and the Greeks recovered the field,
and chased and put the Troyans back unto their diches. Then came Polidamas to
the reskew, with a great number and multitude of knights, and did goodly
exploites of war: and Diomedes addressed him to him, but he was beaten of
Polidamas that took the horse of Diomedes, and delivered it to Troylus that
fought on foot, and he mounted anon thereupon.

Then came Achilles against Troylus, whom Troylus received gladly, and beat
down Achilles, which remounted lightly, and assailed Troylus with his sword,
and Troylus defended him right valiantly. Then came on Hector, and had at this
time slain more then a thousand knights: but the Greeks defended Achilles,
that were so sore oppressed, that hardly they might defend him any more, and he
had been slain or taken, if the king Thelamon and the duke of Athens had not
succored him. And they set him again on his horse with great pain, and then
the night came on, that parted them. They fought thus thirty days
continually, to the great damage of both parties: and there were slain six of
the bastard sons of the king Priamus, and Hector was hurt in the face, and
therefore the king Priamus demanded truce of the Greeks for six months, and
they agreed and accorded to him, etc.

CHAP. XVII. How the Greeks and the Troyans began the seventh battle, that
dured twelve days, and after began the eight battle much damageous to the
Troyans, for Hector was slain by Achilles, and they were driven back into
their City by force, to their great damage.
DVring the six months of the truce aforesaid, Hector sought to be healed
of his wounds, and played in the noble hall of Ilyon, that was (as the
history says) the most royal hall and fair that was in the world. Thus
during the truce, the king Priamus did bury his six bastard sons each in a
sepulture by himself right honorably. Among all other things, Diomedes
suffered great grief for the love of Briseyda, and might not eat nor rest for
thinking on her, and required her many times of her love, and she answered him
right wisely, giving him hope without certainty of any point: by the which
Diomedes was enflamed on all parts with her love. When the six months were
passed, they began to fight by the space of twelve days continually from the
morning unto the evening, and there were many slain of the one side and of the
other. And then came a great mortality among the Greeks in the host, by the
great heat that then was: and therefore the king Agamemnon required truce,
which was agreed and accorded to him, etc.

When the truce was passed, the night before, Andromeda the wife of Hector that
had two fair sons by him: whereof the one had to name Laomedon, and the
other Astromates, this Andromeda saw that night a marvelous vision, and her
seemed if Hector went that day following to the battle, he should be slain.
And she that had great fear and dread of her husband, weeping said to him,
praying him that he would not go to the battle that day: whereof Hector
blamed his wife, saying, that she should not believe nor give faith to
dreams, and would not abide nor tarry therefore. When it was in the morning,
Andromeda went unto the king Priamus, and to the Queen, and told to them the
verity of her vision: and prayed them with all her heart that they would do
so much at her request, as to dissuade Hector that he should not in any wise
that day go to the battle, etc.

It happened, that day was fair and clear, and the Troyans armed them, and
Troylus issued first into the battle, after him Eneas, after Paris,
Deiphebus, Polidamas, and the king Sarpedon, the king Epistropus, the king
Croys, and the king Philomenus, and after all the princes that were come in the
aid of the Trojans, each man in good order. And the king Priamus sent to
Hector that he should keep him well that day from going to battle. Wherefore
Hector was angry, and said to his wife many words reproachful, as he that knew
well that this commandment came by her request, yet notwithstanding ye
forbidding, he armed him: And when Andromeda saw him armed, she took her
little Children, and fell down at the feet of her husband, and prayed him
humbly, that he would take off his arms: but he would not do it. And then
she said to him, at the least if ye will not have mercy on me, yet have pity
on your little children, that I and they die not a bitter and grievous death or
that we be not lead into servitude and bondage into strange countries.

At this instant came the queen Hecuba and the queen Helene, and the sisters
of Hector, and they humbled themselves and kneeled down presently before his
feet, and prayed and desired him with weeping tears, that he would do off
his harneis, and unarm him, and come with them into the hall: but never would
he do it, for their prayers, but descended from the Palace thus armed as he
was, and took his horse, and would have gone to battle. But, at the request
of Andromeda, the king Priamus came running anon, and took him by the bridle,
and said to him so many things of one and other, that he made him to return,
but in no wise he would unarm him.

Among all these things the battle was mortal of the Greeks and of the
Troyans. Diomedes and Troylus iousted together, and at the assembly they
grieved each other and without fail each of them had slain other, if Menelaus
had not come and parted them. Then the king Miseres of Frigie beat Menelaus,
and had taken him when Eneas came, and troubled them, and would have slain
him, but the said Troilus delivered them, and slew many Greeks. Then came the
king Thelamon with three thousand fighting men, and iousted in his coming
against Polidamas, and put him to the worse, and unhorsed him. But Troylus
succored him, and made him to remount on his horse: after came Paris and
Achilles on the other side, that smote among the Trojans, by so great force,
with the help of his people, that he put them to the flight unto the city,
and in this chase Achilles slew Margareton one of the bastardes of the king
Priamus.

When Hector knew that Achilles had slain Margareton, he had great sorrow,
and did anon lace on his helm, and went to the battle, that his father knew
not of, and in his coming, he slew two noble dukes Greeks, the duke
Coriphus, and the duke Bastidus, and he thrusted into the greatest prease of
the Greeks, and slew as many as he could reach, and the Greeks fled before
him, that there was none so hardy that durst abide his strokes: and ^hus the
Troyans returned and slew the Greeks on all sides. Then the Greeks took
Polydamas, and had lead him away, had not Hector been, which delivered him,
and flewe many Greeks. Then an admiral of Greece named Leocides, assailed
Hector, and Hector slew him anon.

When Achilles saw that Hector slew thus the nobles of Greece, and so many
other, that it was marvel to behold, he thought that if Hector were not
slain, the Greeks should never have victory. And forasmuch as he had slain
many kings and princes, he ran upon him marueilously, and a noble duke of
Greece with him named Polyceus, that was come for the love of Achilles, the
which had promised to give to him his sister in marriage. But Hector slew the
same duke anon in the sight of Achilles. Then Achilles weening to avenge the
death of Policeus, assailed Hector by great ire: but Hector cast to him a dart
fiercely, and made him a wound in his thigh: and then Achilles issued out of
the battle, and did bind up his wound, and took a great spear in purpose to
stay Hector, if he might meet him. Among all these things, Hector had taken a
very noble baron of Greece, that was queintly and richly armed, and for to
lead him out of the host at his ease, had cast his shield behind him at his
back, and had left his breast discovered: and as he was in this point, and
took none heed of Achilles, he came privily unto him, and thrust his spear
within his body, and Hector fell down dead to the ground. When the king
Menon saw Hector dead, he assailed Achilles by great ire, and beat him down
to the ground, and hurt him grievously, and his men bare him into his tent
upon their shield. Then, for the death of Hector, were all the Troyans
discomfited, and reentred into their city, bearing the body of Hector with
great sorrow and lamentation.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the rich sepulture of Hector: and of the great lamentations
and weepings that the Troyans made for his death: and how Palamedes was chosen
duke and governor of the host of the Greeks.
WHen Hector was dead, and his body borne into the city, there is no tongue
that could express ye sorrow that was made in the city generally of men and
women: and there was none, but he had rather to have lost his own son then
him: and they said every one, that from thencefoorth they had lost all their
hope and trust of defense: and thus they demeaned right long their extreme
grief and sorrow. The noble kings and princes bare the body unto the palace
of Ilyon. Their when the king Priamus saw him, he fell down in a swowne upon
the body, and was as dead for sorrow, that uneath they could take him away by
force. There demeaned great sorrow all his brethren. What might men say of the
sorrow that his mother the Queen made, and afterward his sister? O what
sorrow made his wife? certes there can no man express all the lamentations
that there were made. And forasmuch as the body might not long endure without
corruption, the king Priamus took counsel of many wise masters, how they
might keep the body of Hector without corruption and without sepulture: and
then he did cause to be made by their advice and counsel a rich sepulture
upon four pillars of gold, lift up on height, upon the which was made a
marvelous rich Tabernacle of gold and of precious stones: and on the four
corners of the Tabernacle, were four images of gold, that had semblance of
angels: and above the Tabernacle there was a wonderful great image of gold,
that was made after the semblance of Hector, and had the visage turned toward
the Greeks, and held a naked sword that he menaced the Greeks with: and there
was in the mids of the Tabernacle a place void, where the masters sat, and
put the body of Hector flesh and bones cladde in his best garments and robes,
and stood right up on his feet, and might endure a long time in that wise
without corruption, by a certain device that the masters had set on the
sommet or top of the head of Hector: that is to wit, a vessel that had an
hole in the bottom, which vessel was all full of very fine balm, and that
distilled and dropped into a place above on his head, and so spread down into
all the members of the body, as well within as without, and they filled often
times the vessel with balm. And thus the body might not impair for the
great virtue of this balm. And all the people that would see Hector, they saw
him verily in like manner as he had been alive. To this sepulture, the same
masters made a lamp of fine gold, burning continually without going out or
quenching, and afterward they made a closure, to the end that no man should
approach nor go unto this Tabernacle without license or leave. And in this
Temple the king Priamus ordained and set great plenty of priests for to pray
unto the gods without ceasing, for his son Hector, and gave to them good
rents.

Among these things, the king Agamemnon assembled all the kings and most nobles
of his host, and said unto them in this manner: My friends all, ye kings,
princes and barons, we ought to render and yield thanks to the gods humbly and
with devout heart, that our right hard enemy Hector has suffered to be slain
by the hand of Achilles. For as long as he was alive, we had never any hope to
have come to the better hand of our enemies. What may the Troyans from
henceforth hope or trust for, but only for their own overthrow? and we may
in short time hope for the victory upon them. And for as much as Achilles is
grievously hurt, and may not go to battle, if ye think good, whiles that ye
maybe healed, and the other also that be hurt (of whom we have many, and also
for to bury the dead bodies) we will send to the king Priamus for to have
truce for two months. The counsel seemed good to them, and they sent anon to
the king Priamus for truce, and he accorded it to them for two months.

During this truce, Palamedes murmured again at the seignorie of Agamemnon,
and as they were on a day all together, and Palamedes spoke of this matter, the
king Agamemnon answered to him, as sage, in the presence of all the other, and
said unto him: Palamedes, weenest thou that I have great joy of the seignorie
that was given unto me at the beginning, and have occupied to this present
time? for that it was not at my request, neither have I none avail nor profit
thereby, but I have great charge, and break many sleeps therefore, to the end
that by my negligence our host go not to decline nor disworship: and certes
if had well suffised me to have been under the government of another: and I
fear no man that may accuse me, that for any evil or negligence I have
failed in any thing. And if thou gave not thy consent unto mine election,
thou need not to dismay thereof: for thou werest not as yet at that time
come with the other, but it was two years after ere thou came. And
therefore, if we should have abiden thy coming, we had been at the Port of
Athens. And forasmuch as thou shall not think that I have joy or pleasure of
this office, and am desirous to have this honor, I am content that another be
chosen, and am ready to give consent with the most voices. When Agamemnon had
thus spoken, there was no further proceeding that day in this matter. And then
at even Agamemnon did make it to be cried in all the host, that each man
should be on the morrow betimes before his tent at the Parliament.

When it came to the morning that they were all assembled, Agamemnon said to
them. My brethren and friends, I have had unto this time the charge of this
work with great travail, for to conduct it well, in such wise that by the
sufferance of the Gods I have brought it unto honor unto this time. And
forasmuch as it is not lawful yt an University be ruled always by one master,
but that every man employ him to ye best, to his power: and for so much, as I
have conducted this host long time, I will that we do choose another, that
may conduct it discreetly. When Agamemnon had finished his words, his saying
pleased to every man, and they chose Palamedes to be their duke and
governor: and then he went unto his Tent.

Achilles that lay sick of his wounds, was angry at the deposing of
Agamemnon, and said before al them that would hear it, that Palamedes was
nothing like unto Agamemnon in wit and in discretion, and that they ought not
to change him for Palamedes: but forasmuch as the people had consented, he
abode thereby also, etc.

CHAP. XIX. How the king Priamus issued to battle, for to avenge upon the
Greeks the death of his son Hector: and of the prowesses that he did: and of
the anniuersary of the said Hector, in which Achilles was surprised with the
love of Polixena the daughter of king Priamus, in such wise that he might
endure no rest.
WHen the the two months of the truce were past, the king Priamus desiring to
avenge the death of his son Hector, ordained with his own person his
battles: and set in each battle good conductors, and he himself went
and lead with him five and twenty thousand of good knights chosen of the
best. And Dares says in his book, that there issued out of Troy that day an
hundred and fifty thousand men. Deyphebus was the foremost, and then Parie:
and after him came the king Priamus, and Troylus, Eneas, Menon and Polidamas,
they went unto the Tents of the Greeks. Palamedes had ordained his battles.
Then began the battle great and mortal. The king Priamus smote down Palamedes
in his coming, and after smote unto the greatest prease of the Greeks, and
slew many of them, and beat them down, and did so much in arms in that day,
that with great pain would believe that a man so ancient and old might do
that he did that day. The king Sarpedon of Troy assailed king Neoptolemus, that
was a passing strong knight, and king Sarpedon was borne to the earth, that
defended him valiantly, and gave so great a stroke unto king Neoptolemus, that
made him a great wound in his thigh. Then came to the battle the king of
Perse, that remounted the king Sarpedon with the aid of his folk. Menelaus
and the duke of Athens assailed the king of Perse, and enclosed him and his
people among them, and slew the king of Perse, and made the Troyans to recule
by force: there did the king Sarpedon, great and woonderous matters of arms.

The king Priamus and his bastard sons that then followed him, ceased not to
slay the Greeks: and there was none that day, that did so much in arms, as
did the king Priamus, for his sorrow and his ire made his strength to grow.
Then the Greeks advised them to take the way, by which the Troyans should
return unto their city: and they went thither in great number. And when the
Troyans reculed for to go into that place, they found themselves in the middle
of their enemies. Then began mortal battle and there came upon them the king
Priamus, with a great number of fighting men, by a wing, and Paris came
crossing them with a great plenty of good fighters, and he had great store of
archers that slew many of the Greeks, and hurted them: and they did so well,
that by force the Greeks were driven to recule to their Tents. And the
Troyans reentered into their City, and the king Priamus had the loss and
worst of this battle. He sent to the Greeks to demand truce, and they
agreed and accorded to him: but we find not how long this truce endured, etc.

Among these things the king Priamus did cause to carry by land, the body of
the king of Perse, for to be buried in his country: then was the weeping and
sorrow great in Troy, and in especial of Paris, that loved him exceedingly.
During this truce, the anniuersary of Hector approached, when men should mourn
fifteen days in great sorrow, and after should hallow the great feast of the
funeral, as it was that time the guise and custom for kings and Princes. And
then during the truce, the Greeks went and came into the City safely: and so
did the Troyans unto the Tents of the Greeks. Then Achilles had desire to go
to Troy to see the City and the feast of ye anniuersary of Hector, who^ he had
slain: and so he went all unarmed unto the temple of Apollo, where as was the
sepulture of Hector, and he found there great plenty of men and women, that
were noble and wept, and made great sorrow before ye sepulture: which Hector a
man might see on all sides al whole, in like manner as he was first, by the
virtue of that balm. There was the queen Hecuba, and Polixena her daughter,
that was passing fair, with a great company of noble Ladies, that had all
their hair dispersed and hanging about their shoulders, and made right
marvelous sorrow. And albeit that Polixena made so great sorrow, yet she lost
nothing of her beauty, but seemed, and showed her self so fair in all her
members, that nature formed never none more fairer, etc

When Achilles had well advised and seen Polixena, he said in himself, that
he had never seen so fair a woman nor better formed nor made, and with that
she was one of the most noble women of the world. Then was Achilles shot with
the dart of love, that stroke him to the heart so maruellously that he could
not cease to behold her: and the more he beheld her, the more he desired her.
He was so besotted on her, that he thought on no other thing, but abode in the
temple unto the evening, as long as the queen was there: and when she went
out, he conveyed his eye upon Polixena, as far as he might see her: and this
was the cause, and the beginning of his mishappe. In this sorrow Achilles
returned unto his tent, and when he was laid to sleep, that night there came
many things in his mind and in his thought: and he knew then the danger that
Polixena had put him in, and thought in himself that the most strong men of the
world could not, nor had not power to vanquish him, but the only regard and
sight of a frail maid had vanquished and overcome him: and him seemed, that
there is no medicine in the world might heal him save she.

Then he said my prayer, my strength, nor my riches may nothing move her to
have pity on me: I wot never what devil has put me in this danger to love
her that hates me so sore, with mortal hate, and by right good cause, for I
am come hither for to slay her kin and cosins, and now late have slain her
noble brother Hector. Certes I see no remedy, since she is the most noble and
fairest of the world. And then he turned him to the wall, and fell in weeping,
and drowned himself in tears, and of necessity he must think how he might
come to the love of Polixene: and so he covered and hid his courage as well as
he might.

CHAP. XX. How Achilles sent his secret messenger unto Hecuba the queen of
Troy, for to request her daughter Polixena, and of the answer: and how for the
love of her the said Achilles assembled the host of the Greeks, and counseled
them to depart, and have peace with the Troyans.
THe night following; as Achilles was laid on his bed, and might not sleep,
he thought that he would send betimes his messenger unto the queen Hecuba, for
to know if he might find with her that favor that she would give to him her
daughter Polixena to wife, and he would do so much for her that he would make
the Greeks to raised their s^^ge, and go again into their country hastily,
and that peace should be made between them. Thus as he thought in the night,
he put in execution and so sent his true messenger unto the queen, for to
require her daughter, and said to her the promises that his Lord had commanded
him. When the queen had understood the words of the messenger, she answered
him discreetly, notwithstanding that she hated Achilles more then any man of
the world, saying: friend, as much as in me is, I am ready for to do that
thing that thy master requires of me: but so say unto him, that I may not
do this thing alone by myself, but I will speak to my Lord, and to Paris my
son, and thou shall come to me the third day again, and I will say to thee
thine answer.

When the messenger heard the queen so speak, he returned unto his Lord, and
said to him all that he had found: and thus began Achilles to have hope to
come to his intent. The queen Hecuba went anon unto the king Priamus her
husband, whereas Paris was, and told to them all that Achilles had sent to
her, and then the king hanged down his head, and was so a long while without
saying of any word, and after said to his wife: O how is it, as me thinks, a
hard thing to receive into friendship and amity, him yt has done to me so
great offense, that has taken away the light of mine eyes, in slaying my dear
son Hector, and has therein given hope to the Greeks to have the victory.
But yet for to eschew the more great peril, to the end that mine other sons
loose not their lives, and that I may have rest in mine old days, I consent
with you that he have that he requires: always foreseen, that he do first
that thing that he has promised, without any deception. Paris agreed to this
thing readily, forasmuch as in the promises of Achilles was nothing spoken of
Queen Hellene, etc.

At the third day after, Achilles sent again his messenger unto the queen,
and as soon as he came before her, she said to him: I have spoken to my
husband, and also to my son Paris of the request, and also of the promise of
thy Lord: and they be content that this his rerequest be agreed to him: so as,
that he do first that thing that he has promised: and so thou may say to
him, that he may come to the chief and end of his desire, if that he conduct
wisely and secretly this thing as much as in him is. The messenger took leave
of the queen, and came anon to his master, and counted to him all that the
queen had said to him. Then began Achilles greatly to think how he might
perform this that he had promised to the king Priamus, and that it was a
grievous thing to do, and that it was not all in his power. But it is a proper
vice unto the foolish lovers, to promise things that are hard to bring about
and difficile, for to come to the effect of their loves. And likewise glorified
him Achilles, that for his merits or for giving his aid to the Greeks he
would make them to leave their siege. And then Achilles by the counsel of
Palamedes assembled all the kings and noble men of the host, in parliament,
and said to them in this manner.

My friends, that be here assembled, for to bring this war to the end,
think ye not other while on your selves, how by great rashness, lightness,
and folly, and for to recover the wife of Menelaus, we have left our countreies
and lands, our wives and our children, and be come into this so strange land,
where we have dispended the hours foolishly, and put our bodies in danger of
death, and in great infinite labor: and since we have been come hither, there
be right many kings and princes dead, and I my self have shed much of my
blood, that never should have happened if we had not begun this folly.
Helene is nothing of so great price that there behooves to die for her so many
noble men: there be enough in the world of as noble and as fair women as she
is, of whom Menelaus might have one or two, if he would. And it is not a light
thing to overcome the Troyans, as they that have a strong City and well
furnished with good fighters, on horse back and a foot: and it ought to suffice
to us that we have now slain Hector and many other of their nobles, by the
which we might now return with our honor and worship: and, if we leave
Helene, have not we Exione, to whom Helene may not compare in nobleness?

Then arose the duke of Athens, and the king Thoas, and contraried strongly the
words of Achilles: and so did all the other, and said, that he spoke neither
reason, nor well. Whereat Achilles had great sorrow, and commanded his
Mirmydones that they should not arm them any more against the Troyans, and
that they should give no counsalle nor aid unto the Greeks. Among these
things, vittailes began to fail among the Greeks, and they had great
famine. Then assembled Palamedes all the most noble of the host to counsel,
and by their counsel was the king Agamemnon sent unto the City of Mess, to
the king Thelephus, that charged and laded his ships with vittaile, and came
safely again into the host of the Greeks, where he was received with great
joy. Among these things Palamedes did cause their ships to be repaired, to
the end that they might be more ready, if they had need, etc.

CHAP. XXI. Of the death of Deyphebus the son of king Priamus: and how Paris
slew Palamedes: and how the Troyans drove back the Greeks into their tents,
and set fire on their ships: and how for all these things Achilles would not
go to battle, for the love of Polixene.
WHen the truce were passed, they began to fight as they had been accustomed.
Deiphebus assailed in his coming the king Cressus of Greece, and he addressed
to him gladly, and iousted the one against the other: but Deyphebus beat the
king Cressus dead down to the ground, whereat the Greeks were sore troubled,
and put them to flight. But Palamedes and Diomedes came with five and twenty
thousand fighting men, that resisted the Troyans: with them was the noble king
Thelamon Ayax, that addressed him against Eufronius, one of the bastard sons
of the king Priamus, and smote him so hard that he beat him down dead to the
ground, in sight of Deiphebus, that in his great fury ran upon Thelamon, and
beat him and sore hurt him. When Palamedes saw the stroke, he took a great
spear, and addressed him to Deyphebus, and smote him so hard in the breast,
that the spear entered into his body, and the spear brake and the truncheon
abode in the body of Deyphebus. When Paris saw his brother so hurt to the
death, he took him, and lead him unto the gate of the City, and took him to
his men to keep. And as Deyphebus opened his eyes and saw Paris his brother,
he said to him: Brother will thou let me descend into hell without auenging of
my death: I pray thee as earnestly as I may, that ere this truncheon be taken
out of my body, thou do so much by thy hand, that thou slay him that has
slain me. Paris promised him, that he would do his best: and returned into
the battle right angry for his brother, and said in himself that he desired
no longer to live, but until he had avenged the death of his brother: and
sought Palamedes all abouts, and found him, that he fought against the king
Sarpedon, that had assaied for to slay him, and Palamedes defended himself
valiantly, and in his great fury gave so great a stroke with his sword to the
king Sarpedon, that he cut off his shoulder from the body, and anon king
Sarpedon fell down dead.

Paris seeing the great damage that Palamedes did to them, and how with his
prowess he had put the Trojans to flight, and ceased not to slay and smite
down always: he bent his strong bow, and aimed well at Palamedes at leisure,
and shot to him an arrow enuenimed, and smote him in the throat, and cut in two
the master vein, and Palamedes fell down dead to the earth: for whose death
the Greeks made much sorrow, and left the battle, and went unto their tents,
and there held a parle against the Troyans, and defended them strongly. Then
descended the Troyans afoote, and entered into some of their tents, and took
all that they found that good was; Then Paris and Troylus went by a side way
unto the Port, and did put fire into their ships, and burnt so great plenty,
that men might see the flame far. To the rescue of the ships came the king
Thelamon, with a great company of fighting men, and began the battle
horible, so so that there was great killing and slaughter on both sides: and
verily the ships had been all burnt, had it not been for the prowess of king
Thelamon, that did marueiles with his body, and for whatsoever he did, there
were more then five hundred ships burnt. There was great slaughter of the
Greeks, and many were hurt. There was Ebes the son of the king of Trace sore
hurt with a spear, and bare the truncheon in his body, and in that point he
went to the Tent of Achilles, where he rested him that day, and had refused to
go to the battle, for the love that he had to Polixene. Ebes reproched
greatly Achilles, that he suffered so to destroy the people of his country,
and to die villainously, and saying that he might well help them if he would.
And as soon as he had finished his words, one took the truncheon out of his
body, and anon he fell down dead in the presence of Achilles.

Anon after, came from the battle one of the varlets or servants of Achilles,
and Achilles demanded him tidings of the host. Ha sir, said he, it is this day
mishapped to our folk, for the great multitude of Troyans that be come upon
them, and they have slain all that they could ^eet with, and I trow there is
not left one at home of the men of Troy but that every man is come to the
battle: and therefore, if it please you now, whiles that the Troyans be
weary, to come to the battle, ye shall get to you perpetual memory of
worship and of glory. For by your prowess you shall in little space have all
vanquished the^, and they shall not dare to defend themselves against you, they
be so weary. Never would Achilles for the words of his varlet, nor for the
death of Ebes, change his courage, but dissembled all that he had seen and
heard, for the great love that he had to Polixene.

During these things, the battle was right sharp, and endured unto the night,
to the great damage of ye Greeks: and the night parted them, yet was not
Deiphebus dead, but he drew toward his end: and when Paris and Troylus saw
him in that sorrow, they began to cry and make great sorrow. And then Deyphebus
opened a little his eyes, and demanded of Paris with a feeble voice, if he
were dead that had slain him? And Paris said to him yea. Then Deyphebus did
cause to draw out the head of the spear with the truncheon, and anon died.
Wherefore the Troyans made great sorrow. It is no need to hold long talk of
the sorrow, that the king Priamus his father made, nor his wife and his sister,
for it was too much, and also for the death of the king Sarpedon. Of the other
party the Greeks made great sorrow for the death of Palamedes, and made his
body to be buried worshipfully. And as they that might not be long without an
head and governor, by the counsel of the duke Nestor, and of other, Agamemnon
was set again in his dignity as he was before.

The day following, the Troyans early in ye morning issued out of the city, in
good order: and the Greeks came against them. Then began the battle mortal,
and there was great slaughter on both sides: but it rained so much that day,
that the Greeks withdrew them to their Tents, and the Troyans followed after
them: but the rain was so great, that they must needs leave the battle and
return to their city. On the morrow betimes, they began to fight, and flew
that day many barons of the Greeks, and fought till the even: and so they
fought the space of seven days continually, where was great slaughter of the
one and of the other. And forasmuch as the Greeks might not suffer the stenche
of the dead bodies, they demanded truce for two months, which were granted
to them by king Priamus.

During this truce, the king Agamemnon sent the duke Nestor, Ulysses and
Diomedes, to speak to Achilles, for to pray him, and will him to come to the
host, for to defend the^ against the Troyans yt slew them maruellously. When
they were come unto him, he received them with great joy. And then Ulysses said
unto him: Sir Achilles, was it not by your agreement, and also ours all this
host to leave our country* and a ow year come running upon king Priamus, and
have destroyed him, and his, by force of arms, and do beat down his ^itie?
From whence comes this courage, after so many hurts and damages as we have
received in this land, by the Troyans yt have slain so many kings and p^intes,
pilled and robbed our tents, and burnt our ships, and we were now in hope to
have vanquished them, alter that ye by your force and valor have slain
Hector, that was the true defender of the Troyans: and also now that Deiphebus
is dead, the Troyans be there with put under foot, and after this day when ye
have gotten with great travel to great worship and so good renown, will ye
now lo^se all at once, and suffer your people to be slain ^uelly, that ye have
so long defended with the effusion of your blood? Please it you from henceforth
to enter ^oute and keep your good renoume, and defend your people, that
without you may not long defend them against your enemies, to the end, that
we may come to the victory by your prowess, by the which we hope to atteine
and come to it.

Sir Ulysses, said Achilles, if we be come into this land for these causes
that ye have declared, we may say that great folly was among us, that for the
wife of one of us (that is to wit, of sir Menelaus) so many kings and so high
princes be put in peril of death. Had it not been much more wisdom, for
the noble Palamedes to have abider in peace in his country, then for to be
slain here, and other kings and princes in like manner? Certes, as the most
great part of the world of noble men be here how assembled, if they die
here, as many be already dead, it must needs follow that the countries shall
be replenished and governed by villains. Hector, that was so noble and so
worthy, is he not dead? in like wise I may die shortly, that am not so strong
as he was. And therefore in as much as ye require me to go to battle, so much
pain and labor loose ye, for I have no more intention to put me any more in
danger: and love better to loose my renown then my life: for in the end there
is no prowess, but it will be forgotten. Nestor and Diomedes contended enough
to draw Achilles to their quarrels, but they might never induce him to their
purpose, nor the words of Agamemnon neither. And then he said to them, that
they should make peace with the Troyans, before that they were all slain. etc.

Then returned these three princes unto Agamemnon, and said to him all that
they had found in Achilles: and Agamemnon made it to be known to the princes
of the host, whom he had assembled for this cause, and demanded of them their
advice. Then stood up Menelaus, saying, that it would be to us now great shame
to seek peace with the Troyans, since that Hector and Deiphebus be dead, and
slain, and that by their death, the Troyans repute them as vanquished: and
that without Achilles they should well maintain the war against the
Troyans. To that answered Ulysses and Nestor, and said, that it was not
marvel though Menelaus desired the war, for affection to recover his wife,
and that Troy was not so disgarnished, but that they had a new Hector, that
was Troylus, who was little less strong and worthy then Hector. And there was
also another Deiphebus, and that was Paris, whom we ought to doubt as much as
the other: and therefore they counseled the peace, and to return home again
to Greece. Then cried the false traitor Calcas, which was traitor to the
Troyans, and said: Ha, noble men, what think ye to do against the
commandment of the gods? have not they promised to you the victory, and will
ye now leave it? Certes, that should be great folly: take again courage to
you, and fight ye against the Troyans more strongly then ye have done before,
and cease not til ye have the victory, that the gods have promised to you. And
then with the words of the said Calcas, the Greeks took heart to them, saying
verily, that they would maintain the war against the Troyans, whether Achilles
help them or not, and that for him they would not leave.

CHAP. XXII. Of many battles that were made, on the one side and on the other,
to their both great damage: and of certain truce, and of the death of the
noble Troylus that Achilles slew against his promise, and drew him at his horse
tail through out the host: and how Achilles slew the king Menon, etc.
WHen the truce of two months was passed, they began to fight in battle right
sharply. There did Troylus marueiles of arms, for to revenge the death of his
brother. Dares says in his book, that he slew that day a thousand knights,
and the Greeks fled before him, and the battle endured unto the night that
parted them: the day following, the foureteenth battle began hard and
sharp. There did Diomedes marueiles of arms, and slew many Troyans, and hurt
them, and addressed himself against Troylus one time, that smote him so hard,
that he beat him down to the earth, and sore hurt him, and reproched him of
the love of Briseida. Then the Greeks ran with great strength, and took
Diomedes up, and bare him upon his shield unto his tent. Menelaus that saw
Diomedes so beaten, adressed himself against Troylus, but Troylus that had yet
his spear whole, smote him so hard, that he beat him down to the earth sore
hurt, and was borne into his tent by his men upon his shield. Then Agame^non
assembled all his strength, and thrust in among the Troyans, and slew many, but
Troylus came against him, and smote him down off his horse: but he was anon
remounted by the help of his folk.

Thus finished the battle that day, and Agamemnon sent for to have truce for
six months: which were agreed and accorded by king Priamus. Howbeit, it seemed
to some of his council, that he should not grant them for so long. Among these
things, Briseida against the will of her father, went for to see Diomedes that
lay sore hurt in his tent, and she knew well that Troylus that was her love,
had so hurt him Then returned into her mind many purposes, and in the end she
saw that she might never recover Troylus: and therefore as soon as Diomedes
were whole, she would give to him her love without longer tarrying.

Among these things the king Agamemnon transported him unto the tent of
Achilles in the company of duke Nestor, and Achilles received them with great
joy, and Agamemnon prayed him that he would come forth to the battle, and
suffer no more their people thus to be slain, But Achilles would never stir
up his courage for his words: yet forasmuch as he loved Agamemnon, he agreed
and consented yt his men should go to battle without him: whereof Agamemnon and
Nestor gave him great thanks, and after they had thanked him, he returned into
their te^ts.

When the truce were passed, Agamemnon ordained his people to battle, and
Achilles sent to him his Mirmidones clad and marked with a red sign, for to be
known. Then began the battle hard and sharp, to the great damage of both
parts. There Troylus beat down the duke of Athens, and slew many of the
Mirmidones, and hurt, and fought thus till the night parted them. On the morrow
betimes, began the battle sharp and mortal, the king Philomenus and
Polidamas took the king Thoas, and had lead him away, had not the Mirmidones
rescued him. Then Troylus smote in among them, and slew many and hurt them, but
they delivered to him a great assault, and slew his horse, and would have
taken him. Then Paris and his bastard brethren smote in among them, and brake
their ranks, and put Troylus again on his horse: then was there a fierce
fight: there slew the Mirmidones Emargeron one of the bastards of king Priamus
of Troy, whereof Troylus had great sorrow, and by the aid of his people smote
in among them, and slew and hurt many, but they defended themselves valiantly,
and held together, and Troylus ceased not to grieve them, and to enter among
them often times. Then came to the battle Agamemnon, Menelaus, Thelamon,
Ulysses and Diomedes, with all their people, and began a hot skirmish. There
the Greeks did make the Troyans to suffer much pain, but Troylus succored
them valiantly, and put himself always where most need was, and slew and beat
down all that he found, and did so much by his prowess, that the Greeks
fled into their Tents, and Thelamon defended valiantly, and made them to
recover the field by his prowess. This was the sixteenth battle, in the
which died many knights of both sides. Troylus ceased not to grieve the
Mirmidones, and there was none so puissaunt, nor so strong, that might endure
against him, and he did so much, that he put the Greeks to flight, and took
an hundred noble men that he brought into the city.

When the battle was finished, against the even the Mirmidones returned unto
the Tent of Achilles, and there was found many of them hurt, and there were an
hundred of them dead, whereof Achilles had much sorrow: and when it was night,
he went to bed, and there he had many thoughts, and purposed once to go to the
battle for to revenge the death of his men, and another time he thought on
the beauty of Polixene, and thought that if he went, he should loose her love
for ever, and that the king Priamus and his wife would hold him for a
deceiuer, for he had promised them, that he would help no more the Greeks,
and when he said in himself, that he had sent his men unto their aid, and in
this thought Achilles had been many days, and that the day came that the
seventeenth battle began being very much horrible, that dured by seven
days continually, wherein were many Greeks slain, Agamemnon required truce:
but the Troyans agreed no longer the truce, but till they had buried their
dead bodies, and when those days were pas: sed, the eighteenth battle began
right aspire and fires. Menelaus and Paris iousted together, and beat well
each other. Polidamas and Ulysses fought together a great while, and Menesteus
beat down Eneas with iousting. The king Phylomenus beat Agamemnon, and had
sore hurt him, if Thelamon had not come on that smote to ground Philomenus sore
wounded. Archilogus the son of duke Nestor, assailed one of the bastardes of
king Priamus named Brum, and smote him so hard with his spear, that he bare
him down to the ground and slew him. Whereof the Troyans had great sorrow, and
above all other Troylus was angry, that smote in among the Greeks and had put
them to flight had not the Mirmidones have been that resisted him. And
therefore Troylus smote in among them, and slew so many, and beat down, and
did so much, that he made the Greeks to go back into their Tents, and
alighted on foot and entered into the tents, and slew them on all sides: and
there was so great a cry, that the sound came to Achilles, that rested him in
his Tent, and demanded of one of his servants that was there, what it was?
and he said to him, that the Troyans had vanquished the Greeks, and slew them
within their Tents, which were no more able to defend them: and think ye to be
sure here said he? nay ye shall see anon more then forty thousand Troyans that
shall slay you unarmed: for at this time they have slain the most part of your
Mirmidones, and they cease not to slay them, and there shall not abide one
alive, but if they be succored.

At these words Achilles did quake for ire, and set behind him the love of
Polixene, and did arm him hastily, and mounted on his horse, and ran all out
enraged as a Lion, and smote in among the Troyans, and spoiled the^, slew and
hurt them in such wise, that anon his sword was known, and the blood ran in
the field all about as he went. When Troylus knew that Achilles fought with
his sword, he addressed him to him, and gave him so great a stroke, that he
made him a great wound and a deep, that he must needs cease many days of
coming to battle. Troylus was hurt also by the hand of Achilles, but nothing
so sore, and both fell down to the ground, and the battle dured until the
night: and on the morrow they began again, and endured unto the Even. And
thus they fought six days continually: Wherefore there were many slain on
either part. The king Priamus had great sorrow of this that Achilles against
his promise was come into the battle, and thought that he had given him to
understand a thing that was not: but rather that he meant for to deceive him
then otherwise, and reproched his wife to believe so lightly him: and Polixene
sorrowed then enough, for she was contented then to have had Achilles to her
husband.

Achilles among other things, did heal his wounds, during six months of
truce that they had gotten, which wounds Troylus had given him, and he
purposed to avenge him, and that Troylus should die shamefully by his hand.
After these things the nineteenth battle began with great slaughter, and before
that Achilles entered into the battle, he assembled his Mirmidones, and
prayed them that they would intend to none other thing, but to enclose Troylus,
and to hold him without flying till he came, and that he would not be far
from them. And they promised him that they so would. And he thronged into the
battle. And of the other side came Troylus, that began to slay and beat
down al them that he raught, and did so much, that about midday he put the
Greeks to flight: then the Mirmidones (that were two thousand fighting men, and
had not forgot the commandment of their Lord) thrusted in among the Troyans,
and recovered the field. And as they held them together, and sought no man but
Troylus, they found him, that he fought strongly, and was enclosed on all
parts, but he slew and wounded many. And as he was all alone among them, and
had no man to succor him, they slew his horse, and hurt him in many places,
and plucked off his head his helm, and his coife of iron, and he defended him
in the best manner he could. Then came on Achilles, when he saw Troylus all
naked, and ran upon him in a rage, and smote off his head and cast it under the
feet of his horse, and took the body and bound it to the tail of his horse,
and so drew it after him throughout the host. Oh what villainy was it to draw
so the son of so noble a king, that was so worthy and so hardy? Certes, if
any nobleness had been in Achilles, he would not have done this villainy.

When Paris knew that Achilles had thus villainously slain Troylus, he had
great sorrow, and so had Eneas and Polidamas, and labored to recover his body,
but they might not, for the great multitude of Greeks that resisted them. On
the other part, the king Menon died of sorrow for the death of Troylus, and
assailed Achilles, and said unto him in reproach: Ha, ha, evil traitor, what
cruelty has moved thee to bind to the tail of thy horse, the son of so
noble a Prince as the king Priamus is, and to draw him as he were the most
villain of the world? Certes thou shall abide it, and ran upon him, and
smote him so hard with his spear in his breast, that he gave him a great
wound, and after gave him so many strokes with his sword, that he beat him
down to the ground, and then was the body of Troylus recovered with great
pain. The folk of Achilles relieved their Lord and set him again on his
horse: and as soon as his strength came to him again, he came again into the
prease, and encountered the king Menon, and assailed him stoughtly, and the
king Menon defended him valiantly, and did hurt Achilles in many places: but
there came so much people on the one side and of the other, that they were
parted: then came the night on, that parted them, and made them to cease, and
they fought thus the space of seven days.

At the seventh day, when Achilles was healed of his wounds, desiring to
avenge him of the king Menon, he said to his folk, that if they might
encounter him, they should hold him in close, like as they did Troilus. Then
began the battle right aspre, Achilles and Menon fought together, and by
great rage beat down each other a foot. Then the Mirmidones enclosed him,
and took him by force, that had no man to succor him. Then Achilles seeing
the king Menon in this danger, he ran upon him, and slew him with great
torment: but Menon gave him before many great wounds, whereof he lay long
after. Among these things, Menelaus and Menesteus with a great company of
kings and princes, and many fighting men, thrusted into the throng and put
many Troyans to flight, the which entered into their City with doing great
mischief, forasmuch as the Greeks chased them so nigh that they slew and hurt
many of them.

CHAP. XXIII. How Paris, by the persuasion of Hecuba his mother, slew Achilles
in the temple of Apollo, and the son of duke Nestor, and how Paris and Ajax
slew each other in battle.
FOr the death of Troilus the king Priamus his wife and his children, and all
the inhabitants of the City made great sorrow maruelously: and they said
all, that since they had lost Hector, Deyphebus and Troylus, they had from
thenceforth no more hope of their life then of their death. The king Priamus
demanded truce, and it was agreed and accorded by the Greeks: during the
which they did bury honorably the body of Troylus and the body of king Menon.
The queen might not be appeased nor comforted for the death of her children,
and thought in many manner ways how she might be avenged on Achilles that
thus had slain her sons by cruel tyranny. And finally she called Paris, sore
weeping, and said to him secretly these words. Right dear son, thou know
how this traitor Achilles has slain by treason thy brethren my children,
that were with thee, the solace of my life. And forasmuch as he has so slain
them by treason. me seems good, and also just and right, that he be slain by
treason, and I will tell thee how it shall be done. The unhappy man has many
times required me to have to his wife Polixene, and I have given to him good
hope thereof. I have purposed to send to him my keeper of my signet, and bid
him come to speak to me in the temple of Apollo, and I will, right dear
son, that thou be there in wait with a good company of knights, and then
when he shall be come, that ye run upon him, and slay him, that he escape not
with his life. Paris answered, that he would do this thing in such wise as she
had devised, and thereupon he assembled twenty good knights in whom he
affied him much, and went forth into the Temple of Apollo.

As Soon as Achilles heard the messenger speak, that came from the queen
Hecuba, the fool being evil counseled, took with him the son of duke
Nestor, and they went both unto the temple of Apollo, and as soon as they were
come, Paris and his knights ran upon him, and Paris cast at him three darts,
wherewith he hurt him sore. Achilles drew out his sword, that had no more
armor, and wrapped his arm with his mantell, and smote in among the knights
right fiersly, and slew seven of them. But in the end the son of duke Nestor
Archilogus, and Achilles, were both slain within the temple: and forthwith
Paris commanded, that his body should be cast unto the hounds, and to the
birds: but at the request of Helenus, they were put in a place before the
temple, for to be kept. And the Troyans had then great joy, and said they had
no care of the Greeks, ne set naught by them. When Agamemnon knew thereof, he
sent unto the king Priamus, for to have the bodies for to bury them. The king
Priamus made them to be delivered, and were borne down to their tents: then
arose a great sorrow among the Greeks, and said that they had all lost. The
duke Nestor might not be comforted for the death of his son, and they made for
Achilles a noble sepulture, which by the consent of king Priamus was laid
within the city, at the entry of the gate of Tymbre.

After these things the king assembled to his counsel all the nobles of the
host, and showed to them, how for the death of Achilles, the most part of them
were discomforted, and discouraged from the war, and therefore demanded them if
it were good to leave the war, or to entertain and hold it. Then was there
among them diverse opinions, some allowed the war, and the other blamed it,
and at last they concluded al together with one accord, to maintain the war,
saying, If Achilles were failed, yet for that should not fail the promises of
the Gods. Then stood up Ayax among them, and said, If Achilles be dead, let
us send for his son whom the king Nicomedes his graund-sire nourishes, and
teaches the feats of arms: for I trow that without him we may have no
victory of the Troyans. His counsel seemed good, and by the agreement and
will of every man, Menelaus was chosen to go fetch Neoptolomus son of
Achilles that was named otherwise Pirrhus.

Among these things, when that truce were failed, the 16. day of June, when
the days be at the longest of all the year, the Troyans began the twentieth
battle against the Greeks, that was right sharp and hard: this day went Ayax
by great folly, to battle without arms, and bare nothing but his sword.

The Troyans that had lost their best defenders, were not then so hardy as they
were wont to be, but for to save their lives they fought mightily: Paris with
all the people of Perse, that were ye best archers, slew many Greeks, and the
king Philomenus fought strongly, and they of Paphlagony came on, that slew many
Greeks, and by force made them to recule. Menesteus iousted against Polidamas,
and beat him right fiersly, and ran upon him with his sword, and had taken
or slain him, had not the king Philomenus delivered him from his hands. Ayax
did this day maruels of arms, thus unarmed as he was, and slew many
Troyans, and was not yet hurt. In the end he smote in among them of Perse that
Paris lead, and slew many of them, and made them to turn to flight. When
Paris saw his people thus slain, he shot to Ayax an arrow enuenomed, and
raught him between the back and the sides, and Ayax anon felt that he was
hurt to the death, and he thought that he would not die, till he had avenged
him on him that had slain him, and did so much that he found Paris, and
said to him, thou have slain me with thine arrow: but before that I die, I
will slay thee. And also by thee, and for thy cause, be many noble men slain.
And then he gave him so great a stroke, that he cut a two his face so deep,
that he fell down dead to the earth: and Ayax fell down after him. The
Troyans took the body of Paris with weeping tears, and bare it unto the
City, and they were followed unto the gates. The next night following
Agamemnon made the host to approach near to the City* and there pight their
Tents. And the Troyans kept their walls day and night. Then had the Troyans
no more no hope of their lives, when they saw that all the sons of king
Priamus were dead: and there is no tongue that can express the lamentations
that the king Priamus made, and his wife and his daughters, and the queen
Helene, for the death of Paris: and above all other, Helene made the most
greatest sorrow. The king did bury Paris in a right rich sepulture, and set it
in the Temple of Juno honorably, etc.

CHAP. XXIIII. How the queen Penthesilea came from Amazonne, with a thousand
maidens, to the succor of Troy: and slew many Greeks, and after was she
slain by Pirrhus the son of Achilles.
THen two months during whole, the gates of Troy were not opened, and the
Troyans did nothing but go in the City, and lamented and sorrowed: and the
king Agamemnon did send oftentimes unto the king Priamus, that he should send
his men to battle. But the king Priamus fearing and greatly doubting his
destruction would not do it: forasmuch as he abode the succors of the queen
of Amazone, that was then on the way for to come unto the succors of the king
Priamus. Amazonne is a province, where dwelled then none but women without men,
and they were brought up to war and to fight. They had nigh their country an
isle, where the men dwelled, and they were accustomed three times a year to go
thither, in April, May, and June, unto the men, for to have their company,
and after they returned into Amazonne, and they that had conceived, and were
with child, if they bare sons, they gave them suck a certain time, and
after sent them to the fathers. And And if it were a daughter, they held it by
them, and did burn off the right pappe, for to bear the better the spear,
and taught her the feats of arms. Of this province, then was the Lady and
Queen, a very noble virgin, and a strong fighter, that had to name
Penthesilea, and she loved well Hector for his good renown. When she knew that
the Greeks had assailed Troy with so great strength, she went thither, for
to succor it with a thousand virgins, for the love of Hector. And when she
was come, and knew that he was dead, she made great sorrow, and prayed to the
king Priamus that he would let her issue out to the battle against the
Greeks, and that she might show to them how her maidens could bear their
arms.

At the prayer of Penthesilea on the morrow betimes was the gate opened, and
there issued out the king Philemenus, with all them of Paphlagone, Eneas and
Polidamas with all their people, the queen Penthesilea with all her maidens.
The Greeks were anon ready and began the battle hard and sharp.
Menesteus addressed him to Penthesilea, and she likewise to him:: and anon
she smote Menesteus down to the ground, and took his horse, and gave him to
one of her maidens. Then came Diomedes against her, and she received him
gladly, and smote him strongly that he was turned vpside-downe from his horse,
and she took from Dyomedes his shield trom his neck, and delivered it to one
of her maidens. When Thelamon saw that she did such deeds of arms, he
addressed him against her, and she against him, and Thelamon was borne down to
the ground, and had lead him into the city, but Dyomedes came to his reskewe,
with great defense: and then she cried to her maidens, that smote in among ye
Greeks, by such fierceness and ire, that she and they turned the^ to flight,
and they chased them sleaing and beating them unto their tents, and had slain
them all, if Dyomedes had not so greatly resisted the^, who maintained the
skirmish unto the night, that departed them, and the queen Penthesilea
returned into the city with great glory: where the king Priamus received her
with great joy, and gave her many fair Jewels and rich, and him seemed well
that he should avenge him of his sorrows. They fought thus many times after,
and so long that Menelaus returned from the king Nicomedes, and brought into
the host Neoptolemus the son of Achilles otherwise named Pirrhus.

This Pirrhus was received with great glory of all the barons of the host, and
above all other, the Mirmidones were passing joyous, and held him for their
Lord. Then was delivered to Pirrhus all the conduct of the men of arms, and
they made him knight by the hand of the noble Thelamon ye prayed to the Gods to
give him strength and courage in guiding of his sword, and that they would give
him victory and honor for to avenge the death of his father: and two other
Princes set on the spurs of gold, and the king Agamemnon gave to him all the
arms of Achilles his father, and all his other precious pearls and jewels: and
for this new knight and feast of chivalry, the Greeks made many days great
gladness and joy, etc.

After these things came the day of fighting, and the battles were ready on
the one side, and on the other. Then began the battle right hard, Pirrhus
that was armed with the proper arms of his father, encountered Polidamas in
his coming, and had slain him with the great strokes of his sword that he
gave to him, but ye king Philomenus came and delivered him: and then Pirrhus
smote from his horse Philomenus, and had lead him away, had not they of
Paphlagone reskewed him with great travel. Among these things, the queen
Penthesilea entered into the battle with her maidens, and smote in among the
Mirmidones, and slew many of the^. There came then the king Thelamon, that
smote to the ground Penthesilea, and she gave him so great a stroke with her
sword, that she beat him down to the earth in like sort: and then her
maidens relieved her, and set her again on horse, and she smote in among the
Mirmidones, that held ye king Philomenus in great danger, and many she slew and
hurt of the^. When Pirrhus saw that his men were so evil entreated, he cried
to them and said, that they ought to have great shame that suffered them to
be vanquished by women: and then he left the king Philomenus, for to defend
his men against the maid. Then addressed the queen Penthesilea nigh to
Pirrhus, and reproched him for that his father had slain Hector by treason,
and that all the world ought to run upon him. Pirrhus that had so great sorrow
at these words, addressed him against her, and anon she beat him down to
the earth: and forthwith he rose again, and assailed Penthesilea with his
sword, and she him by great strength: and then was Pirrhus remounted by the
aid of his Mirmidones. Then came to the battle Agamemnon, Dyomedes,
Menelaus, and Menesteus the duke of Athens, with all their people, and so did
all the other princes and barons.

Among these things, the king Philomenus was delivered of the Mirmidones, and
he gave great thanks unto the queen Penthesilea, and said, that had not she
have been, he had been slain. Then came to the battle all the Troyans: and so
began the skirmish sharp and mortal: there encountered Pirrhus Glaucon the
son of Anthenor, and brother of Polidamas of another mother, and gave him so
great a stroke, that he slew him and fell down dead to the earth. Then
addressed Penthesilea unto Pirrhus, and he to her, and beat down each other
to the earth: but they remounted anon, and began the fight together again:
Then came so much people of both parts, that they were parted. Polidamas (for
to avenge the death of his brother) slew that day many, Greeks, and hurt
them, and did so much in arms he and Penthesilea, that they put the Greeks
to flight. Then came to the reskew Pirrhus, Diomedes and Thelamon, and made
them that fled, to abide and sustain the combat: and so they did unto the
night, that each man went into his place: they fought thus every day a month
long, in which time were slain more then ten thousand fighting men of both
parties, and Penthesilea lost many of her maidens: and when they had rested a
month, they began the battle right sharp.

At this assembly came one against another of Pirrhus and Penthesilea, and
brake their spears without falling, but Pirrhus was so hurt, that the truncheon
of her spear abode within his body: wherefore the cry arose greatly among
the Greeks, and they ran upon Penthesilea with great strength, and brake the
lase of her helm: and then Pirrhus that in his great fury took none heed to
his wound, set not thereby that he had the truncheon in his body, but assailed
strongly Penthesilea, that had then her helm broken, and she weend to have
smitten him, but Pirrhus raught her first, and gave her so great a stroke with
his sword, that he cut her arm off by the body, whereof the said
Penthesilea fell down dead, to the earth: and Pirrhus that was not yet
content, smote the body, and cut it in two pieces: and anon for the great
effusion of blood that ran from his wound, he fell down as dead among his
people, and they took him up and laid him upon his shield, and bare him into
his tent. Then the maidens of Penthesilea, for to revenge the death of their
Queen, smote in among the Mirmidones by great fury, and slew many, and hurt:
but it profited but little to the Troyans, as they that were but a few against
a great multitude of Greeks. And so there were slain of them of Troy that day
in the battle, more then ten thousand men, and the other withdrewe
themselves into the city, for to save themselves, and shut and closed fast
their gates, and had no more intention to issue out to battle against their
enemies, etc.

CHAP. XXV. How Anthenor and Eneas spoke together among them for to deliver the
city unto the Greeks by treason, and did it under color of peace: and how
the king Priamus gainsayd them, with some of his bastards by great and rude
words.
THe Troyans had very great sorrow, when they saw them in this distress, for
they had no more hope to have any succors from any place, and they endeavored
to nothing, but to keep well their city, and to furnish them well with
bitaile: for they feared nor dreaded naught of any assault. Among these things,
the Greeks would have cast to the dogs the body of Penthesilea, forasmuch as
she had slain so many noble men of Greece: but Pirrus gainsayde it, for the
honor and credit of nobleness: and finally, they concluded, that they would
cast it in a pond that was nie the city. Anchises with his son Eneas, and
Anthenor with his son Polidamas, went to counsel together, for to advise
them, how they might have their lives saved against the Greeks, and their
goods, and rather than they would fail hereof, they would betray the City.

Then they concluded that they should speak unto king Priamus, and counsel
him to take a peace and appointment with the Greeks, in restoring of Helene to
her husband, and the damages that Paris did in the I Will of Citharis. O if the
king Priamus had been so happy to have done this, and had pleased the Greeks
at the beginning, he had saved his life, and his wifes life, and the life of
all his children, and had saved all the City and the citizens, and had
eschewed all the mischiefs that came to them afterward. Therefore say men in a
Proverb, that the concord or peace soon taken is good, for it is an hard
thing to reappease such manner damages to him that has advantage of the
war. For with great pain would the Greeks have been content (that were
the^ at the better hand) with these offers, forasmuch as they had suffered so
many hurtes and damages before Troy, for them seemed well that they were at the
point for to destroy the City, and all the inhabitants. But the aforenamed
traitors spoke not of this matter, but to the end that under color of peace
they might betray the city, if otherwise, they might not save their lives.

Then they went before the king Priamus and Amphimacus one of his bastard
sons, and spoke there of this matter before many noble men of the City: and
above as king Priamus had heard them speak of purchasing of peace with the
Greeks, he thought that they spoke this thing by great fury, and began to
laugh, saying to them, that he would be advised and take counsel first: and
then they spoke unto him in this manner: If thou will hear our counsel upon
this thing, mark what we shall say, and if it please thee not use the counsel
of other. The king said that he would well hear their counsel, and would
weete what seemed them good, saying unto them: What seems you good? Then
spoke Anthenor saying: King, you may not dissemble but that you and yours be
compassed with your ennemies, who been here by your city, desiring your
death and destruction, and ye may not issue out: there are more than fifty
kings that desire nothing but to destroy this City, and you, and all them
that dwell therein: ye may no longer resist them, neither dare ye no more open
your gates: and thus we let us then be enclosed herein. We ought of two evil
things choose the less evil: and therefore, for to have peace with the
Greeks, if ye seem good, we will render Helene to Menelaus her husband, since
that Paris is dead, and also restore the damage that Paris did do to them in
Greece, rather than we will suffer our selves to be put to the death, etc.

At these words arose up Amphymacus, one of the bastard sons of king
Priamus, and reproved egerly the words of Anthenor, and said unto him, what
trust or hope may my Lord my father and we have in thee, since that thou
ought to have firm goodwill unto him and to this city, and we see that
thus recreant, thou ought to live and die with us, and thou counsellest us
now to make peace with the Greeks to our great dishonor and shame. Truly,
before that the king shall do that, there shall die twenty thousand men: the
thing that thou counsellest the king, comes of treason. Many other injurious
words said Amphimacus to Anthenor: and Eneas began to interrupt him, saying,
Ye know well that we may not from henceforth go to battle against the
Greeks, and we dare no more open our gates, wherefore it behooves us to find
means to have peace with them. Then the king Priamus with great ire said to
Anthenor and to Eneas: have ye not shame in your selves to speak so to me?
Ye make me die with sorrow: for all that I have done hitherto, I have done it
by your counsel. Anthenor, at thy return fro Greece, whither I sent thee to
require my sister, counselledst thou not me that I should send Paris into
Greece for to endammage the Greeks? And I had never taken upon me for to have
moved war against them, had not thy false counsel been, which moved me to
send thither. And thou Eneas, alas when I sent thee with Paris into Greece,
wast not thou principal of the counsel that Paris should ravish Helene, and
bring her into this realm, and thou helpedst thereto with thy person? And if
thou would have been contrary thereto, and have let it, Helene had never
seen the walls of Troy. And now after this, that they have slain all my
children, and done so much damage and hurt, ye counsel me, against honor,
to make peace with the Greeks, that have so cruelly destroyed me? Certes, your
counsel finisheth my life with great sorrow and dishonor, etc.

Of these words was Eneas exceedingly angry and wroth, and answered to the
king words sharp and pricking enough, and departed, he and Anthenor from the
king evil content. And when they were gone, the king began to weep, as he
that dreaded that they would deliver the city into the hands of the Greeks,
which would slay him incontinent. Then he thought that he would make them die
first, and called to him Amphimacus, and said to him: Right dear son, I am
thy father, we ought to support each other, unto the death. I know certainly,
that Anthenor and Eneas contend for to slay us by the Greeks, and to deliver
them this city: and therefore it should not be ill done to make them fall into
the pit that they have made ready before ere they do any such evil, and I
will tell thee in what manner. To morrow at even they will come to take
counsel, then thou shall be ambushed here within, and thou shall have with
thee good knights, and when they shall be come, thou shall run upon them,
and slay them. Amphimacus made answer unto him, and said, that he would so
do with a very good will, and albeit there were no more assembled at this
counsel but the king and his son: yet there is nothing so secret but
otherwhile it is known. Eneas knew well the truth of this thing, and it was not
known by whom he knew it, and anon he and Anthenor and some other of their
accomplices, spoke forth of the treason of the city, and there they swore each
to other: and then they said, if they went more to counsel to the king, that
they would go with great company of men of arms: for Eneas was of the most
noble of Troy, and most rich next to the king, and best of lineage, and might
well compare to the king. And Anthenor was also rich and puissant of friends
in the city, and their treason was such that they would have delivered the
city in the hands of their enemies: So as they and all they of their lineage
should have their lives and their goods saved, and thereof they took good
surety of the Greeks.

Among these things the king Priamus sent for Anthenor, and Eneas to come to
counsel, for to perform that thing that he had purposed, but they came with
a great company of men of arms: and therefore the king sent Amphymacus that
he should leave off this enterprise. The day following, the king sent for all
the Trojans to council, and when they were assembled before him, Eneas stood up
and willed all them to make peace with the Greeks: to whom all the other
accorded save the king, and then said to him Eneas, Sir king, wherefore
consentest not thou with the other, for will thou or will thou not, we will
treat for the peace, and will make it maugre thee. When the king saw that his
contradiction might nothing avail, he had leauer consent with the other, then
for to be the cause of his destruction, and then said he to Eneas, Let it be
made as ye shall think that it may be most expedient to the peace, and I will
think well of it. Then by the counsel of them all, Anthenor was chosen for to
go to the Greeks, and treat for the peace: and the Troyans took branches of
Palm in sign of peace, and went upon the walls of the City, and showed the
sign unto the Greeks, the which showed well that they would entend to the
peace. And then was Anthenor retired from the walls and let down, and was
presented to the king Agamemnon. And the king Agamemnon commised all the work
to the king of Crete, Diomedes, and Ulysses, and that all those things that
these three kings should decree with Anthenor, all the Greeks promised to hold
it agreeable, and swear it upon their law, etc.

When they were all four assembled, Anthenor replenished with fury, promised
to them to deliver the city by treason, for to do with it their will and
pleasure, so that they would save him and Eneas and all their kinsmen and
parentage, and all them that they would choose, and that Eneas should have all
his possessions without any loss. These three kings of Greece swore to
Anthenor that thus they would do, and hold: then said one to the other that
this thing must be secret, unto the time it be brought about, and to the end to
keep this treason more secret, Anthenor prayed to the Greeks, that they would
deliver to him the king Cassilius that was a very ancient man, for to go with
him to Troy, to the intent that he might be the better believed, and for that he
knew the will of the Trojans, that is to weet, if they would have peace with
the Greeks, and also for to say to them the will and desire of the Greeks,
and then demanded Anthenor the body of Penthesilea, which the Greeks agreed to
them gladly.

After these things Anthenor and the king Cassilius entered into the city, and
did to be known to the king their coming. On the morrow betimes, the king
Priamus assembled all the Trojans, for to hear the answer of Anthenor: the
which said to the king otherwise then he found, making a long sermon, for to
cover his badde doing.

Where he spoke long of the puissance of the Greeks, and of their truth in
their promises, and how they had holden the truce that they made, lying before
the city, and had been faithfully governed without breaking of them, and after
spoke he of the feebleness of the Troyans, and of the dangers that they were
in: and in this time concluded, that forthwith it were profitable to seek
peace, and that they were come thereto: and said, it could not be unless they
gave a great quantity of gold and silver unto the Greeks for to restore to them
the great damages that they had in the war. And after they advised the king
and the other, each in himself, for to employ him in this thing without any
sparing. And forasmuch (said Anthenor) as I cannot know at this time al their
will, I would that ye would let Eneas go with me unto them, for to know
better their will, and to the end that they believe us the better. Every man
allowed the words of Anthenor: and then went he and Eneas to the Greeks, and
with them the king Cassilius.

When the counsel was finished, and all done, the king Priamus entered into his
chamber and began to weep right grievously, as he that perceived well the
treason, and playned sore the death of his sons, and the great damage that he
bare, and that worse is, he must buy his peace of them that had done to him all this hurt, and to give them all the treasure that he had in long time gathered
together, and to become poor in his old days, and yet he is not sure of his
life, but must needs do the will of them that shall betray him. On the other
side when Helene knew that Anthenor should go to ye Greeks, she prayed him right
effectuously, that he would make her peace with Menelaus her husband, and that
he would take pity on her: and he promised to her, that he would do to his
power.

When Eneas and Anthenor were come into the host of the Greeks, they treated
of their treason, with the three kings that the Greeks had commised: and
there they made the peace for Helen, and took good surety. After their
communication, the Greeks ordained that Diomedes and Ulysses should go with
them to Troy, and they went with them. There was great joy when they heard of
their coming into their City, weening to the Troyans to have had the peace
they had so much desired. On the morrow early, by the commandment of the
king Priamus, all the Troyans were assembled at his palace, then spoke
Ulysses, saying unto them, that the Greeks demanded two things, that is to
weete, restitution of their damages, and great quantity of gold and silver:
and also they demanded that Amphymacus should be banished for ever out of
the City of Troy, without any trust ever to come in again, (this purchased
Anthenor for Amphymacus, forasmuch as he had contraried him before.) O how great
peril it is to speak lightly in time of perturbation and sedition. Then as
they were all assembled in parleament, they heard suddenly a marvelous cry:
at that Diomedes and Ulysses were in great fear that the people would have
slain them: then the other said that they would take these two kings in the
stead of Amphymacus, to the intent that he should not be banished: and yet
there could no man know nor weete from whence this noise came, nor wherefore,
therefore they departed, and every man went into his place, etc.

Then Anthenor drew apart Diomedes and Ulysses for to speak of their evil
practices. Then said unto him Ulysses, Wherefore tarriest thou so long, and
delayest to do that thou have promised? Anthenor answered and said: The gods
do know that Eneas and I attend to none other thing, but to do that we have
promised to you, but there is a marvelous thing that hinders us, and I will
say to you what it is. Certeinely, when the king Ilion founded first the
palace of Ilion in this city, he established in the name of Pallas a great
temple in this City, and when it was all ready and made, saving the tower, a
marvelous thing descended from the heaven, and that stacke in the wall of the
temple within the great altar, and it has been there till this time, and none
may bear it away, save they that keep it: the matter is of tree or of wood,
but there is no man that knows of what wood, nor how it is so made: but the
goddess Pallas that sent it thither, gave unto this thing a great virtue, that
is this, that as long as this said thing shall be within the temple or within
the city, within the walls, the Troyans may not loose their City, nor the
kings, nor the heirs, and this is the thing that holds the Troyans in
surety, and therefore they may the better keep it. And this thing has to
name Palladium, forasmuch as the goddess Pallas sent it. Then said Diomedes:
If this thing be of such virtue as thou say, we loose our labor. Then said
Anthenor that they ought nothing to dismay them, for he and Eneas attended for
to fulfill the promise, for I have but late spoken to the Priest that keeps
it, to the end that he may deliver it by stealth: and I have sure trust that he
shall deliver it me for a great sum of gold that I promised him: and as soon
as I shall have it, I will send it to you out of the city: and then we shall
perform that thing we have promised to you: and ere ye go hence, for to cover
and hide our work, I will go unto the king Priamus, and will let him to
understand, that I have spoke long to you, to know what quantity of gold ye
demand: and it was so effected as Anthenor had determined.

CHAP. XXVI. How the traitor Anthenor bought of the Priest the Palladium: and
gave it to Ulysses: and of the horse of brass that was by the Greeks brought
to the temple of Pallas, being full of men of arms: and how the city of Troy
was taken, and burnt, and the king Priamus slain, etc.
WHen Diomedes and Ulysses were returned into their host, Anthenor went unto
the king Priamus, and said to him that he should assemble all his folk to
counsel: and when they were all come, Anthenor said to them, that for to come
to the peace of the Greeks they must needs pay twenty thousand mark of gold,
and that in good weight, and as much of silver, and also an hundred thousand
quarters of Wheat: and this must be made ready within a certain time: and
then when they have this, they shall give surety to hold the peace without
any fraud or subtlety.

There it was ordained how this sum should be levied: and whiles they were
busy thereaboutes, Anthenor went to the Priest that kept the Palladium, the
which Priest had to name Thoant, and bare to him a great quantity of gold,
and there were they two at counsel. Anthenor said to him, that he should
take this sum of gold, wherewith he should be rich all his life, and that
he should give to him the Palladium, and that no man should know thereof, for
I have (said he) great fear, and as much dread as thou, that any man should
know thereof. And I will send it to Ulysses, and he shall bear the blame
upon him, and every man shall say that Ulysses shall have stolen it, and we
shall be quit thereof both two, etc.

Thoant the priest resisted long the words of Anthenor: but in the end, for
covetousness of the great sum of gold that Anthenor gave unto him, he
consented that he should take the Palladium and bear it away. Then Anthenor
took it anon, and sent it unto Ulysses the same night, and after the voice
ran among the people, that Ulysses by his suttletie had taken and borne away
the Palladium out of Troy. O what treason was this of a Priest, that loved
better for covetousness to betray his city than to leave the gold that was
given him! Certes, it is a foul vice in a Priest the sin of covetousness,
but few have been before this time, and few be yet, but they be attainted
therewith, whereof it is great pity, since it is so that avarice is the
mother of all vices. Whilst that the Troyans gathered together their gold and
silver, and put it in the Temple of Minerua, to keep unto the time that it was
all collected, it pleased them to offer and make sacrifice to their god Apollo:
and when they had slain many beasts for their sacrifice, and had put them
upon the Altar, and had set fire unto them for to burn them, it happened
that there came two very strange maruailes, the first was, that the fire
would not kindle nor burn, for they began to make the fire more than ten
times, and always it quenched, and might never burn the sacrifice. The second
miracle or marvel was, when they had appointed the entrails of the beasts for
their sacrifice, a great Eagle descended from the air, crying greatly, and
took with his feet the said entrails, and bare them into the ships of the
Greeks.

Of these two things were the Troyans sore abashed and dismayed, and said that
the gods were wroth with them. Then demanded they of Cassandra what these
things signified: and she said unto them, that the god Apollo was wroth with
them for the effusion of the blood of Achilles that was shed, wherewithal
his Temple was defiled and violated: this is the first, and ye must go fetch
fire at the sepulture of Achilles, and light your sacrifice therewith, then
will it quench no more: and they did so, and the sacrifice burnt clear: and
for the second miracle, she said to them, that for certain, treason was made
of the City with the Greeks. When the Greeks heard of these miracles, they
demanded of Calcas what it signified, and he answered that the yielding of
the City should come shortly. Amongst these things Calcas and Crisis the
Priest counseled the Greeks, that they should make a great horse of brass,
and that must be so great as might hold within it a thousand knights armed: and
they said unto them, that it was the pleasure of the gods. This horse was made
by a passing wise master, as Appius was, whose name was Sinon, and he made it
so subtly, that no man might perceive nor see entry nor issue: but within it
was easy to them that were closed therein for to issue when they would, etc.

When the horse was fully made, and the thousand knights therein, by the
counsel of Crisis, they prayed the king Priamus that he would suffer this
horse to enter into the city, and that it might be set in the temple of
Pallas, forasmuch as they said that they had made it in the honor of Pallas,
for a vow that they had made for restitution of the Palladium which they had
caused to be taken out of the same temple, etc.

Among these things the Princes that were yet in Troy, when they saw that the
king had so fowly and so shamefully treated with the Greeks, they went out of
Troy, and took their men with them, and the king Philomenus led no more but
two hundred and fifty men and threescore maidens of Amazonne that were left of
a thousand that came with the Queen Penthesilea, and carried the body of her
with them, and traveled so long that in the end they came unto their own
Country.

Then came the day that the Greeks should swear the peace fainedly upon the
plain field upon the sanctuaries. King Priamus issued out of the city and
his people, and swear there each party to hold the peace firmly from thence
forth on: and Diomedes swore first for the Greeks: after, when they had
broken the peace that they had treated with Anthenor of that thing that they
concluded after, and therefore they maintained, that they were not forsworn by
that color, as the proverb says, He that swears by a cautele or
maliciously, he by malice forsweareth himself. After that Diomedes swear
likewise all the kings and princes of Greece, and then the king Priamus and the
Troyans swore in good faith, as they that knew nothing of the great treason:
and after their oaths thus made, king Priamus delivered Helene to Menelaus her
husband, and prayed him and other kings and princes of Greece, that they would
pardon Helen, without suffering to be done to her any injury or hurt: and they
promised him fainedly, that they would do to her no wrong.

Then prayed the Greeks, that they might set the horse of brass within the
Temple of Pallas, for the restitution of Palladium, to the end that the
goddess Pallas might be to them friendly, in their return. And as the king
Priamus answered not thereto, Eneas and Anthenor said to him, that it should be
well done, and that it should be honor to the city. Howbeit the king Priamus
accorded it with evil will. Then the Greeks received the gold and silver,
and the wheat that was promised them, and sent it, and put into their ships.
After these things they went all in manner of procession, and in devotion with
their priests, and began with strength of cords, to draw the horse of brass
unto before the gate of the city, and forasmuch as by the gate it might not
enter into the city, it was so great: therefore they brake the wall of the
city in length and height, in such wise as it entered within the town, and the
Troyans received it with great joy, but the custom of Fortune is such, that
great joy ends in heaviness, and in sorrow. The Troyans made joy of this
horse, wherein was closed their death, and they knew nothing of it. In this
horse was a subtle man named Sinon, that bare the keys of the horse, for to
open it. When the Troyans were a sleep, and rested them in the night,
forthwith they issued out of the horse, and gave a token of fire to them that
were in the fields, to the end that they should come into the City, for to
put it all to destruction.

The same day the Greeks fained to go unto Tenedon, and said, that they would
receive Helene, and set her in safety, because that the people should not
run upon her, for the great euilles and hurtes that were fallen for her, and
thus they departed from the port of Troy with their sails drawn up, and came
before the sun going down, to Tenedon. Then had the Troyans great joy when
they saw the Greeks depart, and they supped that evening with great
gladness: and the Greeks so soon as they were come to Tenedon, they armed
them in the evening, and went stilly and privily toward Troy. When the Troyans
had well supped, they went to bed for to sleep. Then Sinon opened the horse,
and went out and light this fire, and showed it to them that were without, and
anon without delay, they that were in a wait, entered into the City by the
gate that was broken for to bring in the horse of brass. And the thousand
knights issued out, and where they found the Troyans they slew them in their
houses, where they slept as they that thought nothing.

Thus entered the Greeks into the City, and slew men, women and children,
without sparing of any, and took all that they found in their houses, and slew
so many ere it was day, that they had slain more then twenty thousand. They
pilled and robbed the Temples, and the cry arose to be horrible of them that
they slew. When the king Priamus heard the cry (he knew anon that Eneas and
Anthenor had betrayed him) he arose then hastily and went into his temple of
Apollo, that was within his Palace, as he that had no more trust nor hope of
his life, and kneeled before the high altar. Cassandra fled on the other side,
as one that had been out of her wit, into the temple of Minerue, weeping and
demeaning great sorrow: and the other noble women abode still in the Palace,
in weepinges and in tears.

When it came to the morrow, the Greeks (by the conduct of Eneas and of
Anthenor that were open traitors unto their City, and also to their king and
Lord) came and entered into the Palace of Ilion, where they found no defense,
and put to death all them that they found. Then Pirrhus entered into the temple
of Apollo, and found there the king Priamus abiding his death: then he ran
upon him with a naked sword (in sight of Eneas and Anthenor that guided him) he
slew there the king Priamus before the high altar, which was all be-bled with
his blood. The queen Hecuba and Polixene fled, and wist not whether to go: and
it happened that she met with Eneas, and then said Hecuba to him in a great
fury, Ha, a, felon traitor, from whence is come to thee so great cruelty,
that thou have brought with thee them that have slain the king Priamus, that
has done to thee so much good, and has set thee in magnificence, and also
have betrayed the country where thou were borne, and the city that thou
ought to keep: at the least let it suffice thee, and refrain thee now of
thine intent, and have pity of this unhappy Polixene: to the end that among
so many euilles as thou have done, thou may have grace to have done one good
deed, as for to save her from death, before the Greeks slay her. Eneas
(moved with Pity) received Polixene in his guard, and put her in a secret
place.

Among these things king Thelamon set in the temple of Minerue in keeping
Andromeda the wife of Hector and Cassandra, whom he found there in Ilion, and
set the city on fire in all places, and brent all the noble city, except
only the houses of the traitors, which were kept and reserved. When the city
of Troy was all brent, king Agamemnon assembled all the most noble of Greece in
the temple of Minerue: and when they were all assembled, he required them of
two things: one was, that they should hold their faith and truth to the
traitors: the other, that they should take good advise to part the prey of the
city. The answer of the Greeks was such that they would hold their faith to
the traitors as for the first point: and as to the second, every man should
bring all the prey in common, and there to part to each man after his merit and
desert. Then spoke Thelamon and said, they should burn Helen, for whom so much
hurt and evil was come, and that so many worthy kings and princes had died
for. And there was a great murmr hereupon, that with great pain Agamemnon,
Ulysses, and Menelaus might save her. But Ulysses with his fair speech said
to them so much of diverse things, that they were content that Helene should
have no harm. And then Agamemnon did so much to all the other, that for his
reward, the daughter of king Priamus Cassandra was delivered unto him. Whilst
that the Greeks held yet their parliament, there came to them Eneas and
Anthenor, and advertised them how Helenus had always blamed the Troyans of the
enterprise that they made against the Greeks, and counseled them to put the
body of Achilles in sepulture, which they would have given to the hounds, and
besought them therefore that they would save his life, and it was agreed and
accorded to them. And then Andromeda and Helenus entreated for the two sons
of Hector, which were saved, albeit that Pirrhus was there against, and debated
it a little, but in the end he agreed it, and so the children were saved.

After this vproare they ordained that all the noble women that were escaped
from death, should go whither they would freely, or dwell there still, if it
pleased them. And after these things done, they purposed to depart from Troy:
but a great tempest began to arise that time that endured a month whole
before they might go to the sea. Then demanded the Greeks of Calcas the cause
of this trouble that endured so long? and he answered, that the puissances
infernals were not yet appeased for the effusion of the blood of Achilles, that
was shed in the temple of Apollo, for the love of Polixene: and for to appease
the Gods, it behooued to sacrifice Polixene, for whom Achilles died.

Then Pirrhus enquired diligently where Polixene was become, that was cause of
the death of his father, for there was no tidings whither she was alive or
dead? Agamemnon demanded of Anthenor: which said to him, that he knew not where
she was, whereof he lied not: and yet for to make an end of all his euilles, he
enquired so much that Polixene was found in prison in an old ancient tower,
whereas she was put in, and then he went thither and drew her out by force by
her arms, and presented her unto the king Agamemnon, which anon sent her to
Pirrhus, the which sent her to the sepulture of Achilles for to be slain: and
as they led her, there was no king nor prince but that he had great sorrow, for
to see so fair a figure of a woman to be lost, and without that she had
deserved it, and they had delivered her from the hand of Pirrhus, if Calcas had
not been, that said always, that the tempest should not cease unto the time that
she were dead.

When the fair Polixene was before the sepulture of Achilles, she excused her
very humbly of the death of Achilles, and said, that she was much wroth and
sorry of his death, and that the kings and princes of Greece suffered her to
die against justice, and without fault or trespass: yet that she had leauer
have the death then to live with them that had taken away and slain al her
friends. And when she had finished her words, Pirrhus smote her with his
sword (in sight of the queen her mother) and slew her cruelly, and cut her all
in pieces, and cast them all about the sepulture of his father. When Hecuba the
queen saw thus her fair daughter slain* she fell down in a ^woone, and
after went out of her wi^, and became mad, and began to run as a vacabond,
and all enraged, and assailed with her teeth and with her nails all that she
might come by, and casted stones, and and hurt many of the Greeks. Then they
took her by force, and lead her into an I Will, and there they stoned her to
death. And thus (...) queen Hector ended, and finished her life, and the
Greeks made for her a noble sepulture, and put her body therein: and hi^
Sepulture appears yet in the same I Will unto this day, etc.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the dissension that was moved because of the Palladium,
between Thelamon and Ulysses: and how Eneas and Anthenor were exiled out of
Troy: and how the Greeks returned, and of their adventures.
WHiles that the Greeks soiourned yet at Troy, and might not depart for the
great tempest, after that they had destroyed all the City, and taken all that
they found that was good, the king Thelamon made his quarrel before the king
Agamemnon for the Palladium that Ulysses had, saying that he had not so well
deserved it as he had done, that had so many times succored the host with
vittaile, and also had defended it by his great prowess: whereas the Host of
the Greeks had been in danger to have been lost, had not he been, and
said, that he had slain the king Polimnestor, to whom the king Priamus had
put Polidorus his son, and after had slain the same Polidorus, and had
brought a great treasour he found, unto the host of the Greeks. And also he
had slain the king of Frigie, and brought his goods into the host, and
alleged then, that he had gotten many realms to the seignorie of Greece, and
other many valiances that he had done to the honor of the Greeks: and said
moreover, that Ulysses had in him no prowess nor valiance, but only subtlety,
and fair speaking for to deceive men, and by him have we gotten to us great
shame, yt where we might have vanquished the Troyans by arms, now we have
vanquished them by deceipte and falsehood.

To these words answered Ulysses, and said, that by his valiance and by his
wit the Troyans were vanquished: and if he had not bin, the Troyans had been
yet in state and in glory in the City. And after said to Thelamon: certes the
Palladium was never conquered by your prowess, but by my wit: and the Greeks
wist not what it was, nor of what virtue it is, until I did them to know
thereof first, by the diligence that I did use thereto: and when I knew that
the City of Troy might not be taken as long as it was in the same, I went
secretly into the city, and did so much that it was delivered unto me, and
after we took the city. To this answered Thelamon injuriously, and Ulysses to
him in like manner, insomuch that they became mortal ennemies each to other:
and Thelamon mena^ed Ulysses to the death openly. And yet after that this
matter was well discussed, Agamemnon and Menelaus judged that the Palladium
should abide and tarry with Ulysses (and some said, that they did likewise
make this judgment forasmuch as Ulysses by his fair speaking had saved from
death Helene, that Thelamon and other would have had dead) And with this
judgment they might not be content, for the most greatest part of the host
said, that Thelamon ought better to have the Palladium then Ulysses: and
therefore Thelamon spoke to Agamemnon and Menelaus in many injurious words,
and said unto them, that he would be their mortal enemy from thenceforth on.
For this cause Agamemnon, Menelaus, and Ulysses held themselves all three
near together, and had always after with them a very great number and
marvelous multitude of most valiant knights. Then it came to pass, that on
the morrow after, early in the morning, that Thelamon was found slain in his
bed, and had wounds in many places of his body, whereof rose a very great
cry in the host, and they made great sorrow, and gave all the blame unto
three kings before rehearsed. Pirrus that loved exceedingly the king Thelamon,
said many injurious words to Ulysses, and to the other. Then Ulysses doubted,
and the next night following he and his men entered into their ships
secretly, and went to the sea, for to return homewarde, and left with Diomedes
his friend the Palladium. Pirrus did cause to burn the body of Thelamon, and
put the ashes in a rich vessel of gold, for to bear with him into his
country, to bury it honorably. The hate was great between Pirrus and the
king Agamemnon, and his brother: but Anthenor made the peace, and after on a
day gave a dinner unto all the nobles of Greece, and did serve them with many
meats, and gave to them fair gifts, etc.

Among these things, the Greeks reproched Eneas, that he had falsified his
oath, in that that he had hid Polixene: and for this cause they banished him
out of Troy for ever. And when Eneas saw that he might not abide there, he
prayed them earnestly that they would accord and agree that he might have the
two and twenty ships that Paris had with him into Greece, and they granted
to him his request, and gave unto him four months space for to repair them,
and furnish them of all such necessaries that they lacked. Anthenor departed
after from Troy with his good will, and led with him a great number of Troyans:
but the history tells not whither he would go. Eneas greatly hated Anthenor,
for so much as by him he was banished out of Troy: and was in great sorrow,
because Anthenor was not as well banished as he. And for this cause Eneas
assembled all the Troyans, and said to them: my friends, and my brethren,
since that Fortune has put us in the state wherein we be, we may not live
without a head and governor: and if ye will do by counsel, ye shall choose
Anthenor, and make him your king, for he is wise enough to govern you. This
counsel seemed good to the Troyans, and they sent after Anthenor that returned
anon unto them: and as soon as he was come, Eneas assembled a great number of
people for to run upon him, as he that was most mighty in Troy. Then the
Troyans prayed him that he would cease, since that the war was finished, and
that he would not begin it again. How (said Eneas) should we spare one so
heinous a traitor, that by his great villainy has caused Polixene the fair
daughter of king Priamus to die, and by him I am banished out of Troy, that
should have counseled and helped you: and now I must needs leave you? Eneas
said so much to the Troyans, that they bannished Anthenor for ever out of
Troy, and constrained him anon to go his way out of the town, etc.

Anthenor entered into the sea with a great company of Troyans, and sailed so
far that he fell among men of war and pirates of the sea, who ran upon him
and slew many of his men, and hurt and robbed and pilled of his ships: and in
the end Anthenor escaped from them, and sailed so far that he arrived in a
Province named Gerbandy, whereof the king Tetides was lord and king, a just man
and a courteous. In this land arrived Anthenor with a few ships, and rested
on the side of a greater I Will, that was nigh unto the port. He saw the country
fair and full of woods and of land, and of fountains, and there he builded a
city to him and to his people, and fortified it with walls and good towers.
And when the Trojans knew thereof, many went thither and dwelled there with
Anthenor, and the city grew apace, and was full of people, and Anthenor
governed him so wisely in this land, that he was well in the grace of the king
Tetides, and was the second after the king in his realm: and named his city
Cortiremetralum.

Cassandra that was left at Troy, had great sorrow for the great mischiefs
that were fallen to her friends: and ceased not to weep and wail: and when
she had demeaned long her sorrow: the Greeks demanded her of their estate
in their returning home: of which she said to them, that they should suffer
many pains and great perils ere they were come into their country: and after
she said to Agamemnon, that they of his own house should slay him. So it
happened to him after, and to all the other, like as Cassandra had devised to
them and said. Of the king Thelamon were left two sons, of two queens, the
eldest was named Hermicides of the queen Glausta: and the other of the queen
Thymissa had to name Anchisatus: these two children nourished the king Theuter
til they were great to bear arms.

Among these things Agamemnon and Menelaus demanded leave for to return into
their lands: and the most great of the host gave the^ leave, being sore
vexed, forasmuch as they had been taken as suspect of the death of Thelamon,
with Ulysses which was stolen away like a thief, wherefore he showed well,
that he was culpable of the death. Thus these two brethren put them to the fea
for to return home, and in the entry of the Winter, when the sea is most
dangerous, anon after the other Greeks entered into the Sea, as fools and
evil advised for the doubts of the Sea, and had their ships all charged and
laden with the richesse, whereof they had spoiled the rich city and realm
of Troy: and for the great desire that they had for to be at home in their
country, they began to return thus in the mids of the Winter, and set
apart all dangers and perilles, which fell unto them. About the hour of
noone, came a great tempest, and surprised them suddenly, with great thunder
and rain, with wind and with great waves of the sea that casted their ships
here and there in the sea: and brake their mastes, and all to rent their
sails. And when the night came, which was long and dark, the ships left
each other in sailing before the wind, some in one place, and some in another,
and many were burnt with lightening and thunder that fell upon them, and many
were drowned and sunk into the Sea: and they that were therein were dead and
drowned, and the great riches of Troy lost. Oyleus Ajax that had xxxii. ships
in this company, had all his ships burnt and perished, and he himself by the
force of his arms and legs all naked swimming came and arrived a land, all
swollen with the water that he had drunken, and lay a great while upon the
grauel, more looking for death then life: and anon after came other in
likewise, that were so saved with swimming, which were discomforted in their
mishap and unhappiness. This mischief came to this Ajax, forasmuch as he drew
Cassandra out of the temple of Minerue. And it happens often time, that many be
punished for the sin and trespass of one man, etc.

CHAP. XXVIII. How the king Naulus and Cetus his son did spoil on the sea
many ships of the Greeks, in their return for the death of his son
Palamedes, and of the death of the king Agamemnon, and of the exile of
Diomedes, and of his calling back by Egee his wife, etc.
IN this time there was a king in Greece named Naulus that was very rich and
puissant, and his realm stood upon the side of the Sea of Greece toward the
South. In the which Sea were great rocks and high, and many mountains and
hills of sand which were right perilous. The king was father of Palamedes,
that was slain before Troy, and had yet a son named Cetus: there was none
in Greece so rich, nor so puissant a king.

Now were there some evil people there that could not be in ease without
greeuing and annoying of other, which made the said king Naulus to understand,
and his son king Cetus, that Palamedes was not slain in battle, so as the
voice ran, but he was slain covertly by Ulysses and Diomedes. Agamemnon and
Menelaus had made and contrived a false letter, wherein was contained that
Palamedes would have betrayed the host of the Greeks, whiles he was emperor
of the host, for a great quantity of gold: and they made this letter to be
put by the side of a knight that was slain. And then Ulysses treated in such
wise with one of the secretaries of Palamedes, for a great sum of money, such
as the Letters contained: and this Secretary by the induction of Ulysses put
this sum of money under the head of Palamedes whiles he slept. And as soon as
the secretary had said to Ulysses that he had done: then Ulysses slew this
Secretary privily, and forthwith did so much that this letter came into the
hands of the Greeks, that read it, and were all abashed when they saw in
writing the treason, and the sum contained in the same laid under his head.
They went then into his tent, and found the truth of this thing, and would
have run upon Palamedes: but he offered himself to defend it against whom
soever would prove it: and so there was none that durst fight against him.
Then Ulysses did so much by his fair language, that this thing was appeased:
and it seemed that it was best that Palamedes should abide in his dignity.

After this thing thus appeased, Ulysses and Diomedes on a day did Palamedes to
understand, that they knew a pit, wherein was much treasure, and that they
would that he had his part: and that he should go the night following. When
the night was come, they went all three alone without more company, and there
offered Palamedes for to go down into the pit first, and they said, that they
would follow: and as soon as he was within, the other two cast stones upon
him so many, that they slew him, and after returned to their tents privily.
This thing said, these men charged king Naulus, and Cetus of the death of
Palamedes: and all was false. Then the king and his son began earnestly to
think how they might avenge them of the Greeks. They knew well that the
Greeks were upon return in the heart of the Winter: and that they must pass
by his realm. And then the king Naulus did cry in all his realm, that men
should make great fires every night upon the mountains that stood by the sea
side. And this did he to the end, that when the Greeks should see the fire by
night they should come thither, weening to find good haven: and if they came,
they should find hard rocks and mountains of sand. And so they should not
escape without death. It was thus done, as Naulus had devised, there were nigh
two hundredth ships of ye Greeks broken against the rocks: and all they that
were therein were drowned. When the other ships that followed them heard the
noise of the ships that so were broken, and the c^^e of them that were
drowned, they turned on the other board, and made to seawarde, and saved
themselves. Of them that escaped, were Agamemnon, Menelaus, Diomedes, and some
other that shall be named hereafter.

Cetus, that otherwise was called Pellus, had great sorrow, when he knew that
Agamemnon was escaped: and then he thought long, how he might avenge himself.
When he was come home, and was arrived in his own land, he wrote a letter to
Clitemnestra the wife of Agamemnon: and this letter contained, that for
certain Agamemnon her husband had espoused one of the daughters of king
Priamus, and that he loved her greatly, and brought her with him into his
country for to make her Queen, and to put out Clitemnestra, or to slay her:
and therefore Cetus advertised her, to the end that she might provide for her
self. Clitemnestra anon believed these letters, and thanked Cetus enough, and
thought that she would avenge her of her husband. This Clitemnestra, in the
absence of her husband, loved a man named Egistus, by whom she had a daughter
named Erigona: she loved more her love Egistus, then ever she did her husband,
though he was come of low blood. But it is the custom of a woman that does
amiss, to take one to her of less value than her husband is. She had treated
with Egistus, that the first night that Agamemnon should lie with her, he
should run upon him and slay him. This thing was done in like manner as she
had purposed: and Agamemnon was slain, and laid in the earth: and anon
after, Clytemnestra took to husband her love Egistus king of Michmas.

Agamemnon thus slain, had a son of this Clytemnestra that was named
Horestes, a young child, which Calcibus his cousine had in keeping, and took
him from his mother, to the end that she should not slay him: and after sent
him to the king of Creete Idumeus that was his uncle. And he had great joy of
him: and so had his wife Tharasis also, that loved him as much as Clytemnestra
her daughter, that had no more children but her, and she was a fair young
maid. Thus as Cetus had written to Clytemnestra the wife of Agamemnon, in like
manner he wrote to the wife of Diomedes named Egee, who was daughter of the
king Polimites of Arsimens, and sister of Assandrus, that returned from Troy
with Diomedes his brother in law. So it happened in their returning, that they
went into the land of king Thelephus, which was evil content, and went against
them with a great company of men of arms, and assailed them: and they defended
them strongly. And Assandrus slew many of the knights of Thelephus, whereof he
had great sorrow and was angry, and took a great spear, and addressed him
against Assandrus with so great force, that he smote him to the earth, and slew
him. Diomedes, to avenge the death of his brother in law, slew many knights
of Thelephus, and recovered the body of Assandrus with great trouble and
pain, and bare it into his ship.

Thus died Assandrus, but it was not so reported to Egee his si^ter: but it was
told her, that Diomedes her husband had slain him, to have all the seignorie
of Archimens, whereof Assandrus had the one half against his sister Egee. Of
these tidings, and of them that Cetus had written, Egee was angry with Diomedes
her husband, and wrought so with her people, that they promised her they would
no more receive Diomedes for their lord. Thus when Diomedes returned, his wife
ne his folk would receive him, but banished him out of the country of
Archimens for ever. Then happened he to arrive in Salamine, where king Theuter
brother of king Thelamon was. This king heard say, that Diomedes was culpable
of the death of his brother, with Ulysses: whereupon he commanded that
Diomedes should be taken. But Diomedes hearing thereof, fled thence. King
Demophon, and king Athamas being arrived in their lands, were banished by
semblable manner. Then arrived they in the land of Duke Nestor, which received
them with great joy. These two kings purposed to go into their lands with men
of arms, and take vengeance on their people. But Duke Nestor blamed them
thereof: and counseled them that they should first send to them to admonish
them to receive them for their Lords, and promise to them great franchises and
liberties. Thus did they as Nestor had counseled them: and it was not long
after, but that their people received them, as aforesaid.

While Eneas abode in Troy to repair his ships, he endured many assaults of
his neighbors, that would have taken as a prey all the remnant of the Troyans.
And forasmuch as he might not abide there longer then his term assigned unto
him by the Greeks: he assembled the Troyans, and councelled them that they
should send and seek Diomedes to be their king, and said unto them, he would
come willingly, forasmuch as he was driven out of his country: and he was both
wise and valiant. So they sent for to seek Diomedes, and found him: who came
forthwith, and found the Troyans besieged by their neighbor nations, Eneas
then prepared to the battle: in which Diomedes bare himself so valiantly that
he took away prisoners, and hanged many as thieves. In the fifth battle he
behaved himself so, that he gat the upper hand altogether of his ennemies, and
conquered them all: so as there were none of his neighbors that durst assail
the Troyans.

During these things the navy of Eneas was ready, whereupon he took shipping
with Anchises his father: and being at sea, they resolved to go and seek an
habitation where the gods and fortune would assign. During their adventures at
sea many perils happened, and rouing at randon this way and that way, they
sailed by Hellespont, and thence passing arrived at Tuskane in Italy: from
whence sailing they came to Carthage, and thence again to Italy. The story
whereof who lift to peruse, let him read Virgil. When Egea the wife of
Diomedes knew that the Troyans had entertained Diomedes, and that he had
discomfited their ennemies, she doubted that Diomedes would also take
vengeance on her. Then she councelled with her people, and by their advise she
sent for him to come unto her: who came with a good will, and had good
intertainement, In like manner did sundry Lords that had been exiled, return
again to their wives and houses, and enjoyed their old seigniories, as many
as had escaped the danger of the sea.

CHAP. XXIX. How Horestes son of King Agamemnon cruelly avenged himself of
the death of his father. And how king Ulysses, after sundry perilous
adventures returned to his Country and kingdom.
THen Horestes the son of king Agamemnon, who was twenty and four years of
age, and had been brought up under king Idumeus, was by the said Idumeus made
knight, at whose knighting was great feasting and sport. Then Horestes prayed
him that he would help him with his people to be avenged of the death of his
father, and to recover his land again. Whereupon Idumeus delivered to him a
thousand armed men wise and hardy. And Horestes gathered out of other places
an other thousand: so passing toward Michmas he went by Trasim, where Forensis
was Lord and governor, of whom he gat a hundred soldiers: this did Forensis
for the hatred that he bare to Egistus, forasmuch as the said Egistus having
espoused his daughter, forsook her for the love of Clitemnestra. So he joined
with Horestes to make war against Egistus. This expedition was taken in hand at
the beginning of the month of Mate. When they came before Michmas, those that
kept the city would not yield it. He then besieged it round: for Horestes
had answer from the gods, that he should be avenged of his mother with his
own hands, albeit that she was fast closed within that fortified city.
Egistus was not all this time within the city, but was gone to procure aid and
succors of men of war from other places, against the coming of Horestes his
enemy, by the instigation of his wife Clytemnestra.

When Horestes understood thereof, he laid a great ambush of armed men, to
surprise Egistus in his return, and therewith also laid fresh and hot
assaults daily to the city: which being not well fortified, was by Horestes
taken after fifteen days siege: who appointing his men to keep due watch and
ward, that none should go out nor in at the gates, went himself to the
palace royal, where he took his mother, committing her to safe prison, and
caused them to be apprehended that were any wa^ guilty of the death of his
father, and that had rebelled against him. The same day returned Egistus with
his new aides, thinking to have gone unto the rescue of the ci^ie but by the
way he was taken by the ambush of Horestes, who slew all his men, and carried
him to Horestes with his hands bound behind him.

On the morrow after Horestes caused his mother Clytemnestra to be brought
before him stark naked, with her hands bound, whom as soon as ever he
saw, he ran at her with his naked sword, and first he cut off her two
pappes, and after slew her, and caused her body to be drawn into the fields,
and there to be left for dogs and the birds of the air to devour. Then he
made Egistus to be taken and stripped, and to be drawn naked thorough the
city, and after to be hanged. And in like sort dealt he with those that were
found to have been culpable of his fathers death. This vengeance took
Horestes for the death of good king Agamemnon his father.

Menelaus after sundry great perilles by sea, at length arrived in Creete,
having with him Helene his wife: who hearing of the death of his brother, and
how cruelly Horestes had put his own mother to the death, was sore
displeased with his nephew. At that same time came to Menelaus all the greatest
Lords and Nobles of Greece, for whose sake all the Greeks had suffered so
much trouble and vexation. From Creete Menelaus sailed to Michmas, and told
Horestes, that he was not worthy to be king or governor, for that he had so
cruelly put to death his own mother. Whereupon Menelaus assembled at Athens
all the chief nobles of Greece, to the end to deprive Horestes of his reign
and government, for the tyrannous murdering of his mother. Horestes excused
himself thereof, saying, the gods had appointed him to do that which he
had done.

At this the duke of Athens rose up, and offered to be champion in maintaining
Horestes his cause against any that would withstand it, by combat or otherwise:
which challenge of his being by no man accepted, Horestes was judged
guiltless, and was suffered still to enjoy his kingdom. But upon this
quarrel Horestes conceived such mortal hatred against Menelaus his uncle,
that he afterward bare great evil will to him. Notwithstanding king Idumeus
came within a while to Michmas, and so reconciled them each to other, that
Horestes took to wife Hermione the daughter of king Menelaus and of Helen.
Whereat Erigone the daughter of Egistus and of Clytemnestra had so great
sorrow, that she hanged herself, being grieved that Horestes prospered so well.

During these affairs, Ulysses came into Creete with two Merchants ships,
for he had lost all his own ships, and the chief of his goods by rouers or
pirates at the sea. After which loss, he arrived (by mishappe) within the
country of king Thelamon, where he lost the residue of his goods, and they of
the country would have hanged him, had it not been, that by his wit and
cunning he escaped their hands. After that he arrived in the country of king
Manlus, who hated him for the death of his son Palamedes: yet there he so
handled the matter by his wit and industry, that he got out of their hands
also. In the end coming again into Creete, he was friendly entertained by
king Idumeus, who wondered to see him in so poor a case, demanding him of all
his adventures, and how he had sped since his departing from Troy. To al which
Ulysses replied, showing how many and how great perilles he had passed by sea,
and how he had lost all his men and goods that he brought with him from Troy.
King Idumeus had pity on him when he heard these things, and gave him
honorable and bountiful entertainment, for as long as he would stay with
him. When he would needs depart to return into his own country, Idumeus gave
him two ships furnished with all things necessary for his voyage, and riches
with him great plenty, requesting him that he would take his way homeward by
the Country of king Alcinous, to whom he should be very welcome, etc.

Thus Ulysses departing from Creete, came unto king Kingdom. But upon this
quarrel Horestes conceived such mortal hatred against Menelaus his Uncle, that
he afterward bare great evil will to him. Notwithstanding King Idumeus came
within a while to Michmas, and reconciled them each to other that Horestes took
to wife Hermione the daughter of King Menelaus and of Helen. Whereat Erigone
the daughter of Egistus and of Clytemnestra had great sorrow, that she hanged
her self, being grieved that Horestes prospered so well.

During these affairs, Ulisses came into Creete, with two Merchant-ships, for
he had lost all his own, and the chief of his goods by Pirates. After which
losses, he arrived in the Country of King Thelamon where he lost the rest of
his goods, and they of that Country, would have hanged him, if he had not by
his cunning escaped their hands. After that he arrived in the Country of K.
Manlus, who hated him for the death of his Son Palamedes: yet there he so
handled the matter by his industry, that he got from thence. At last coming
again into Creete, he was kindly entertained by K. Idumeus, who wondered to see
him in so poor a case, demanding of all his adventures, how he had spe^ since
he last departed from Troy. To which Ulysses replied, how great perils he had
passed by Sea, and how he had lost all his men and goods, that he brought from
Troy. K. Idumeus had pity on him, when he heard these things, and gave him
honorable entertainment, as long as he would stay. When he would depart into
his own Country, Idumeus gave him two ships, furnished with all things
necessary for his voyage, and with great plenty of riches, requesting him that
he would take his way b^ the King Alcinous to whom he should be very welcome.

This Ulisses departing from Creet came unto K.

Alcinous who received him joyfully, and was much delighted with his
communication. There Ulysses told of Penelope his wife, how many noblemen had
requested her love, yet none could obtain it, but she still abode constant: and
how certain of his lands were unjustly detained from her during his absence:
the truth of which, his Son Ulysses Thelamonious coming thither assured him
thereof. Whereupon Ulysses prayed Alcinous that he would accompany him to his
Realm with a great company of armed men, to help him again to his right. To
which Alcinous willingly agreed. So they sailed by Sea, and on a night arrived
in his Country, and coming to the houses of his enemies, slew them all, on the
morrow after, Ulisses came to his Palace, where he had Royal entertainment, of
all sorts of people: but especially Penelope his wife made great joy for his
coming, which she had long desired. His people then came from all places, with
many rich presents, to welcome him home. Great was the joy, and most honorable
the entertainment that Ulysses had at his return showed him. Then he dealt with
King Alcinous, that he gave to his Son Thelamonius, his daughter Nausica to
wife. The wedding being celebrated with great solemnity, Alcinous departed home
again, into his Country, leaving Ulysses quietly possessed in his Realm.

CHAP. XXX. Of the dealings of Pyrrhus after his return from Troy: and how
Horestes the Son of Agamemnon slew him at Delphos, for that he had gotten away
Hermione his Wife.
PYrrhus the Son of Achilles, and of Dyadamis, daughter of Lycomedes, which
Lycomedes was Son to Acastus an old King, and greatly hated of Acastus his
Grandfather by the mother side. It is not recorded how this hatred grew. But
this Acastus having driven Peleus out of his Kingdom of Thessaly, laid wait to
have slain Pyrrhus in his return from Troy.

Pyrrhus passing through many perils at Sea, was driven by foul weather, to
cast most part of his riches he brought from Troy into the Sea: and arriving
at Molosse he going ashore, was given to understand, that K. Peleus his
Grandfather, by the Father-side, was exiled from his Kingdom by Acastus, and
that many Ships were hired to lie in wait to slay him: whereat he was sore
displeased. King Peleus then knew not how to save himself, because Philistines
and Menalippus the two Sons of Acastus, sought by all means to slay him. In the
end Peleus remembered him of an old building, that stood half a mile from the
City of Thessaly, between the Sea and the City: this place was encompassed
about with Rocks and walls, having great Cellers under ground, into which by a
little hole grown over with bushes, a man might go.

Into these Vaults King Peleus got him, and there he abode until the return of
his Nephew Pyrrhus from Troy, by whose good help, he trusted to avenge himself
of his enemies. (...) whose coming he often went to look on the Sea coast. When
Pyrrhus with his Ships were landed, he addressed himself to Thessalie, against
K. Acastus: and the better to atchieve his purpose, he sent his two
Secretaries, the one called Crispus, and the other Adrastus, to one Assandrus,
a man of great honor in Thessalie* (which Assandrus was a great friend both to
him, and to Peleus) for to have his counsel and help. The Messengers having
been with Assandrus, returned to Pyrrhus, assuring him of his friendly aid.
Whereupon Pyrrhus hoysed Sail, and making toward Thessalie, they were by a
sudden Tempest driven in at the Port ^epeliadim, half a mile from Thessalie
near about where Peleus kept in the Vaults. Then Pyrrhus went ashore to rest
himself, and take fresh air, and by chance he went walking to the Cave where
Peleus was hidden: and passing along the bushes* he fell into the hole, where
was the descent into the Cave, where he found Peleus his Grandfather* Peleus
knowing him by his countenance, for he resembled much his Father Achilles*
embraced him joyfully, and made known unto him all his misfortunes, and the
wrongs that he had sustained by the means of Acastus, and his Sons. Tidings
hereof came to Philistines and Menalippus the Sons of Acastus, who were on
hunting in a Forest there by. Then Pyrrhus apparrelled himself in beggarly
apparel, and leaving his Grandfather with his Ships, went alone with his sword
into the Forest, where he met with Philistines and Menalippus, who demanded of
him, what he was* Pyrrhus said, he was a Grecian, that returning from Troy* in
company with 500. more had escaped his life from Shipwreck, and lost all that
he had in the Sea, being now driven to beg for his sustenance: wherefore he
did beseech them, if they had brought any victuals with them, they would give
him some thing to eat. The two brethren said, that he should abide with them:
which thing he granted.

Upon this parley a great Heart came running by them, at the ^^ght whereof
Menalippus put spurs to his Horse and followed on the chase: and immediately
Philistines alighting off his horse to rest himself, Pyrrhus ran him through and
slew him: and Menalippus afterward returning again, was also slain by Pyrrhus.
Thus Pyrrhus slew his two Uncles, the brethren of Thetis the Mother of Achilles
his Father. Passing from thence, he met with Chinaras, one of the household of
Acastus, of whom demanding where the K. Acastus was? and understanding that he
was hard by, he slew Chinaras, and going in haste to his ships he arrayed him
in precious robes, and so came back again to the Forest: and meeting with King
Acastus, the King asked him who he was? I am (said he) one of the Sons of King
Priamus of Troy, who now am Prisoner to Pyrrhus. Where is Pyrrhus (said the
King?) He pointed him toward the Sea. And as he was looking toward the
Seacoast, Pyrrhus drew his sword and would have slain him, had not Thetis
been, who knew Pyrrhus, and cried out saying: Ah dear Nephew what will thou do?
Will thou kill my Father as thou have killed my two brethren, thy Uncles? and
thus saying, ^he caught him fast by the arm, that he was about to strike
withal. Then Pyrrhus replied saying: the King Acastus thy Father, has
wrongfully exiled K. Peleus thy Husband: let him restore him unto his right and
I will save his life. King Acastus was content therewith: then a peace was
concluded between them all three, and they loved well together. After this,
Acastus said to Peleus, I am old, and can no longer govern this Realm: and
those are gone that should have succeeded me in this Kingdom. Therefore if it
please thee, let Pyrrhus my dear Nephew take on him the Government. Peleus was
well contented: and then was commandment given to all the Barons of Thessaly,
that they should do homage to Pyrrhus as their King and Sovereign: whereto the
Barons with great joy and liking accorded. Thus was Pyrrhus crowned King of
Thessaly and esteemed the most redoubted King in all Greece. Idumeus King of
Creet dyed shortly after, leaving behind him two Sons, Merian and Loarca.
Loarca dyed shortly after his Father, and Me^ian enjoyed the Kingdom.
Thela^^^us his ennemies. For whose coming he often went to look on the sea
side. When Pirrhus with his ships were landed, he addressed himself to
Thessalie, against king Achastus: and, the better to atchieue his purpose, he
sent his two Secretaries, the one called Crispus, the other Adrastus, to
Assandrus, a man of great honor and estimation in Thessalie (which Assandrus
was a great friend both to him and to Peleus) for to have his counsel and
help. The messengers having been with Assandrus, returned to Pirrhus, assuring
him of his friendly aid. Whereupon Pirrhus hoised sail again, and making
toward Thessalie, they were by a tempest driven in at the port Sepeliadim
half a mile from Thessalie, near whereas Peleus kept in the vaultes or
cellars. Then Pirrhus went aland to rest himself, and take fresh air, and by
chance he went strait walking to the cave where Peleus was hidden, and passing
along the bushes he fell into ye hole, where was the descent into the cave, as
before is said, where he found Peleus his grandfather. Peleus knowing him by
his countenance, forasmuch as he resembled much his father Achilles, embraced
him joyfully, and told him all his misfortunes and wrongs that he had
sustained by means of Achastus and his sons. Tidings hereof came to
Philistines and Menalippus the sons of Acastus, who were on hunting in a
forest thereby. Then Pirrhus apparelled himself in torn beggarly apparel,
and leaving his grandfather and company with his ships, went alone with his
sword into the forest, where he met with Philistines and Menalippus, who
demanded of him, what he was, and whither he would. Pirrhus said he was a
Grecian, that returning from Troy, in company with 500. mo, had escaped with
his life from shipwreck, and had lost all that he had in the sea, being now
driven to beg for his sustenance from door to door: wherefore he did beseech
them, if they had brought any victuals into the forest, that they would give
him somewhat to eat. The two brethren said forthwith, that he should abide with
them: which thing he granted, etc.

Upon this parlee a great Heart came running by them, at the sight whereof
Menalippus put spurs to his horse and followed on the chase: and immediately
Philistines alighting from his horse, to rest himself, Pirrhus ran him
through with his sword and slew him: and Menalippus afterward returning again,
was also assailed and slain by Pirrhus. Thus Pirrhus slew his two uncles the
brethren of Thetis the mother of Achilles his father. Passing from thence, he
met with Chinaras one of the household of Acastus, of whom demanding where
the king Acastus was, and understanding that he was near there by, he slew
Chinaras, and going in haste to his ships, he arrayed him straitway in
precious robes, and so adorned, he came back to the forest: and meeting anon
with king Acastus, the king asked him who he was. I am (said he) one of the
sons of king Priamus of Troy, who am prisoner to Pirrhus. Where is Pirrhus
(said the king?) He poynted him toward the sea. And as he was looking toward
the sea, Pirrhus drew out his sword and would have slain him, had not Thetis
been, who knew Pirrhus, and cried out saying: Ah dear nephew, what will thou
do? will thou kill my father, as thou have killed my two brethren thine
uncles? and thus saying she caught him fast by the arm that he was about to
strike with. Then Pirrhus replied, saying: the king Acastus thy father has
wrongfully exiled king Peleus thy husband: let him restore him unto his right,
and I will save his life. King Achastus was well content therewith: then a peace
was concluded between them all three, and they loved well together. After this
Acastus said to Peleus, I am old, and can no longer now well govern this
realm: and those are gone that should have succeeded me in the kingdom. Now
therefore, if it please thee, let Pirrhus my right dear Nephew take on him the
government. Peleus hereof was well contented: and then was commandment given
to all the barons of Thessalie, that they should do homage to Pirrhus as to
their king and Sovereign: whereto the barons with great joy and liking
accorded. Thus was Pirrhus crowned king of Thessalie, and esteemed the most
redoubted king in all Greece. Idumeus the king of Crete died shortly after,
leaving behind him two sons Merion and Loarca. Loarca died shortly after his
father: and Merion enjoyed the kingdom.

Thelamonius the son of Ulysses had a son by his wife Nausica, named
Deiphebus.

After all these things accomplished, Acastus went and buried his two sons in
Thessalie, by the consent of Pirrhus: and it happened that when Pirrhus was
promoted to this royal dignity, he became enamoured of Hermione daughter of
Helene, and wife to Horestes. Her he so courted, and allured by many
intisements, that he got her away from her hu^bande into Thessalie, and took
her to his wife. Horestes was sore grieved at this injury offered: yet he
durst not assail him with battle in his own Realm, but said that he would
ere long be avenged of this indignity, as soon as time and place would serve.
It came to pass shortly after ye Pirhus went to Delphos, for to give thanks
unto his god Apollo, for the good success he had obtained in Thessalie, in
reue^ging his fathers death, and getting the kingdom: and leaving in his
palace behind him Andromache sometime the wife of Hector, and Laomedon her
young son, in his absence it was found, that the said Andromache was with
child by Pirrhus, whereat Hermione took displea^ure, so that she sent word to
Menelaus her father, how^ Pirrhus for the love of Andromache had forsaken her,
requesting him, that during the abode of Pirrhus at Delphos he would come and
kill Andromache and Laomedon her son. At her request Menelaus came, and with
naked sword ran at Andromache, who caught in her arms Laomedon her young
son, and ran into the city crying for aid.

Upon sight hereof the city rose in arms, for to defend Andromache and her
young son from the outrage and daughter: whereupon Menelaus was forced to
retire into his country without atchieuing his purpose. When Horestes also
understood of Pirrhus his being at Delphos, he went with all speed thither,
and meeting him, slew him with his own hands, and caused him to be buried.
Shortly after this, did Horestes recover again his wife, and carried her into
his own Realm. When Pirrhus was dead, Peleus and Thetis took Andromache that
was with child by Pirrhus, with her little son Laomedon, and sent them into
the city of Molossa, where Andromache was delivered of a (...) son, which
she named Achilleides. This (...) when he was grown to years, help his
brother Laomedon to be king of Thessaly, and willed, that for his sake all the
Troyans should be set free. Here the story says, that the sister of king
Menon (which Menon Achilles slew before Troy, and whom king Priamus buried by
his son Troylus) came in very ^^^tly apparel to Troy, and opening her
brothers sepulcher, took out his bones: which so soon as she had, she with
them vanished suddenly, no man knew whither, or which way. And it is said, that
either she was a Goddess, or the daughter of a Goddess.

the Son of Ulysses had a Son by his Wife Nausica, named Deiphebus.

After all these things accomplished, Acastus went and buried his two Sons in
Thessaly, by the consent of Pyrrhus: and when Pyrrhus was promoted to his Royal
dignity, he became enamo^ed of Hermione daughter of Helen, and wife to
Horestes. He be so courted, and allured by so many enticements, that he got
her away from her Husband into Thessaly, and took her to his wife. Horestes was
sore grieved at this injury: yet he durst not assail him with battle in his own
Realm, but said he would ere long be avenged of this indignity, as soon as time
would serve: shortly after that, Pyrrhus went to Delphos, to give thanks unto
his God Apollo, for the good success he had obtained in Thessaly, in revenging
his Fathers death, and getting the Kingdom: and leaving in his Palace behind
him Andromache, sometime the wife of Hector, and Laomedon her young Son, in his
absence it was found, that Andromache was with Child by Pyrrhus, whereat
Hermione took displeasure, and sent word to Menelaus her Father, how Pyrrhus
for the love of Andromache had forsaken her, requesting him, that during the
abode of Pyrrhus at Delphos, he would come and kill Andromache and Laomedon her
Son. At her request Menelaus came, and with a sword ran at Andromache, who
caught in her arms Laomedon he^ young Son, and ran into the City crying for aid.

Upon sight hereof the City rose in arms, to defend Andromache and her young
Son from the slaughter: whereupon Menelaus was forced to retire into his
Country, without atchieving his purpose. When Horestes understood of Pyrrhus
his being at Delphos, he went with all speed thither, and slew him with his own
hands. Thus did Horestes recover again his wife, and carried her into his own
Realm. When Pyrrhus was dead, Peleus and Thetis took Andromache that was with
Child by Pyrrhus, with her little Son Laomedon, and sent them to the City of
Molossa, where Andromache was delivered of a goodly Son, which she named
Achilleides. This Achilleides when he was grown to years, help his Brother.
Laomedon to be King of Thessaly, and willed for his sake, all the Trojans
should be set free. Here the story says, that the sister of King Menon (which
Menon, Achilles slew before Troy, and whom King Priamus buried by his Son
Troylus) came in very costly apparel to Troy, and opening her Brothers
Sepulture, took out his bones: which so soon as she had, she with them vanished
suddenly, no man knew which way. And it is said, that either it was a Goddess,
or the Daughter of a Goddess.

CHAP. XXXI. Of a Vision that Ulisses had in his sleep: and how Thelagonus the
Son of Ulysses by Queen Circe, came to seek Ulysses and slew him, not knowing
who he was.
AS Ulysses was sleeping on his bed, he saw a vision, in which there seemed
before him, a wonderful fair creature, the most beautiful that ever he saw,
which he would fain have embraced, but the Image would not suffer him. And he
going after it, the Image asked him, what he would have: he answered, that he
was desirous to join with it in carnal copulation. Then said the Image: Oh, a
woeful conjunction will this be, for thereupon one of us must dye. Moreover, to
him seemed, that the Image held a Spear, about the head was a pensil cunningly
wrought all over with fishes. And to him seemed, that the Image departed away
and said: this sight betokneth destruction that shall happen to us two. When
Ulysses awaked, he was troubled to think of his dream, and being desirous to
know what it might signify: he sent unto the Soothsayers of his Realm, to
enquire what this Vision might presage: who having considered thereof, said:
that his own Son should kill him. Upon this, he fearing his Son, caused him to
be apprehended and surely kept. Afterward he made him to dwell in a Castle,
that stood alone, where with a few of his trusty Friends and Servants, he spent
the time: and this Castle none might come unto but those few of his own
retinue: and they not to pass or re-passe but at certain times, by a
drawbridge and a wicket, the Castle being watered round about. Now it had so
fallen ^^t before, that in his return from Troy, Ulysses had arrived in an Isle
where Circe was Queen and Governor, which was the cunningest woman in the
world in enchantment.

This Circe by her witchcraft made Ulysses stay with her a time at his return,
and conceived by him a Son, whom she named Thelagonus. And about the time of
Ulysses his dwelling in his Castle: Thelagonus being grown to ripe years, and
being a stout young man, would needs know of his Mother, who was his Father.
After much entreaty she told him, who was his Father, and where he did dwell.

Thelagonus very glad hereof, and desiring to see his Father, traveled
forthwith to Achaia, and hearing where U^isses dwelt, he went thither: and
coming on a Monday morning, he requested those that kept the bridge, that they
would let him go in to speak with Ulisses. The Porters would by no means yield
thereto, but thrust him back churlishly whereat he taking displeasure, struck
one on the neck with his fist, and beat him dead, and seting upon the other,
cast them all off the Bridge, whereupon they made a great cry: insomuch that
the people of the Castle armed themselves, and came and assailed Thelagonus. He
seeing that, stepped to one, and wrung his Sword out of his hand, wherewith he
slew fifteen in short space, and was himself hurt in many places. Hereupon the
uproar grew more and more: and Ulysses doubting it was his Son Thelamonius, who
had broken out of prison, came running out with a dart in his hand, which he
flung at Thelagonus, and hit him, not knowing who he was, and hurt Thelagonus a
little.

Thelagonus feeling himself hurt, flung it again at Ulisses (not knowing who he
was) with so great force, that hitting him, he fell down to the earth. Then
Ulysses being in great pain, (remembering himself of his foresaid Vision,)
demanded of him what he was? saying, I am Ulisses. Thelagonus hearing this,
fell to great lamentation, and said. Alas wretch that I am, I came hither to
see my Father, and to live joyfully with him, and now I have slain him. Thus
saying, he fell down in a swound: and when he was come again to his
understanding, he rent his clothes, beat himself about the face ^^th his fists,
and went to his Father, and fell down weeping before him, and said: I am
Thelagonus thy unhappy Son, whom thou begottest on Queen Circe: I pray the Gods
that they will suffer me to dye with thee.

When Ulysses understood this, he sent for Thelamonius his lawful begotten
Son, who presently coming would have slain Thelagonus, to revenge his Fathers
death. But Ulisses said, not so, for he is thy brother: be ye reconciled
together, and live and love as brethren. Then was Ulysses carried into Achaia:
where within three days he dyed, and was by his Son honorably buried. After
whose death, Thelamonius his Son succeeded in that Kingdom, who kept with
him Thelagonius his brother for the space of a year and a half, making him
knight, and honoring him greatly. At length being often sent for by Circe his
mother, he returned to her into the Isle Aulides, having received many rich
presents at the hands of his brother. And Circe dying shortly after, Thelagonus
enjoyed her Kingdom, and reigned in the said Isle threescore years.
Thelamonius was fourscore and thirteen years old at the death of Ulysses his
father, and reigned afterward, much increasing his Seigniory, threescore and
ten years.

In this wife Dares finished his book of the siege of Troy, and speaks not of
their further adventures: and as much as is contained in the History before
written, is also found to have been recorded by Dictes, the Greek: and in most
things both their Books agree.

Dares in the end of his book writes thus, that the siege of Troy endured for
the space of ten years, ten months and twelve days: and that the number of the
Greeks there slain was eight hundred and six thousand fighting men: and the
number of the Tro^ans, slain in defense of themselves and of their Country, was
six hundred fifty and six thousand fighting men. He says, moreover, that when
Eneas departed from Troy into exile, he carried with him two hundred ships: and
that Anthenor had with him away five hundred Soldiers, and all the rest that
were escaped, went with Eneas.

The said Dares furthermore reports in the latter end of his Book, by whom
the most noble Kings and Princes of the one part and of the other were slain:
and he says that Hector the most famous Prince of Chivalry in the world, slew
with his own hands in good and loyal fight, eighteen Kings: not with treachery
or subtle devises, but by his prowess and valor: the names of which Kings do
here follow; That is, King Archilogus, K. Prothesilaus, K. Patroclus K. Menon,
K. Prothenor, K. Archimenus, K. Polemon, K. Epistropus, K. Ecedius, K. Daccius,
K. Polixenus, K. Phybus, K. Anthypus, K. Cenutus, K. Polibetes, K. Humerus, K.
Fumus and K. Exampitus. And Paris he slew Pallamedes, who was Emperor of all
the Greekish Host, K. Achilles, and at last K. Ajax: and therewithal Ajax slew
him also. Eneas slew K. Amphimacus, and K. Nercus. Achilles slew K. Cupemus, K.
Yponeus, K. Plebeus, K. Austerus, K. Cimoneus, K. Menon, and King Neoptolemus.

Also he slew Hector at unawares, and Troylus, whom he caused his Myrmidons to
beset round about. Pyrrhus the Son of the said Achilles, slew the Queen
Penthasilea in fight: he slew also cruelly and tyrannously, the noble King
Priamus. He slew moreover Polixena, the fairest Maid in the world, Dyomedes
slew King Antipus, K. Escorius, K. Prothenor, and King Obtineus.

Now thus I am come to the finishing of this present book, which I have
translated (though rudely,) out of French into English, at the commandment and
request of my right gracious and redoubted Lady and Mistress, the Lady
Margaret, Duchess of Bourgony Lothericke, and of Brabant, etc. And forasmuch
as I am weary of tedious writing, and worn in years, being not able to write
out several books for all Gentlemen and such others as are desirous of the
same, I have caused this book to be Printed: that being published the more
plentuously, men's turns may be the more easily served. And as for the sundry
Authors that have written of this matter, namely, Homer, Dictes and Dares,
albeit their writings in many circumstances do disagree, yet in describing the
Destruction of Troy, they all affirm it to have been in manner as is said,
utterly ruinated and laid waste for ever, with such a wonderful Effusion of the
blood of so many worthy King, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons and Knights, and
such an exceeding number of soldiers; as here is mentioned.

And look what pleasure or commodity men reap by perusing this Book, let them
transfer the praise and thanks due therefore, (next to almighty God) unto my
foresaid right gracious Lady, who not only caused me to undertake this
translation, but has also bountifully rewarded me for my labors. To whose
good liking I humbly Dedicate this work: beseeching her Grace, and all that
shall read the same, to accept in good part my simple endeavor herein. And I
(most humbly pray unto Almighty God) that the example of these cruel Wars and
dissolation of this famous City, may be a warning to all other Cities and
People, to fly Adultery, and all other vices, the causes of Wars and
Destruction: and that all true Christians may learn to live godlily, and in
Brotherly love and concord together, Amen.

PErgama flere volo, Fata Danais data solo,
Solo capta dolo: capta, redacta solo.
Causa malitalis, Meritrix fuit exitialis:
Foemina lethalis, Foemina plena malis.
Si fueris lota: si vita sequens bona tota:
Si eris ignota, non eris absque nota.
Passa prius Paridem, Paridis modo, Thesea pridem.
Es factura fidem, ne redeas in idem,
Rumor de veteri, faciet ventura timeri,
Cras poterunt fieri, turpia sicut heri.
Scoena quid evadis, morti qui cetera tradis?
Cur tu non cladis, conscia clade cadis?
Foemina digna mori, re-amatur amori priori:
Reddita victori, deliciisque thori.
FINIS.
The Table of the Third Book of the Destruction of TROY.
Chapters. 1. HOw King Priamus re-edified the City of Troy more strong then
ever it was before: of his sons and daughters. And how after many counsels, he
sent Anthenor and Polidamas into Greece, to demand his sister Exione, that Ajax
kept. Pages. ^ Chapters. 2. How King Priamus assembled all his Barons, to know
who he might send to Greece to get again his sister Exione. How Hector
answered: and of his good counsel: how Paris declared to his Father, the Vision
of the Goddess Venus. Pages. 9. Chapters. 3. How Paris and Deiphebus, Eneas,
Anthenor and Polidamas, were sent into Greece: and how they ravished Helen out
of the Temple of Venus, with many prisoners, and riches, and brought them to
Troy, where Paris e^poused Helen. Pages. 17 Chapters. 4. How Menelaus was sore
troubled (...) the Ravishing of Helen his Wife. And how her two Breth^^ Castor
and Pollux, pursued Paris in the Sea: and of their deaths: And of the condition
and manner of the Lords, as well Greeks as Trojans. Pages. 14 Chapters. 5. How
the Kings, Dukes, Earls, and Barons of Greece, assembled with their Navy,
before Athens, to come to Troy: and how many ships each man brought to help K.
Menelaus. Pages. 28 Chapters. 6. How the Greeks sent Achilles to Delphos, to
the God Apollo, to know the end of their War, and how he found Calchas, sent
from the Trojans, that went with them to Athens. Pages. 29 Chapters. 7. How the
Greeks with a great Navy saild toward Troy: and how they arrived at Tenedon
three miles from Troy, which they conquered, and beat down to the earth. Pages.
3^. Chapters. 8. How the Greeks did send Dyomedes and Ulysses again to K.
Priams, to have Helen and the Prisoners, and of their answer. Pages. 35
Chapters. 9. How Agamemnon assembled in council the Greeks to have victuals:
And how they sent Achilles and Telephus to the Realm of Mess, where they slew
King Theutran in battle: And how Telephus was made King: And of the Kings that
came to aid and help King Priamus. Pages. 39. Chapters. 10. Of the coming of
Duke Palamedes, and how the Greeks departed from Tenedon, by the counsel of
Dyomedes, and came and took Land before the City of Troy, and how the Trojans
received them in Battle right vigorously. Pages. 43 Chapters. 11. Of the second
battle before Troy, where were many Kings and Barons slain, by worthy Hector:
and how the Trojans had been victorious of their Enemies, had it not been for
the request of Thelamon Ajax, Cousen of Hector. Pages. 48 Chapters. 12. Of the
first truce of two months: and of the three battles between them, in which
Hector beat Achilles to the ground twice, and after slew K. Prothenor, and cut
him in two. Pages. 58. Chapters. 13. How the Greeks held Parliament how they
might slay Hector, how they returned to the fourth battle, in which Paris and
Menelaus* encountered, and brought King Thoas prisoner to Troy. Pages. 61.
Chapters. 14. How Priamus would have had King Thoas hanged, and how they fought
the fifth battle, in which Hector slew three Kings: and how Dyomedes slew the
Sagitary. Pages. 63 Chapters. 15. Of the Truce between them, after which began
battle again from morn to even, with great damage to both par^ys, but the
Trojans lost more then the Greeks. Pages. 65 Chapters. 16. How the Greeks and
Trojans began the sixth Battle, that dured thirty days, in which were many
Kings and Princes slain on both sides, and how Dyomedes smote down Troylus off
his Horse, and sent it to Briseyda his Love, that received it gladly. Pages. 69
Chapters. 17. How the Greeks and Trojans began the seventh battle, that dured
twelve days, and after began the eighth battle, wherein Hector was slain by
Achilles, and they were driven back into their City by force to their great
damage. Pages. 71 Chapters. 18. Of the rich Sepulture of Hector, and great
lamentations and weepings the Trojans made for his death: and how Palamedes was
chosen Governor, of the Host of the Greeks. Pages. 74 Chapters. 19. How K.
Priamus went to be revenged on the Greeks for the death of his Son Hector: and
of the Prowesses he did: and of the Anniversary of Hector, in which Achilles
was surprised with the love of Polixena, the daughter of King Priamus, in such
wise that he might endure no rest. Pages. 77. Chapters 20. How Achilles sent a
secret Messenger (...) Hecuba Queen of Troy, to request her Daughter Poli^ena,
and the answer: how for the love of her Achilles assembled the Host of the
Greeks and caused them to depart, and make peace with the Trojans. Pages. 79
Chapters. 21. Of the death of Deiphebus, the (...) of Priamus, and how Paris
slew Palamedes: and the (...) chased the Greeks into their Tents, and set fire
on t^ (...): and how Achilles would not go to battle, for the love of Polixena.
Pages. 82. Chapters. 22. Of many battles that were fought on both sides: and of
a certain Truce, of the death of (...) ^roylus, whom Achilles slew against his
promise, and d^^w at his horse-tail through the Host, how Achilles slew King
Menon. Pages. 86. Chapters. 23. How Paris by the persuasion of Hecuba his
mother, slew Achilles and the Son of Duke Nestor in the Temple of Apollo, and
how Paris and Ajax slew each (...) in battle. Pages. 90 Chapters. 24 How Queen
Penthesilea came from ^^azon with a thousand Maidens, to the succor of Troy,
and slew many Greeks, and after was slain by Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles.
Pages. 93. Chapters. 25 How Anthenor and Eneas consulted together to deliver
the City unto the Greeks by Treason, and did it under color of peace: and how
King Priamus withstood them, with some of his Bastards, by great and rude
words. Pages. 96 Chapters. 26. How the Traitor Anthenor bought of the Priest
the Palladium, and gave it to Ulysses: and of the Horse of Brass that was by
the Greeks brought to the Temple of Pallas, being full of men of Arms: and how
the City of Troy was taken and burnt, and the King Priamus slain, etc. Pages.
103. Chapters. 27. Of the dissension that was moved because of the Palladium,
between Thelamon and Ulysses: and how Eneas and Anthenor were exiled out of
Troy (...) how the Greeks returned, and of their adventures. Pages. 109.
Chapters. 28. How K. Na^lus and C^tus his Son did spoil many Ships of the
Greeks in their return, for the death of King Agamemnon, and of the exile of
Dyomedes, and of his calling back Egee his wife. Pages. 113 Chapters. 29. How
Horestes (...) of K. Agamemnon, cruelly avenged himself for the death of his
Father. And how King Ulysses after sundry perilous adventures, returned to his
Country. Pages. 117. Chapters. 30 Of the dealings of Pyrrhus after his return
from Troy: and how Horestes the Son of Agamemnon slew him at Delphos, for that
he had gotten away Her^^one his Wife. Pages. 120 Chapters. 31. Of a Vision that
Ulisses had in his sleep: and how Thelagonus the Son of Ulysses by Queen Circe,
came to seek Ulysses and slew him, not knowing who he was. Pages. 124.
FINIS.

