THE MOST Pleasant and delectable History of Lazarillo de Tormes, a Spanyard:
AND OF HIS MARVELLOVS Fortunes and Adversities.

The second part.

Translated out of Spanish into English, By W. P.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA


Printed at London by T. C. for John Oxenbridge, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Parrot. 159^.

To my very good friend, Master Jonas Tirill of Burstow, all happiness be
wished.
ALthough good will and perfect friendship is not to be requited nor sought
with money, yet such is the exellencie thereof, that it is oftentimes requited
with some ingratitude, wherewith the virtue is much more beautified, as it was
with the good and wise King Don Alonso of Spain: who being given to
understand, that one unto whom he had done great good by preferring him to
honor, besides many liberal gifts, was very unthankful for the same; he
answered in a mild manner, that a great good turn is never requited without
some ingratitude, even so I may compare you in this happiness unto him, and in
unhappiness my self unto the other: who for much good, have returned but ill;
wherefore I am the bolder, being acquainted so well with your good disposition,
to show my self thankful, being well assured that you cannot think of my
service evil, seeing, (as I have said) you have always done well, being
delivered unto me by a Gentleman of mine acquaintance, a small Spanish
Pamphlet, by him new done into English, entitled Lazarillo de Tormes, a
Spanyard, discoursing the many hard fortunes and adversities he sustained in
the Sea, being transformed into a Tuni Fish; though but a toy, yet I assure
you passing pleasant and delectable; which I have adventured to dedicate unto
you: Only craving you will accept it as friendly, as I present it willingly,
and then I have my only request. And so resting in hope of your favorable
acceptance, I commit you to the Almighty, and this poor Lazarillo, to the
friendly Readers censure.

Your loving friend who wishes you all hearts ease. I. O.

How Lazarillo de Tormes, at the importunate requests of his friends, Embarked
himself, to go in the Voyage with the King of Spain, made unto Argel, and
what happened unto him in the same.
YOur worship must understand, that the unfortunate Lazaro de Tormes, being
in this pleasant life, exercising his office, and getting his meat and drink,
(for that God made no such office, and which is much better then the best
four and twenty other offices in Toledo,) and withal, both I and my wife
being well paid, and contented with our new daughter, daily increasing our
household stuff, I for my part being well used, and having two suits of
apparel, one for every day, and the other for the holy days, and my wife as
much, with 24. Roialls of Plate in my purse, I came unto this Town, whither I
should not have come, where at my arriual, I understood the news (as other men
do) of the voyage unto Argel. Whereunto diverse of my neighbors began to
hearken, saying one to the other, let us go thither, for by that voyage we
may come home laden with gold and silver: so that they began to put me into
such a covetous humor, that I imparted the same unto my wife, whereunto she,
being desirous to return back again unto the priest, answered me saying, do
as you think good, but if you go, and that it pleases God to send you good
fortune, I pray you bring me a Moore for my slave, to serve me all my life, and
it shall suffice me, as also I pray you remember to bring some what to marry
this your little daughter, whereunto the Barbery Ducates, wherewith (they say)
those Dogs the Moors are so well stored will not be amiss. With the which
answer, together with the covetous desire I had, I determined (which I should
not have done,) to go on this voyage: From the which my master the Priest
dissuaded me very much, but I would not believe him. To conclude, I having
many miseries more to pass, the^ in former times I had passed, I agreed with a
Knight of the order of Saint John, with whom I was well acquainted, to bear
him company, and to serve him in the voyage, and that he should bear my
charges, with such condition, that whatsoever I could get it should be for my
self. And so there were diverse that got, but it was unto me a great and an
unfortunate misery, which although diverse men felt, yet I dare assure you I
had sufficient for my part. This Knight and I (with diverse others departed out
of this Town, in great Iollitie and much bravery, as in all voyages is
commonly seen, but to avoid tediousness, I will make no rehearsal of that
which happened unto us in our iourny by land, for that it is nothing unto the
purpose, but we were no sonner embarked at Carthagena, in a good ship full of
men, and victuals sufficient, and in company of other ships, but there arose
in the sea the most horrible and cruellest tempest that ever your worship
heard of, whereby there happened the greatest wrack and destruction of men,
that had been seen or known upon the seas long time before: and in this
storm the worst was, that the waves of the sea did us not so much harm, as
our own ships did, one unto the other, because the tempest being by night,
and the cruel waves rising so high, and so big, there was not any of us, that
could see to devise any remedy for our safety, but that whether we would or
not, the ships struck one against the other, in such sort, that with the
blows they forcibly brake and drowned in the sea, with all the passengers. But
for that your worship has (as I said) been informed at large of that which
was happened in that tempest, by such as beheld it and were in the same, and
(as God would escaped,) as also by others that have heard the same delivered
from their mouths, it shall be needless for me to touch any point thereof,
more then of that whereof I my self am able to inform you, as being only he
that saw it, and (which of all the rest that were with us,) saw it best:
Wherein God showed his great mercy unto me, as your worship shall hear by the
sequel.

I speak neither of he Moore, nor yet of the Moore, for the devil take them
all for any that ever I saw, in that voyage: but I beheld our ship broken in
many pieces, I saw the like done by others, I perceived neither mast nor yard
in her, all the deckes broken up, and the upper part clean carried away, at
which sight the Captains and Officers men of quality entered into the boat,
seeking to bestow themselves in other ships, although at that time there
were very few among us that could help them; and left the mean and baser
sort of us within the ship, for that the common saying is, It is better to
leese the worst then the best. We seeing that, committed our souls unto God,
and began to confess our selves one unto the other, because the two Clerks
that were in our ship, naming them selves (as they say) soldiers of Jesus
Christ, went with the Captains, and left us as base companions unto the mercy
of the seas. But I for my part never heard so wonderful a confession, as the
poor men made being ready to die, and I am assured that there was not one
among us at that present that was not half dead, and diverse, which at every
wave of the sea that entered into the broken ship, felt in a manner present
death, in such sort as it might be said (if it were possible) that they were
one hundredth tons, and to say the truth, their confessions were of bodies in
a manner without souls. Among diverse of them which I confessed, there were some
that uttered not one word out of their mouths, but only sighs, and sobbes,
(a thing common unto men troubled and in adversity,) and as much did I unto
them: In the end we being in a manner drowned in our weak ship, and wholly
out of all hope of any remedy or aid to be looked for, I began to lament my
death, and to repent me of my sins, (but much more of my coming thither) and
having recited certain devout Orazons, which I learned in my youth of my first
master, fit to be said at such a time, with the fear and horror of death I
fell into a most horrible and deadly thirst, and considering with my self that
it would soon be quenched with the salt and unsavory water of the sea, it
seemed unto me a point of great inhumanitie to use small charity unto my
self, wherewith I determined, that it were good for me before that evil water
entered into my body, to fill it first with most excellent wine, whereof at
that present there was great store in the ship: which at that time was as well
without a master, as I without a soul, so that with great desire and much
more haste, I began to drink, and with the great thirst and the fear of
death wherewith I was oppressed, together with the extremity thereof, (withal,
I being no scholar but rather a master in that Art,) and the great folly I
conceived at that present, because I perceived not any one desirous to bear me
company, I stood to my tackling so earnestly, and drunk in such manner, and so
much, sometimes resting my self, and then beginning again, that from the head
to the foot, I felt not any part of my sorrowful body, but was all filled
with wine, which I had no sooner done, but the ship brake in pieces, and we all
drowned in the sea, as for my part, I was nothing else but wine: when the ship
suncke it was about two hours after day appearing, at which sight, by reason
of yt wine that wrought in my head, feeling my self wholly under the water,
and perceiving not any means of help, nor knowing what to do, I laid hand on
my sword, which then I had at my side, and therewith I began to sink downward
into the sea. At which time I might perceive great quantity of fishes both
great and little, and of diverse kinds to draw nere unto us, and very nimbly
with their teeth assaild my dead companions, soon tearing and renting their
bodies in pieces: which I beholding, was in great fear they would do the like
to me, if I should stand upon terms with them. Wherewith I left shaking of mine
arms, as those which were drowned in sinking did, thinking thereby to escape
death: but for I could not by any means swim, I sanke downwards into the Sea,
and so labored my heavy body, that I outwent that wicked company and great
multitude of fishes that (at the crack which the ship gave in breaking) came
thither. And in this manner I descending downward into the deep sea, I
perceived coming behind me a great and mighty Army of other Fishes, and
(as I think) they came with great desire to learn some news of me, and with
great have approached nere me, that with their teeth they might tear me in
pieces, and so eat me up: but I perceiving my self so compassed about with
death, with the rage and fear whereof, not knowing how to escape, I began to
skirmish and flourish about me with my sword, which I held naked in my right
hand, for that as yet I had not let it fall, and I played my part therewith so
well, that in short space I made such a riddance of them, laying about me both
on the right side and the left, that in the end they concluded among themselves
to recule back, and for a time to leave me in peace: and letting me rest,
began to busy themselves about the dead bodies of their companions, that I in
defending of my self had slain, (which they presently eat up and devoured):
and surely I did it with little labor, by reason those Fishes having small
means of defense, and their arms much weaker, it lay in me to kill and
destroy as many of them as I would. In the end, a good space after I had left
them, descending and sinking still into the sea, and that so straight and
directly downward, as if my feet being fixed upon some certain thing, my
body had stood upright. In the end I chanced upon a great rock, which stood
in the midst of the deep sea: and as I felt my feet upon the same, I stayed
my self for a time, and began to rest after my great trouble and labor
sustained: which until then, by reason of the alteration that I found in my
self, and fear of death withal, I had no time to think upon. And as it is
a common thing unto all those which are afflicted and wearyed to sigh, being
ready to fetch a great sigh, which cost me full dear: negligently opening my
mouth, (which notwithstanding I shut presently again) the wine having by that
means gotten some vent, it being at the least more than three hours after I
drunk the same, at the issuing forth made place for the salt and unsavory
Water of the Sea, which as then entered into me, causing great pain and torment
in my body, striving with her contrary as then within me. Then I perceived
and saw the wine was the only means that my life had so long been preserved
in the sea, by reason that my body even to the very throat being filled with
the same, the Water of the Sea had no power nor place to enter in. And then
likewise I knew the Prophecy to be true that my master told me of touching
the same, saying unto me in Escalona, that if Wine could ever preserve the life
of man, it should surely preserve mine. Then it grieved me to think upon my
dead companions in the sea, because they bare me not company in drinking:
which if they had done, they surely had been living as well as I, and their
company would have ministered some comfort unto me. I did likewise in my self
lament the miserable case of all such as then were drowned with us, and began
to think with my self, that peradventure although they had drunk as I did,
they would not all have been so wilful and obstinate as my self, because they
were not all Lazaroes de Tormes, who learned the Art at that notable school
of the Tauernes and Cellars of Toleda, in the company of my masters the
Dutchmen. In this manner calling to memory these and many other things, I
perceived a great quantity of Fishes to approach unto the place where I was,
some rising from the bottom of the Sea, others descending downward, and all of
them joining together, besieged me round about where I sat. I saw and knew
very well that they came with an evil intent and meaning: wherewith, having
more fear than will, I began to rise, and with much pain stood upon my
feet, thinking to defend my self against them: but all in vain, being at
that instant in a manner spoiled and stiff with cold, by means of the evil
water which had entered into my body, whereof I was so sick, that I could not
by any means sustain my self, nor yet once lift up my sword for to defend
me. And as I perceived my self to approach so near unto my death, I looked
if I could find any remedy against that misery, and to seek it in my sword
there was no long hope, for the reasons before alleged. Wherefore going upon
the Rock as well as I could, as GOD would I found a little hoale wherein I
entered, and being within, I perceived it to be a Cave made into the Rock:
and although the entry were but straight and narrow, yet was there space
enough within to turn and wind my self, and use my weapons at pleasure:
whereinto there was no other entry but that only which I had luckely found
out.

It seemed the Lord himself had sent me thither, for by that only means I
recovered again some part of my former strength, which before I had almost
utterly lost. Wherewith taking again to my self fresh courage, and reviving
my drouping spirits, I turned my face toward my enemies, placing the point of
my sword at the entry of the Cave, and so began with most fierce Stoccadoes to
defend my Fort.

By that time the whole multitude of fishes had besieged me round about, giving
most great flashes and assaults against me in the water, and approaching very
near unto the mouth of the cave: but such as seemed to be most hardye,
presuming to eat in, I think escaped not scot free. For as I stood directly
with my sword against the entry of the cave, they thinking to enter, fell upon
my sword, and so lost their lives: and others which with great fury approached
near unto me, got their reward with blows. All this notwithstanding, made
them not break up their siege: but in the mean time it waxed dark, and night
approaching, made the fight somewhat to cease, although they left not off many
times to assail me, proouing whether I slept, or if by any means they might
perceive me to be wearied and weak. This thus continuing, poor Lazarus being
in this great extremity, perceiving my self assieged by so many enemies, in
so strange a place, without all remedy or hope of relief: and considering,
that my good conseruator (I mean the wine) began by little and little to
consume within me, in place whereof the salt water entered, and that each hour
I began to wax weak, because it was not possible for me to sustain my self,
my nature being altogether contrary unto theirs, that remained and dwelt in
the water: and that likewise my strength failed me, by reason that of a long
time I had not eaten any thing wherewith to strengthen the same, but to the
contrary, labored and traveled my weary body, as also, because the water
does digest and consume very much: I still looked for no other thing, than
when my sword would fall out of my weak and trembling hands, which should no
sooner be perceived by my enemies, but they would put me to a most cruel and
bitter death, making their bodies my sepulcher. All which by me well weighed
and considered, and on the contrary, not finding any remedy or means of
relief, I turned unto him to whom all good Christians have recourse,
recommending my self unto him that gives aid and relief to all such as
crave it at his hands: that was, the most merciful God our Lord Jesus Christ.
Then I began afresh to sigh, lamenting and bewayling my former sins, asking
mercy and forgiveness for them, and committing my self unto his divine will
and pleasure, I besought him to deliver me from that cruel death: with
promise, that if it pleased him to give me life, I would become a new man ever
after. Then I made my prayers unto the most glorious Saint Marie, his Mother
and our Lady, promising to visit her in her houses of Monferrat, of
Guadalupe, and on the borders of France. After that, directing my supplications
unto all the Saints, but specially unto S. Eli^^us, and unto Monsieur S Amador,
which both have power over the waters. This done, I rehearsed certain
oraisons, as many as I could remember (learned of my master) which with most
great devotion I uttered, besides diverse other prayers, which have force and
power against the perils of the water. Which done, in the end the Lord Jesus,
by the virtue of his passion, and by the force of the Saints prayers, and for
the pity of my great misery, which as then appeared before mine eyes, wrought
in me a most marvelous and rare miracle, although in respect of his mighty
power it seemed nothing: which was, that I being thus in manner without a
soul, sick, and half choked with the great quantity of water, which (as I
said before) had entered into my body, to my no little damage, and likewise
being stiff, and as it were dead with cold, that still assailed me: which, as
long as my preserver the wine remained in his force, I never once did feel. My
sorrowful body being wearied, and as it were broken in pieces, by means of
the anguish and continual persecution thereof, together with the
discontinuance of eating meat, I suddenly felt my self to be changed from the
shape of a man (which I had been, not feeling either hand or foot) unto the
very shape and form of those which had and did at that present besiege me
round about. Whose shape when I perceived my self to be changed into, I
presently knew them to be fishes called a Tonnie, and then I understood how
they sought my death, saying, This is the traitor, and the enemy of our sauery
and most sacred waters: this is the adversary, not only of us, but also of
all other Fishes, which at this present has made such an execution and
slaughter among us, killing and murdering so great multitudes of our nation:
it is not possible for him to escape from hence, but day once appearing we
will be revenged on him. Thus I heard the judgment, which my masters the
fishes pronounced against me, being a Tonny as well as they. In this manner
being changed, I rested and refreshed my self in the Water, taking my breath,
and finding my self as clearly without pain or grief, as if I never had
any, washing my body both within and without with that water, which then and
from that time forward I found to be very sweet and sauerie, viewing and
beholding my self, if I could perceive any part of my body that was not
changed into a Tonnie: and so, remaining in the cave in great ease and
pleasure, I thought with my self, that it would be good for me as soon as day
came to get me out from thence: but then I feared they would know me, and so
my conversion should be manifest unto them. On the other side, I feared my
issuing forth, distrusting in my self, that they could not understand me, and
that I could not be able to answer them unto that which they should ask
me, by which means my secret might be discovered. For although I understood
them very well, and that I perceived my self to be of their form and shape,
yet I greatly feared to be among them. In the end, I determined the best way
for me was, that they should not find me within the cave: for they finding
me not to be of their company, and Lazarus de Tormes not being found, they
will straight judge me to have saved him, and so will demand an account of him
at my hands. For the which cause it seemed best unto me, that I going out of
the cave before it were day, and thrusting my self among them, being so great
a number, peradventure they would not see me, neither yet once find me to be
a stranger: and as I determined with my self, so I put it in effect.

CHAP. II. How Lazarus de Tormes called a Tonny fish, went out of the cave, and
how the Centinells of the Tonny fishes took him, and lead him before the
General of the Army.
IN skipping out of the cave and leaving the rock, I was presently desirous to
prove my new language, and began with a loud voice to say, I dye, I dye. Those
words scarce uttered by me, the Centinell which held the watch over the poor
sinner Lazaro de Tormes, came unto me, and standing about me, asked me whom I
served. Sirs, said I, I serve the Fishes, and those which are called the
valiant Tonnyes. Then said they, for what cause did thou cry out so loud?
what is it that thou have seen or felt in our adversary, whereby thou art so
altered and perplexed, that thou know not under what Captain thou seruest?
I said they should bring me before the General of the Army, and there they
should know that which they demanded. Presently thereupon one of the Tonnyes
willed ten of the rest to bring me unto the General: mean while he stayed
behind keeping the watch, with the number of ten thousand Tonnyes at the
least. I was exceeding glad to perceive that they did understand me, and said
unto my self, He that showed me this great grace, makes no man lame.

Thus we marched, and at last as day began to appear we approached near
unto the place where the great Army lay, whereas I perceived such an
innumerable number of Tonnyes, that I was abashed at the sight. As soon as
they knew those which led me, they suffered us to pass forward: and being
entered into the Generals lodging, one of my guard making humble reverence,
declared unto him, where and in what manner they had found me, and that I being
asked by Captain Licio what I was, I answered him, that they should bring me
before the General: and for that cause they said they had brought me unto his
Honor. The Captain general was an excellent Tonnie, fiercer and greater in
body than the rest: he asked me, who I was, what was my name, under what
captain I served, and what I would have, seeing I desired to be brought before
him? Whereat I stood in a manner confused, not knowing what name to say I had,
although I had been rightly baptized, unless I should say my name was Lazaro de
Tormes: neither could I better tell from whence I was, nor under what Captain
I served, by reason I was but newly transformed, nor knew not the seas, neither
yet the large territories, and the particular names of the same: in such sort,
that letting pass some of the questions by the General propounded unto me, I
answered him thus. My Lord, your honor being so valiant, as it is well known
throughout the seas, it seems a great disgrace unto your Honor and us all,
that one miserable weak man should defend himself so long against so puissant
and mighty an Army: and the more, considering his weak estate and ability,
and the great power of the Tonnies. Saying further, seeing that I am one of
your Honors subjects, and at your commandment, and of your Army, I here
present my self, with promise to get and deliver unto you his Arms, and other
things that he has: which if I do not, I desire for my reward that you
command me presently to be cruely executed as a traitor. Yet whatsoever I
said, I was sure I made him no promise to deliver Lazaro de Tormes unto him,
left I should bring a fool to bed. This point proceeded not of mine own
mother wit, but I learned it of my master at school. Whereat the General
took great pleasure to see me offer my self unto such a piece of service: by
which means he desired not any farther matter of me, but presently making me
answer said. It is very true that to avoid the death of my soldiers, I
determined to hold a siege about that traitor, and to take the man: but if (as
thou say) thou do adventure thy self to enter the cave, thou shall be well
rewarded for thy labor: although it would grieve me much, that venturing thy
person in the Kings service and mine, thou should loose thy life, as others
have done before thee: because I esteem much, and make great account of my
valiant and stout Tonnyes, and such as are more hardy than the rest, I desire
to preserve them before others, as all good Captains ought to do. My Lord,
said I, let not your excellency stand in fear of any danger that may happen
unto me, for I hope to bring the matter to effect without the loss of one drop
of my blood. Seeing it is so said he, it is surely a great piece of service,
for the which I mean to recompense thee well: and for that it is day already,
I am desirous to see how thou will accomplish that which thou have promised.
Thereupon he presently sent unto all the Officers of the Field, that they
should march forwards unto the place where the enemy lay. It was a wonderful
thing to see so great and mighty a camp to remove, and I suppose, that
whosoever had seen them, would have been abashed. The General caused me to go
on the one side by himself, by the way asking me what order I meant to hold in
the entering of the cave. I told him counterfetting and faining many stratagems
and devices. Mean time we approached near unto the place where the Sentinels
stood about the Rock, and to Captain Licio, that had sent me unto the
General: who at that time was in very good order about the rock, holding
each place about the cave straightly besieged. And yet all this
notwithstanding, not one of them durst once be so hardy as to approach near
unto the entry of the same, by reason that the General had sent special
commandment to the contrary, thereby to avoid the damage that Lazarus did
unto them: because that at such time as I was converted into a Tonny fish, I
let the sword stand upright in the entry of the Cave, and in such manner as I
held it in my hands when I was a man, which the Tonnyes saw, fearing that
their enemy held it in his hands, and that he stood right before the entry
of the cave. As we approached near unto the place, I said unto the General,
it were good he should command those that held centinell and siege about the
cave to depart, and that he with all the rest should withdraw themselves from
thence; which was presently done. I did that, because they should not perceive
the little labor I had to enter into the cave. Then I (being alone) gave great
and lively flashes in the water, and skipping up unto the mouth of the cave, I
made a show of some great thing I meant to do: mean time that I did this, the
report went among them, that I had begun to enter into the cave, but said they,
he will be slain as well as others (altogether as hardy and bold as he) have
been: let him alone, for assure your selves, you shall see his lustines well
cooled in the end. In the mean time I made show as though some resistance had
bin made against me out of the cave, and that the enemy thrust at me, as he
had done at others, whereat I made as though I skipped with my body from the
one side to the other. And as the Army stood in this amaze, they had not the
wits to perceive that which in truth was not to be perceived: sometime I
approached unto the cave, and assailed it with most great force, making as
though I fought, and then again I retired as I did before: which I did only
to make a show of great matter, where none was. After I had done this three or
four times, standing somewhat distant from the cave, I began to roar with a
loud voice, to that end the General and the whole Army might hear me, saying:
O miserable man, think thou that thou can defend thy self against the
great power of our puissaunt Lord and and King, and against his valiant
Captain general, with those of his mighty Army? Think thou to escape
from hence, without being punished for thy great boldness, and the great
murders, which by thy means have been done upon our friends and companions?
Yield, yield thy self (I say) a prisoner unto the valiant and great General,
and it may be he will be merciful unto thee. Yield thine Arms, which have
so well served thee at this present, and come forth of thy strong Hold wherein
thou art, for it will little avail thee to tarry there, and put thy self
into his power, with whom for power none within the whole compass of the seas
may once compare. I, (as I say) giving these great and threatening speeches
unto poor Lazarus, and all to fill the ears of the hearers thereby to
encourage them, as men are accustomed to do, being a thing wherein they take
much pleasure: a Tonny came unto me from the General, willing me to come
presently unto him: with whom I went, and at my approaching, I found both him
and all the rest almost dead with laughter, and such was the noise that they
made, that one could not hear the other by means thereof: but as I appeared
before him, being much amazed at such an alteration, the General commanded
that each man should be quiet: whereat some silence was made, although the
most part of them began again to laugh, till at the last, with much pain, the
General said unto me: Companion, if thou hold no other method in entering
the Fort of our Enemy, than that thou have already showen, neither shall thou
accomplish thy promise, nor I be any thing the wiser in standing to trust upon
thee: which makes me the more to suspect it, in that I have only seen thee
to assail the entry of the Cave, and yet thou did not enter: and more, that
thou beginnest to persuade our adversary by speech, which every one can do
as well as thou. So that as far as I and these the rest of my Campanie can
perceive, thou would be very glad to be well rid of so dangerous an action.
Whereby it seems most apparent and evident unto us, that all this time is but
lost, and these words spent vainly to the wind, because I am certain by this
means thou can not in a thousand years accomplish that which thou desire,
or have said that thou could do: and for this cause we laughed at thee,
and surely our laughter is not without just cause, to see thee stand prating
unto him, as if thou were some jolly fellow: and then they all began again to
laugh at me. With this I found mine own want, and said within my self, If God
had not preserved me to some other end than to feed those fools, the
unaccustomed manner of behavior that I used as a Tonnie, would have been cause
of my decay: which was specially by reason that I had only their form and
not their nature. But I seeking to amend mine error, answered: My Lord, when
any man is desirous to effectuate that which he has in mind to do, it
happens unto him as it does unto me. Whereat the General and all the rest
began again to laugh, saying, Alas poor man thou art deceived, for thou
should have answered unto me (as it is true) that thou fear, that in
stead of renting his clothes, he will tear thy body. With that he left off
speaking for that time. Wherewith I seeing that still my want of behavior
appeared, and perceiving that with a few more of such checks I might soon be
mated, I began also to laugh with them for company, but God knows I grinned
with no small fear, which at that time I had: and therewith I said unto the
General, My Lord, it may please you not to think that my fear is such as
some of you do presume, because that having to do with a man, you think that
the tongue utters that which the heart means: but it seems unto me, that
I stay over long to accomplish my promise, and to take vengeance in your
behalf of this our enemy, wherefore with your Honors license I would
willingly crave that I might return to make an end of my enterprise. Thou
have thy request said he. Then I with no little shame and fear returned
toward the cave, thinking thereafter (as it touched me near) to be wiser and
circumspecter in my speech. And approaching unto the Cave, I made as though I
had been stricken, and faining to retire, I skipped sodeinly unto the entery of
the hole, and took that with my mouth, which at other times I used to do with
my hands: which done, I studied, thinking with my self, whether it were best
for me to enter into the Cave, or to go and deliver the Sword unto the
General, to whom I had promised the same. In the end I considered, that if I
should go in, I might peradventure be accused of theft, saying, that I had
eaten him, seeing he was not there to be found, which had been a thing
worthy of punishment. At the last I turned my self unto the Army, the which I
prayed to help me, because they had seen me recover the sword, and yet to
show more courage, having gotten it upon the rock, then when I took it at
the mouth of the Cave, I skirmished with the same, wreathing and turning my
mouth, looking on all sides both backward and foreward, and coming unto the
General, with humble salutation, holding the sword as well as I could, (by the
hilts) in my mouth, I said; Valiant Captain, Behold here the Arms of our
cruel enemy, from this time forth there is no cause of fear, why we should
not enter into the Cave, seeing he has not any thing wherewith to defend the
same. You have (said he) done like a valiant Tonny, and assure your self you
shall be well rewarded for so great a piece of service, and for because with so
great valor and hardiness, you have gotten the sword, and that it seems
unto me, you can better skill of it then the rest of us, I pray you hold it
still until we have gotten this unhappy and wicked traitor into our hands.
With that an infinite number of the Tonnies went unto the mouth of the Cave, but
yet not one of them durst be so bold to enter into the same, because they
feared that he was not without a poniard, then I proffered my self to be the
first that would venture for to enter, so that some of them would follow and
assist me: and this I desired, only because I meant to have witnesses of my
innocence, but such was the fear which they had of Lazarus, that not one of
them sought to follow me, although the General promised great gifts unto him
that should second me. The thing standing in this point, the General asked
me, what I thought best to be done therein, seeing not one of them was
desirous to bear me company in that dangerous entrance. I answered, that for
his service I would venture to enter therein my self alone, so they would
assure me the entry, and that they should not fear to stand by me. He said
it should be so, and if so be that those which were there durst not do it, he
promised to follow me himself. In the mean time Capiaine Licio came unto us,
and said that he would enter in with me: wherewith I began to skirmish on all
sides of the cave with my sword, and to give diverse fierce pricks with the
same, and at the last skipped in, crying with a loud voice, Victoria, Victoria,
God save the the great sea, with her great and puissant inhabitants of the
same, and confound those which dwell upon the Land. With these cries (although
but full evil fauouredly uttered) Captain Licio (of whom I spoke before)
entered after me, who at that day wan much renown, and recovered with me much
credit, in showing himself so hardy and valiant above the rest: yet it
seemed unto me, that one witness was not sufficient to discharge me, and
therefore not leaving the entry of the cave, I desired more help: but all in
vain was my request, for the devil take them all, not one of them durst once
venture to enter. And surely they were not greatly to be blamed therein, for I
assure ye in my conscience that I my self should have done as much, if I had
thought the thing to be as they took it, (for what should a man do but
speak the truth): but for me, I entered therein, as into mine own house,
knowing very well before, that there was not so much as a snayle within the
same. Then I began to animate them thereunto, saying, O mighty, great and
valiant Tonnyes, show forth this day your force and accustomed boldness, seeing
that such an occasion is offered, whereby you may win honor and renown. Are
you not ashamed to show so little courage? Know ye not that your Enemies will
from henceforth esteem but little of ye, when they shall see and understand
your small courage? With these and other things spoken unto them by me, the
General himself (although with more shame than otherwise) entered in, crying,
Peace, peace: by which words I understood very well, that he brought not all
in with him, seeing that in time of so great wars, he proclaimed peace. As
soon as he was entered, he willed the rest to enter, which I think entered full
evil against their wills: but when they perceived not poor Lazarus, nor yet
any defense against them, although I gave great blows and thrusts against the
sides of the cave with my sword, they were all amazed. And the General was
ashamed of the small company that approached to help me and Captain Licio,

CHAP. III. How after that Lazarus with all the Tonnyes had entered in the
cave, and finding nothing therein but Lazrroes clothes, there entered so many,
that they thought to be smothered therein: and what remedy Lazarus devised for
the same.
SEarch having been made round about the Cave, we found the apparel of the
valiant Tonny Lazarus de Tormes, for they were left behind me when I was
turned into a fish: yet when I saw them I was in no small fear, doubting least
my poor body had been still within them, and that the foul only had been
turned into a Tonny: but as God would I found not my self there, and then I
knew assuredly, that both in body and soul I was turned into a fish. Yet I
was not well in my mind, because nevertheless I felt no small pain, and it
grieved me in my very flesh, to see those garments that had fitted my body
so well being a man, to be so injuriously torn and plucked in pieces by
those which did it with so good a will, and yet I was constrained to do the
like my self, because I would not seem to vary from those of my company,
thereby offering occasion to be perceived. At this fight the General and the
rest being astonished, and looking round about very circumspectly, yet not
without fear, although they desired to meet with that which they found,
after that they had well searched and compassed the little Cave, the Captain
General spoke, asking me what I thought as touching the not finding of our
adversary there. My Lord said I, without doubt, I think verily this was no
man, but rather some devil, which took the shape of a man upon him, for our
destruction and damage; for that who ever saw, or heard it reported, that the
body of a man could sustain it self so long time under the water, or yet
could do as this man has done, and in the end holding him enclosed in such
a place as this is, and standing so near as we did, he to have escaped in the
sight of us all. I having said my opinion, and being ready to make an end
thereof, there happened a greater danger unto us, which was, that as the
Tonnies that were without, began to enter into the Cave, they came in so fast,
perceiving themselves to be delivered of their enemy, and to get part of the
spoil, as also to be revenged of the murders, he had committed upon their
companions and friends, that when we looked about us, the Cave was so full,
that from the very bottom unto the top, men could scarce find any space
within the same, but that all was full of Tonnies, and so heaped one upon the
other, that we were almost all smothered to death: for as I said before, there
was no end of their entering in, until such time as the General began to
devise how he might remedy the matter, in such sort, that he perceiving the
necessity of the case, and the great peril wherein we stood, said unto me,
My stout and valiant companion, what means shall we find for to get out from
hence with our lives, seeing as thou seeest the danger begins more and more
to increase, and yet we are all in a manner smothered to death? My Lord said I,
the best remedy will be, if these which are here before us could give us
place, that I might get unto the entery of the Cave, and defend it with my
sword that no more might enter in, these that are in might go forth, and we
likewise with them, al without danger. But that is impossible, because there
are so many Tonnies upon us, and you shall see, that all this notwithstanding,
they cannot let, but that still there will more enter in, because that he which
is without, thinks that those that are here within, are dividing the spoils,
and desire their part thereof, so that there is but one only remedy to help
us: which is, if for to escape, your honor think it good that some of these
that are within should die, because that to make room for your honor it
cannot be done without hurt unto the rest: seeing it is so (said he) it is
good to save the best and loose the worst, that all the rest may rejoice.
Seeing that you (said I) does command it as having authority, it may please
your honor to discharge me in this action from all damage that may happen unto
me thereby. There shall not only (said he) not any harm be done unto thee, but
also I promise thee, that for thy pains thou shall be well rewarded: for in
such extremities it is a great benefit unto the army that the Captain should
be saved, and I had rather save one scale of my self then any subject under me.
O Captains said I unto my self, which make small account of other men's lives,
so you may save your own, many there be that do as this Captain does, but how
far different are such men's actions from that which I have heard reported of
one Paulus Decius, a noble Roman Captain, when the Latins conspired against
the Romans, and both the armies being ready to join, the night before the
battle should be, the said Decius dreamed, that it was ordained by the Gods,
that if he died in the battle, the Romans should overcome and get the
victory against the Latins, and if otherwise he were saved and escaped, then
the Romans should be overthrown, and the first thing he did, (when the
battles began to join) was to set himself in such a dangerous place, that
he could not by any means escape with his life, because the Romans should be
victors, and so they were: but our great General Tonney, did not follow him
in this point. Then I considering of the security which he promised me, and
the great necessity that urged me thereunto, together with the means I then
might have to be revenged of the evil entertainment and strange lodging
wherein these wicked and perverse Tonnies had put me. I began to flourish with
my sword, and to strike the best I could both on the left and on the right
side, saying, Forth, forth, you indiscreet Tonnies, which smother our noble
Captain in this Cave, and then striking and thrusting both backward and
forward, in a short time, I dispatched no small number of them, not regarding,
or respecting any one, but only Captain Licio, who for that I perceive his
good will toward me in entering of the Cave, I bare some affection unto him,
and to say truth I loved him very well, whereby I lost nothing, as hereafter
shall be shown: At the which sight, those that were within the Cave, seeing
the great slaughter, began to dislodge, and look with how great a force
they entered, they issued forth with a greater. Which news when those that
were without knew, and saw some of their companions issue forth bleeding, as
being wounded, they sought no more to enter, and by that means they left us
alone with the dead Tonnies, whereby I placed my self at the mouth of the
Cave, and then began to give diverse fierce thrustes out of the same. And in
my opinion I thought my self as nimble with my sword which then I held in my
teethe, as when I used to hold it in my hand.

After that, I having dispatched our General and those that were with him out
of trouble and smothering, they began to suppe of the water which at that
present time was turned into blood: And likewise to tear, rent, and eat,
those miserable dead Tonnies that I had slain. Which I perceiving, began to
bear them company, and yet it seemed news unto me to handle them in that
sort, although I had eaten of them before in Toledo, but not so fresh as I
eat them then: and in that manner I filled my self with great store of sweet
and sauourie Fish, not letting to do it, notwithstanding all the great and
terrible threatenings, that those which were without made against me for the
damage I had done among them. Having ended our banquet, when the General
thought it convenient time, we issued forth, I giving him to understand of the
evil will and meaning that those which were without had against me, that his
excellency might provide for my safety and security. He going forth well
satisfied and filled, (at which time they said it is best having to do with
great lords) caused it to be proclaimed openly, that whosoever were enemies
either in word or deed unto the valiant stranger Tonny, that they should die
for it, and that they and their heirs should be always holden and accounted
for Traitors, and that their goods should be confiscated unto the Kings use:
for if the said stranger Tonny did them any damage or hurt, it was because
they were Rebels, and had broken the Commission of their Captain, and by
their negligent oversight, had put him in great danger of death: With which
Proclamation every one seemed to be content, and agreed that those which died
in the Cave, by that means had well deserved the same, and that the living
should from thencefoorth put up the quarrel, and live in peace.

This done, the General caused all the other Captains, masters of the
field, and under Officers, which had any charge of the Army, to be called
together, willing as many of them as had not been within the Cave, to go in,
and to divide the spoil they should find among them, which was soon done,
for there were so many that they had scarce every one a morsel of a Tonny.
They coming forth, because they though it good, that every one should have
his part of the spoil, proclaimed openly, that each one might enter who
would, which the common sort did soon perform, for any thing that was to
be found there, unless it were certain drops of blood, and Lazarus
clothes.

Here I have set down for a perpetual memory, the cruelty of these Fishes,
and how far differente the state of man is, from this of theirs. For put the
case that here upon earth there be diverse men to be found dwelling, which
seek after some cunning sort, and in some covetous manner to devour their
neighbors goods, which I doubt are more to be found at this present, then
has been heretofore, by reason that men's consciences are now far larger than
they have been in times past, yet there are none such to be found that are so
void of reason or humanity, that they do, or would eat their neighbors
flesh. Wherefore such men as daily do complain of certain wrongs and injuries
done unto them upon earth, let them (say I) come unto the seas, and they shall
soon perceive those things to be bread and honey which they complain of, in
respect of that which is to be found among the fishes.

CHAP. IIII. Lazarus shows what an evil reward the General of the Tonnies
gave him for his service, and of the friendship he entered into with Captain
Licius.
BVut returning unto the matter, the next day after, the General being in his
Chamber, took me aside, and said unto me, Valiant and stout stranger Tonny, I
have determined with my self, that thy good services and counsels shall be
well rewarded, for if such as thou art serving as thou haste done, should not
be rewarded, there would none be found in great armies, that would venture
their persons in any dangerous service: wherefore in respect thereof, thou
shall from henceforth be assured of our favor and good will, and withal thou
shall be freely pardoned, of all the murders and massacres by thee committed
upon our soldiers and companions within the Cave, and in memory of the good
service thou did in my behalf, delivering me from the peril of death, thou
shall possess and enjoy (as thine own proper good) this sword wherewith thou
have done us so much damage, because I see thou can manage it so well, (but
yet with this prouiso,) that if with the same thou shall hereafter commit any
violence, or do any wrong unto our subjects, and the natural Tonnies of our
sovereign Lord the King, thou shall die for it, and herewith it seems unto
me thou art well rewarded, and from henceforth thou may return unto the
place from whence thou did come. And so showing me no great good countenance,
he left me, and went unto the rest of his company. Wherewith hearing him utter
such speeches unto me, I was so astonished, that I stood almost without either
sense or feeling, because I looked (at the least) he should have made me some
great man (I should have said a Tonny) for my good service, giving me a charge
during my life of some great Signiory in the sea, as he before had offered unto
me. O Alexander said I unto my self, thou did distribute and spread among thy
soldiers such spoils and riches as thou wonst from thine enemies: I have
likewise heard of Caius Fabritius, a Roman Captain, in what manner he
rewarded and crowned those which first did adventure themselves to enter into
the Listes: and thou Gonzago Hernandes General of the Spaniards, did give
other manner of rewards unto such as seeking to resemble the brave soldier in
the service of their King, and to augment thine honor, did put themselves into
all hazards of the field: for that all such as did serve and follow thee, to
how many of them did thou give great rewards? that of poor and needy
soldiers thou made them both valiant and rich: not as this unworthy Tonny
does, rewarding me with that, which in Cocodouer had cost me but three royalls
and a half. Let those therefore that complain of great Lords upon earth,
comfort themselves herein, seeing that in the deep seas there are such small
rewards bestowed by great Lords. I standing in this sort, thus pensive and sad,
Captain Licio perceiving it, came unto me, and said: Sir, to such as trust in
great Lords and Captains, it happens oftentimes as it does unto thee: for
they, standing in need of other men's aid, do make many great promises, but
being delivered out of danger, they do not once so much as remember their
promise made. I my self am witness of thy great and good service, and of all
thou have so valiantly done, as he that has been present by thee, and I see
likewise the evil reward that thy valor and prowess has received, besides
the great peril wherein thou art: wherefore I am desirous thou should
understand, that many of these which are here present before thee, do among
themselves conspire thy death. Therefore I will not that thou depart out of my
company, for that I am bound to do for thee as for mine own child, and to
favor and aid thee: not only with mine own, but also with the aid of my
friends, to the uttermost of our powers, for it should be a most great damage,
to loose so valiant and hardy a fish as thou art. For the which his great
courtesy, I rendered him most hearty thanks, withal accepting of his gentle
and courteous offer made unto me: in lieu whereof I presented my small ability
unto him, offering to be ready at all times to do him what service I could:
and wherewith he seemed to be so well content, that presently he called unto
him fifteen hundred Tonnyes of his Regiment, willing them from that time
forward to take charge to guard me, and to bear me company in such manner as
unto himself: so that neither night nor day they did once depart from me, and
that they did very willingly, for there were not many among them that hated
me: and as I supposed, there was no small number among the rest of the great
Army, which did bear me good will, by reason that they beheld me at such
time as we fought to show forth my great valor and force. In this manner
Captain Licio and I entered into league and friendship, which we showed by no
small signs one unto the other, as after you shall hear. Of him I learned
many things touching the customs and manners of the inhabitants of the Seas,
together with the names and provinces, kingdoms and signiories of the same,
and the names of the Lords and Governors thereof. In such sort, that in short
space he made me as experient in them, or rather more, than the natural
Tonnyes themselves: for that I could better discourse upon them, than they
were able to do. Not long after, our Camp brake up, and the General willed
that each Captain should depart, and that within two months after all the
Captains should repair again unto the Court, for it was the Kings pleasure.
Wherewith my friend and I departed, and all his Company, which (to my
judgment) were about ten thousand Tonnyes: among the which there were not
above ten Females, and those were laboring Tonnyes, such as among Soldiers
are accustomed to wash and get their living. There I saw the devises that those
Fishes used to find out meat to sustain themselves: which is in this manner.
They scatter and spread themselves abroad on all sides in certain places, each
Company holding the circuit of a league and more, and if it fortune that two
Companies do chance to meet, they turn their heads one against the other,
making forward to join together, and all the Fishes which they take in the
midst between them, are sure to die, and to be torn in pieces with their
teeth. And in this manner do they hunt twice or thrice every day, as they
chance to issue forth. Thus we filled our bellies with great store of sweet
and sauerie fishes, verefying the old Proverb, which says, that the great
fishes devour the small: for that if in our circuit we found any greater
fishes than our selves, we presently gave them a pasport, suffering them to
pass away without any brabling, unless they desired to remain with us,
helping us to kill and eat other Fishes, according unto the common saying, He
that takes no pains for his living, is not worthy to eat. At one time among
others, we took certain Cuttle fishes, whereof, the biggest among the rest I
saved and kept for my slave, and made him my page to bear my sword: by which
means I had my mouth at liberty, and not cumbred with the same, and my Page
turning one of his sins backward (in manner of a ring) carried it very
easily at his pleasure, ietting and bragging among the rest. In this manner we
traveled for the space of eight Suns, (for that in the Sea the days are so
called) at the end whereof we drew near unto the place, where my friend and
those of his Regiment kept their wives and children: of whom we were received
with most great joy, and every one went home unto his own house, leaving me
in the Captains lodging, being after the sea manner very stately.

We being entered into the Captain Licioes house, he said thus unto his Wife:
Gentlewoman, the gaynes which I bring you of this Voyage, is to have gotten for
my friend this gentle Tonny, which here you see. The which purchase I make no
small account of: wherefore I pray you let him be welcome unto you, and give
him as good entertainment, as you were accustomed to do unto my brother: for
therein you shall do me a singular great pleasure, because I honor and
admire his virtues.

She was a very fair Tonny, and with a very good grace made him answer:
Sir, assure your self it shall be done as you require, and if any default be
found in me, it shall not be for want of good will. Whereat I made an humble
reverence, and fell down, desiring her to give me her hands that I might
kiss them: which I spoke some what softly, so that (as it chanced) they
neither saw nor heard my folly. But I said unto my self, what a fool am I, to
desire to kiss her hands, that has nothing but a tail? The Tonny gave me a
sweet kiss, willing me to rise up, and so I was most courteously received of
her: and offering unto her my service, it was very well accepted of, and
received so wise an answer of her again, as of so honorable a Gentlewoman
might be given. In this manner we remained there certain days in great
pleasure, I being very well used and entertained by those Gentlemen, and
waited upon by his servants. In the mean time I taught the Captain to play
at sense, although I never had learned in all my life: and yet I did it very
nimbly with my sword, which he praised very much as likewise a brother of his
called Melo, a very brave Tonny. Resting thus at mine ease, one night being
alone in my bed, and thinking upon the great favor and friendship I had found
in this fish, my great friend, desiring if occasion might be offered to do
somewhat for him, as part of a recompense of the great debt which in that
behalf I ought him: at the last there came unto my mind a great service that
I might do, which in the morning I imparted unto him: which he took in good
part, because it was not to be disliked, and which stood him in great stead, as
hereafter shall be showen. The thing was thus, that I seeing him to be so well
affectionate to arms, told him that he should do well to send to the place
where our shipwreck happened, and that there he should find many swords,
spears, ponyards, and other manner of Arms, and that they should bring away
as many as they could find: for that I was minded to take the charge upon
me to learn our Company the managing of them with much dexterity: which if
I brought to pass, his Company should thereby be the most strong and valiant
above all others, and which the King and all the Sea would most account of,
because that by that means it would be more worthy for strength than all the
rest joined together, whereby he might obtain much honor and profit. This
seemed unto him to be the counsel of a very good friend, for the which he gave
me most hearty thanks: and presently thereupon putting my counsel and advice
in effect, he sent in all have his Brother Melo with six thousand Tonnyes
unto the place by me alleged, who very shortly after with great diligence
returned again, bringing with them an infinite number of swords and other
weapons, whereof diverse were all rustie: which should seem to have lain in
the sea since the time that the valiant Captain Don Luigo de Moncada suffered
shipwreck in that place. The Arms being brought, they were divided amongst
those Tonnnyes that seemed unto us to be the most nimble and of best courage
among them. And then the Captain on the one side, his Brother on the other,
and I as the chief Master of Defense, taught such as desired to be expert in
their weapon: so that we employed our whole time in learning them to manage
their Arms, and to defend themselves therewith. Whereby in short space there
were some among them that could give the thrust, the cross blow, and the
reuerse: as for the rest that dealt not in their weapons, we appointed them to
hunt and seek for victuals: and the women we learned to scowre our weapons,
by a fine invention that I devised: which was that they should thrust them into
the sand, and draw them forth again so long, until they waxed bright. In such
manner, that our company being joined altogether, he that should behold that
part of the sea, would think he saw a great battle in the water. In the
end, by this means there was almost not one of the Tonnies but began to be
very expert in his weapon. Hereupon we entered into counsel, and in the same it
was agreed, that we should make a perpetual league and amity with the cuttle
fishes, whereby they might come and live among us, because with their large
sins they might do us great service to bear our Arms: and so it was done,
and they were glad of it, because they saw we took them for our friends, and
maintained them: the which (as I said before) might serve our turns in that
point without any pain or trouble unto them. About this time, the space of
two months appointed by the General for the Captains repair unto the Court
began to draw near: at the end whereof, the Captain general sent
commandment that they should come thither. Whereupon Licio began to make
preparation for his journey, and between him and I it was debated, whether it
should be good for me to go with him to the court, to do my humble duty unto
the king, that he might know me: but we found it not convenient, considering
the General seemed to bear me no great good will, and that he had expressly
commanded me to return unto mine own country: for the which cause, the
matter being thoroughly debated in the presence of Melo, brother unto Captain
Licio (a Tonny of singular good wit) and of the no less wise Tonny his wife,
their advice at ye present was, that I should stay there with her. Whereupon he
determined to go in all speed, and to take but few of his men with him, and
being at the Court, he would inform the king of me, and of my great valor, and
upon the Kings answer we should proceed. This being agreed upon among us, the
good captain Licio departed on his journey with very near a thousand Tonnies,
his brother Melo and I with all the rest staying at home in our lodgings: and at
his departure from me, taking me aside he said unto me, My very friend, I must
of force let you understand, that I depart from hence with no small grief, by
reason of a dream I had this last night, I pray God it fall not out to be
true: but if to my evil fortune it should happen to be true, I pray you that
you will take it in good part, and think upon that which you have given me in
charge, and hereof I pray you desire not to know any farther at this present,
because it is neither convenient for you nor me. I besought him much to declare
the same unto me, and the rather, because at his departure from his wife, his
brother and the rest, he gave me a nod with his head, (although very sadly)
leaving me very sorrowful and heavy. He being gone, I could not but think
upon the matter, and diverse things ran in my mind touching the same: and among
the rest, I supposed this one to be it, ye peradventure he unto whom I was so
much beholding might think, that the beauty of his wife, (which most commonly
is not matched with the greatest honesty) would blind me so much, that I
could not see how the sea does abhor so great a wickedness. But that good law
is at, this day much corrupted on the earth, and in the sea it is the like, but
it is no marvel. In this conceit I continued long, and in the end I devised
a mean whereby he might be assured of me, and my loyalty no way suspected:
which was thus, that I and her brother in law being with her, (after some
salutations and comforts offered unto her on our parts, thereby to put her out
of the melancholy humor which we perceived to be in her, because of her
husbands departure, and the rather to behold him so sad and heavy, although
that he hid it both from her and me at his departure from us) I told Melo that
I desired to be his guest, if be thought it good, because I could not be
merry, being always in company of women: and rather than I should be
troublesome unto her, I would leave the house. She was presently ready to make
me an answer, saying, that if she found any means of comfort, she thought it
would be by reason that I was in her house, and at her commandment, she
knowing very well the great love and affection that her husband bare unto me,
and that at the time of his departure from her, he gave her not any greater
charge, than of the care that she was to have of me, although I suspected not
what the cause was: for our thoughts did rather disagree. In the end, I
thinking that it might be with the Tonny fishes, as it was with me in the same
case, touching my wife Eluira, and my master the Priest, could never be in
quiet, but desired rather to be with her brother in law, and whenever I went
to visit her, I brought him always with me.

CHAP. V. Lazarus tells what happened unto Captain Licio his friend at the
Court, by means of the Captain general.
BEing sometimes hunting, and sometimes exercising our weapons, within eight
days after my friends departure, news was brought us, which made us the most
sorrowful fishes in the sea. Being thus, that when the Captain general used
me so hardly, as I told you before, he willed me to depart out of the Army,
saying, that those Tonnies which found themselves agreeued at me, because of my
offense committed against them, would be revenged: and afterward he had
commanded certain Tonnies, that finding me alone from al company, they should
presently kill me, and for no other cause more than that it seemed unto him (as
it was very true) that I would be a witness of his cowardlines, for other cause
there was none, but only where desert is it ought to be recompensed: but God
prevented this mischief, putting (as I think) into Licioes heart, the favor he
showed me. Which being known unto the General, he bare him likewise most
great hatred and evil will, affirming and swearing that that which Licio did
unto me, was for to vex and grieve him: and knowing very well he had but a hard
witness of him, because he was with me, when the General entering into the cave
cried, peace, peace. This together with that which the good Captain (and
better than he) had done unto me, caused him to procure this mischief against
him, and as he came unto the Court, he went presently with great complaints
unto the King, accusing him as a traitor, saying, that one night as the said
Licio was Captain of the guard, and held the nearest Centinell unto the cave,
for a great sum of money which was given him by the enemy, that he might
escape, he left his watch. Which he affirmed to be true by diverse witnesses,
and even so God help him as he told the truth: for that Lazaro de Tormes could
not give any thing, unless it were a number of their heads that lay dead at his
feet. And going on with his falsehood, said, that he had brought from strange
places, a most cruel and wicked Tonny, the which had slain a great number of
his Army, with a sword that he carried in his mouth: wherewith he played his
part so nimbly, that it was impossible for him to do it, except he were some
devil, that for the destruction of the Tonnies had taken their shape upon him:
and that he perceiving the great damage which the wicked Tonny had done,
banished him from the army upon pain of death, and that the said Licio, in
despite of the King and of his royal crown, as also in despite of him, had
entertained the said Tonny in his company, and given him aid: for the which
causes he affirmed him to be a traitor, and to have incurred the danger of the
laws, and in respect thereof, he ought to be delivered into the hands of the
Justices to be punished for his offenses, that by him others might take
example, that hereafter none might break the Kings commandments. The King
being thus wrong informed, and worse counseled, giving so much credit unto his
wicked Captain, with two or three false witnesses that swore as he had taught
them, and with a proof made in the absence of the party accused, the same day
that Captain Licio arrived at the Court, altogether innocent and ignorant of
the matter, he was commanded to be taken and put into a cruel dungeon, with a
great chain about his neck: and commission given unto the Captain General to
keep him safe; and to see him punished according unto his desert, who presently
provided more then thirty thousand Tonnies to watch him.

CHAP. VI. How that Lazarus understanding of his friend Licios imprisonment,
was very much grieved thereat, and all the rest of his company; and what order
they took for the same.
THese sorrowful and doleful news, were brought us by some of those that
went with him, declaring unto us how they had charged him in such sort as I
said before, and in what manner he had been heard, and that it would go hardly
with him, by reason that all the Judges which had to do in the cause, were
suborned by the General, so that as they thought, the matter proceeding in
such order as it did, he could not long escape from a most cruel death. (At
that time I called to mind the old saying commonly used, and said unto my
self, When shall thou end thy adventures? when thou shall have finished a
thousand misfortunes on the land, and many more in the seas.) At this their
speech, there began among us a great lamentation and cry, but in my self a
double sorrow, because that on the one side I sorowed for my friend, and on the
other side, I lamented mine own estate, for that wanting him, I had no hope of
life, being then both in the middle of the seas, and of my enemies, altogether
without comfort and forsaken: for it seemed unto me that all the company
complained on me, and that with most justly and by good reason, for that I was
the only cause that they must lose him whom they desired. Wherewith I said, You
my Lord departed from me in great sorrow, without once imparting your grief unto
me, now I see well that you prognosticated my great loss, without all doubt
said I, this is the dream that you my good friend dreamed, this is that grief
which at your departure leaving me, you left us withal. And thus every one
mourned and lamented unto himself, till at the last I spoke in presence of
them all. My Lady and you my Lord and friends, that which the sorrowful news
has constrained us to do, has been justly done, for each of us by outward
sign, does show his inward grief, but seeing that this our first motion is
past, as it were in a moment, it is good reason my Lords, seeing that with
tears and complaints, our loss is not recovered, that we give order
presently for the best remedy that may be devised therein: and the same well
wayed and considered, to put presently in effect, seeing that as these men say,
the occasion of speeding the matter which by those men that hate us is
ministered unto us, does require the same. To this the fair and chaste Tonny his
wife, sheading many tears from her gracious eyes, answered me. All of us (most
valiant gentleman) do very well perceive and know that your reasons are most
true, as also the soden necessity which at this present offreth it self unto
us, verifieth the same: wherefore if ye these gentlemen and my friends were all
of my opinion, we should all refer our selves unto you, as unto him whom God
has endowed with a most clear and perfect judgment, for seeing that Licio my
Lord, being so wise and learned, did put you in trust with his most earnest and
weighty affairs, and therein followed your counsel, I do not think that I
err any thing herein, (although I am but a weak and simple woman) in desiring
you to take the charge upon you, for the providing and ordeining of that which
shall be convenient to be done, for the safety of him ye loved you with so
sincere a love, and to the comfort of this his sorrowful wife, which by this
means you shall always bind unto you.

This said, she returned unto her complaints, and al we did the like. Melo and
other Tonnies were with the captains wife, and at ye present agreed in one
consent with her, giving me the charge of ye enterprise, offering themselves to
follow me, and to do all whatsoever I would command them. I seeing yt I was in
duty bound to do it, and to take upon me all care and trouble for him, that
for me was in such misery, took the matter upon me, saying unto them, I knew
very well, that every one of you could do it better than I, but seeing that it
pleases you so to appoint it, I am very well content therewith. They thanked
me, and the^ it was presently agreed upon, that we should make the same
known unto all the Regiment, which was presently done, so that within three
days after they were all gathered together. I chose out for my Council,
twelve of the richest among them, not respecting their wisedoms if they were
poor, because when I was a man I had seen that sufficiently done in diverse
assemblies, wherein many causes of importance were handled, because (as I say)
they look not whether they be apparelled with wit, so they be apparelled in
silk. These being chosen out, one of them was Melo, and an other the Captains
wife, a woman of great wisdom, a thing very well known both by land and seas.

This done, we sent unto all the company that they should dine, and then
repair unto us in order of battle, the armed with their arms, and ye rest
with their bare bodies, when they were come, I caused them to be numbered, and
we found them to be in all the number of ten thousand one hundredth and nine
Tonnies, all fighting men, without counting women, boys and old men, whereof
five thousand of them were armed, some with Swords, other with Lances,
Ponyardes, and Knives, all which took their oaths upon my tail (under the
which they put their heads according unto their accustomed manner,) although
I laughed in my self to see their pretty ceremony,) that they would do as
I should command them, and would thrust in their weapons, and those that had
none their Teethe, into whom so ever I should command them to do it,
procuring with all their power and force if it were possible to set their
Captain at liberty, their duty and loyalty unto their sovereign King
always reserved.

We agreed likewise in our Counsel of War, that the Captains wife should
(being amongst us,) be accompanied with the number of one hundredth of the
beautifullest of all the other female Tonnies, among the rest one of them was a
sister of his, a Gentlewoman of great beauty, and very well proportioned,,
and of our army we made three esquadrons, one of all the unarmed Tonnies, and
the other two, of those that bear arms, I led the vantguard, with two
thousand five hundredth armed Tonnies, and Melo led the rereward with as many
more: the disarmed, with the carriages being placed in the middle, having with
us our Pages, (spoken of before,) that carried our swords.

CHAP. VII. How Lazarus and his Tonnies being in order of battle, went unto the
Court, minding to deliver Licius out of prison.
IN this manner, as I said before, we marched forwards, in great haste,
giving charge unto such as we thought good, for the provision of victuals for
the army, because they should not disorder themselves. In the way I questioned
with those that brought us the news, of the situation of the Court, and the
place where our Captain was kept in prison, mean time, at the end of three
days we were within ten miles of the Court, and for because we marched in so
new and unaccustomed order, if our coming should be known, we might be
prevented of that we went for, we agreed yt we would not march any further
until night came, willing certain of those Tonnies that had brought us the
sorrowful news, to go before into the City, and as secretly as they could,
learn how the case stood with our Captain, and having so done, presently to
return us the news: whereof some of them returned and brought us the worst
news we could desire. Night being come, it was agreed that the captains wife
and her women, with Melo and five hundred Tonnies disarmed, of the best and
oldest among them, should go straight unto the Court, and as they well could do
it, they should beseech the King that it would please him to examine the cause
of her husband and his brother, and that I and all the rest would place our
selves in a wood full of trees and rocks, within two miles of the City, where
the^ King sometimes went to sollace himself, and there we would remain until
such time we should see by our advise from them, what were best to be done.
We presently went unto the wood, which we found very well provided with great
store of fishes, upon the which we fed, or to say the truth, filled our selves
at our pleasures, and all the company did the like. And the fair and gentle
Tonny by morning arrived at the City, and presently went unto the court, where
she staide a long time at the gate, until the King rose, to whom they declared
the coming of that gentlewoman, in the end, by means of the importunate suit
she made unto the porters, they suffered her to enter in, that she might
speak unto the King. But the King, that perceived well her suit, returned her
an answer, that as then he had no time to hear her, she seeing that he
desired not to hear her by word of mouth, caused a supplication in very good
form to be drawn by two Counselors, that pleaded for Licio, wherein she
besought him to remit judgment of Licio, seeing he had appealed unto his
majesty, and the reason why, for that he was the day before condemned to die,
by the Judges of the land, as we understood, by our aduiser, saying his
highness knew very well, that her husband had been falsely accused, and
unjustly condemned, and that his highness would cause the indictment to be
perused, and the judgment with the execution of the sentence to be stayed.
These and other things were contained in the petition, which she delivered unto
one of the porters, and withal took her chain of gold with a Jewel hanging
thereat from about her neck and gave it him, praying him to stand her good
friend, and with tears from her eyes, to consider of her dolor and grief,
and not to respect the small gift. The Porter very willingly took her petition,
but more willingly her chain, promising to do for her the best he could, and
in very deed, his promise was not in vain, for that the petition being red
before the King, he from his own mouth (full of gold) used such persuasions
unto his highness, withal showing him of the tears and lamentations that the
Captains wife made for her husband, at the Palace gate, that therewith he
moved the King to pity her estate, and said. I will that you go with this
woman unto the Judges, and will them to stay the execution of the judgment,
because I am desirous to be better informed touching certain points
concerning Captain Licios accusation. With the which commission, the Porter
very glad to have sped so well, came unto the sorrowful gentlewoman, asking
her a reward for his earnest solicitation, which she willingly gave him, and
then without farther delay, they went together unto ye Judges lodging, but as
her hard fortune fell out, in going thither, they chanced to meet in the
street with Don Pauar, (for so was the causer of our trobles named,) who being
accompanied, went to the court, but as he espied the gentlewoman with her
captain, and understood who they were, knowing likewise ye Porter, craftily
suspected what their meanings were, so that very dissemblingly he called ye
Porter unto him, asking him whither he went with that company, who presently
declared it unto him: he seeming to like it well, told the Porter how the case
stood touching the captain (although it was all contrary) saying that he liked
well the kings proceeding therein, because Licio was a brave soldier, and there
was no reason why he should be executed without further examination of the
cause; saying further, that the Judges were at that present in his lodging, and
said they came thither to ask my counsel in the matter, whereupon I was now
going to the court for to speak with the king, whereas they attend my return,
but seeing that you bring a dispatch, let us go back again, and declare the
kings pleasure unto them, and going by the way, he called one of his Pages to
him, to whom very pleasantly he said, that he should with all haste go unto
the Judges, and will them presently to cause execution to be done upon captain
Licio, because it was the kings pleasure, and that they should execute the same
either within the prison, or else at the gate thereof, without leading him unto
the common place of execution, mean time that I hold the Porter here in talk
with me, the Page did as he was commanded, and drawing near unto the
Generals lodging, the Traitor took the Porter in with him, and said unto
Melo, and his sister in law, that they should be of good comfort, and stay
there, while he went in and spoke with the Judges, and that from thence they
would go all together to the prison to see Licio, and to comfort him, giving
him that which he so long had expected, and that he meant to go thither himself
with them, but the unfortunate woman by good hap was informed of the great
treason of the captain general. And although he had greater hatred unto the
good captain Licio, then compassion upon the tears and lamentations of his
wife, yet for an outward show he seemed to favor her request. For when as
the cruel traitor called unto his Page, willing him to go and cause Licios
execution to be dispatched, as God would, one of her servants heard him, and
told it unto the captains wife, which the wicked general perceived not,
whereat she fell in a manner dead, upon the neck of brother in law, standing
next unto her. Which as soon as Melo understood, he presently caused 30.
Tonnies of his company to depart with all speed, and to declare unto me in
what point and iminent danger the case stood with Licio, who like faithful and
diligent messengers, did within short space make us acquainted with those
sorrowful news, which they brought us, crying with loud voices, Arm, Arm,
you, O you valiant Tonnies, for our captain shall be presently executed to
death, by the treason and deceit of the traitor Don Pauar, against the will and
pleasure of our king, and so in brief rehearsed unto us, all that I showed you
before: whereat I presently caused the drums to be sounded, and in all haste my
Tonnies were ready with their mouths armed, unto whom I made a pithie
Oration, declaring the whole proceedings, to the end that as good and valiant
soldiers they should show their courages against their enemies, ayding and
succouring their captain in so extreme necessity, who answered all with one
voice, that they were ready to follow me, and to do their endeavors in that
behalf: which their answer being ended, we presently began to march
thither, but he that had then seen Lazarus the Tonny marching before his
soldiers, would have judged him a valiant captain. To conclude, we entered into
the town and besieged the kings palace, and by force took Licio out of their
hands, slaying great nombers of them. Which the king perceiving, willed Licioes
wife who was then at the court, to sue to the king for Licio, to return unto
her husband and tell him, that if he think good, I would have him to dissolve
his siege from about his palace, and suffer his subjects quietly to go home to
their houses, and to morrow to come hither again, and deliver her message unto
the council, and then she should have Justice.

The Captains wife with this answer departed not, but taking time when it
served, said unto the king, My Lord, neither my husband nor yet his company,
do hold any siege about your royal person, neither likewise have they entered
into any house, but that of Don Pauar, so that the inhabitants of this city,
cannot justly complain, that there has been any injury done unto any of them
in their houses, wherefore what it pleases you to command as touching them,
it shall be done, for, for that cause I was sent unto your grace. For God is
our judge, that neither Licio nor his company have any other meaning or intent,
but as good and faithful subjects ought to have. Woman said the king, for
this time I can say no more unto thee. Wherewith she and her women making
humble reverence, with most gracious behavior and comely sort departed from
the presence, which the kings pleasure being known unto us, we presently in
good order departed the city, staying in the wood, but yet not very hungry,
because we fell to eating of our enemies dead bodies, commanding the disarmed
Tonnies to carry as much with them, as might suffice our army for the space of
three or 4. days, leaving nevertheless as much within the city, as sufficed
the city and the court likewise: those that live of the spoil wished no other
thing of God, then that every eight days, there might happen the like among
them, light upon whom it would. The city being discharged of our troops, the
citizens repaired again each man to his house, finding them as they left them.
The king commanding yt the captain generals treasure should be brought unto him,
which was such and so much, as there was not any king within the seas, that
had the like, and then the king had some reason to mistrust his traitorous
dealing, because he might well suppose that it was not possible for him to get
that he had gotten, by good means, but by stealth. Then he caused his council
to be assembled, who said unto the king, that if it were as Licio said, he
then had not much offended in that actio^, specially because his highness had
commanded justice should not be executed until further enquiry were made: and
to confirm ye same, the Porter that had the message in charge, declared the
subtle practice that the General used with him: and how he deceived him and
brought him to his own house, saying the Judges were there, and that he let
them not depart from thence, and what diligence he made toward the court.

Further, he was showed by the Sheriffs, that the Captain general had sent
them word, that his Highness commanded them that they should presently cause
execution to be done, and the better to dispatch it, they should not lead him
thoough the accustomed streets, but do it before the prison gate: which they
believing to be true, had delivered him to be executed. In such manner, that the
King knew and perceived his Generals fault, and the more he looked into the
matter, the more he perceived it to be true.

CHAP. VIII. How the Captains wife returned again unto the King, and of the
good answer she brought.
ALL this while we stayed that day and the next night in the wood, not greatly
in quiet: and the next day after the Captains wife with her Company went
again unto the palace: and to avoid tediousnes, the King by that time was in
better quietness, receiving her very courteously, and saying, Good woman, if all
my subjects had so wise and discreet wives, peradventure they should increase
their honor and wealth, and I account my self happy. I say this, for that in
truth I seeing your discretion and wise reasons, have therewith appeased my
anger, and you thereby have delivered your husband and his company from my
wrath and heavy displeasure: and for because that since your being here I have
been better informed than I was, tell him that upon my word he may come to the
Court, with all his friends without any peril or danger. But for avoiding of
tumults and speeches, at this present will him from me that he keep house as a
prisoner, until I send him word unto the contrary: and in the mean time I
pray you come hither and see us, because I take great pleasure to see and
behold your person, good behauior, and pleasant speech. Whereat the Captains
wife kissed his tail, giving him hearty thanks for the great grace and
favor he showed, as she full well could do it, and so returned unto us with a
most joyful answer: although some of us thought it not convenient to be done,
saying it was but subtly and politikely done, thereby to get us into his
hands. In the end we agreed as loyal subjects, to accomplish the commandment
of our King, trusting unto (...), I mean our mouths, when our loyalty should
be brought in question. Whereupon we presently removed unto the City, and
entered therein, finding in the same man is friends, which as then shows
themselves, perceiving our enterprise to be well taken, and effectuated, but
before they burst not make any show thereof, as the old saying is, When
Fortune turns and sends thee adversity, then thy friends are shaken and
(...) from thee: for adversity shows who be friends, and who are foes. Being
entered, we retired unto one end of the City wherein least people were, where
stood houses great store, but most part without inhabitants, being the houses
of such as we had slain, there we lodged as near as we could together: in
the mean time giving commission that not one of our band should walk abroad
into the City, that the Princes will might be fulfilled. Mean time the
Captains wife, went every day unto the Court to visit the King, as he had
commanded, with whom she became a great friend: but as far as I could
perceive, although all seemed clear water, yet the beautiful Luna paid for
all, for the going with her sister in these visitations, (and as it is a common
saying, Such pilgrims, such saints) the King wan her favor so well, that in
the end he obtained her love: which I verily think she did not with the
consent of her sister. Which Captain Licio knew very well, for that in a
manner he delivered it unto me, asking my counsel therein. I told him that in
my opinion the matter was not great, specially because it would be a great
help, and the principal occasion of procuring our liberty. And so it fell
out: for that the fair Gentlewoman Luna was so privy with the King, that
within eight days after his royal conjunction, fall out what would, we were
all pardoned and acquitted: and the King releasing her brother in law, sent word
that we should all come unto the Court. Being there, Licio kissed the Kings
tail, which he offered him very willingly, and I did the like, although with
an evil will, as being a man, and to kiss in such a place. Then the King
said unto us: Captain, I being informed of your loyalty, and not hearing any
thing unto the contrary, therefore from henceforth I pardon you, with all your
company, friends and servants, which in the enterprise past did aid and assist
you: and because hereafter you shall be here attendant at our Court, I give unto
you all the houses with the goods therein, of those that (by the permission of
God) lost them, together with their lives: giving you likewise the same office
that our Captain general had: and from henceforth I will that you exercise
the same, as one that knows well how to use it. Whereat we fell down before
him, and our Captain Licio went and kissed his tail once again, giving him
great thanks for his liberal rewards, saying, that he trusted in God to do
such service in the said office, that his Highness should think it well
bestowed. The same day the King was informed of poor Lazarus the Tonny,
although at that time I was so rich, and so glad to see them friends, that me
thought I never was better pleased. The King among diverse questions, asked how
I found out the invention of our arms. I answered him to his content. Then he
asked with what number of fishes I and my company durst encounter? I answered,
the Whales excepted, I could overcome all the fishes in the sea. Whereupon he
appointed next morning to see us all muster before him. Next day Licio our
General and I, with all the rest of our armed company went out, where I found
a very good invention, although the soldiers use it here at this present. I
made them place themselves in order, and so we passed before his Highness,
making a ring: which although the Coronell Villalua and his company could do
it better, and in brauer manner, yet in the sea they having not seen any
esquadrons made, it seemed strange unto them. After that I made a battle of
our armed Tonnies together, placing the fairest and best armed in the first
ranks, willing Melo with all the disarmed, and with thirty thousand other
Tonnies to come forth and skirmish with us: who compassed us about on al parts.
But we placing ours in good order, and holding close together, began to defend
our selves so well, and to strike and hurt them in such sort, that all the sea
had not been sufficient to have entered within us. The king seeing that I had
told him truth, and that in such sort we could not be hurt, called unto Licio
and said, This your friend has marvelous great skill in arms: it seems unto
me that in this manner we might conquer and overcome the whole seas.

It is most true as your Grace says, said our Captain general, and as
touching the good industry of the strange Tonny, my good friend, I cannot
believe or be persuaded otherwise, but that he comes from God, and was
brought into these parts for the augmentation of your Highness honor, together
with your lands and dominions, which your Grace may very well believe: for the
qualities and parts within him are such, and so excellent, that I am persuaded
there is not any one able to declare them in brief: for he is the wisest and
discreetest Tonny that is at this day in the sea, with all virtuous and
honorable, likewise most true, and very faithful, endued with excellent
manners and behavior, such as I never heard speak of before: and to conclude,
there is nothing in him tending unto evil. In saying thus much of him, your
Highness must not think that I speak it by reason of the good will I bear
him, but only because I know it to be most true. Truly said the King, that
Tonny is much bound unto God, upon whom he so liberally bestows his graces
and benefits: and because you report so well of him, it is good reason we
should do him honor, seeing he is come into our Court, wherefore I would have
you ask him, if he be minded to remain here with us, whereunto I would you
should persuade him in my behalf: and it may be he shall not repent him of our
company.

CHAP. IX. How Lazarus agree to stay at the Court, and was of great credit, and
very secret with the King.
THis agreed between them, the General took upon him to declare it unto me,
and the King returned unto the City, and we likewise. Being come home, the
Captain told me what had passed (as touching me) between the King and him,
and how he desired that I would serve him, with other things, In the end, I
being entreated (with my great honor) consented thereunto. Now behold I pray
you, your Crier of wives in Toledo, made the chief man in the Kings house,
with charge to rule and gouerns the same: and go and tell it for a jest. Then
I gave thanks unto God, that my affairs waxed daily better, and sought with
all diligence to please the King, so that in little space I fell into such
credit with him, that in a manner not any thing whatsoever, were it of great
or small importance, but it passed through my hands, or was done by my
counsel. This done, I thought it not convenient to suffer such as had deserved
punishment to escape: because I knew very well, how and in what manner Licioes
sentence had bin unjustly given, although the king had past it over in silence,
by reason the Captain general was a Fish of great account and of great power.
Whereupon it entered into my mind to ring the bells again, and said unto the
King, that there had a matter of dishonor happened to him of late, which were
not worthy to be kept in silence, because it was a means to cause justice to
be done, as a thing appertaining unto his Majesty's service, that such as are
faulty should be punished. Which his Highness presently committed unto me, as
he did all other things: and I endeavored my self so well therein, that I caused
all the partakers in the same to be apprehended, when they little thought of
any such matter: who being put unto the rack, confessed they had sworn falsely
in the cause, whereby Licio was condemned: and asking them wherefore they did
it, and what the wicked General gave them to do it, they answered, that he
had not given nor promised them any thing, neither were they his friends or
servants. O sensles and miserable sinners, O contentious men said I, which
complain that your adversaries condemn you by false witnesses, which they
proved against such times: come come I say unto the sea, and you shall behold
the small reason you have to complain upon earth: for that if the same your
adversary do produce false witnesses, either he gives or promises them
somewhat for their pains, or else they were his friends or acquaintance before
that time, for whom he promises to do the like: but these unfaithful fishes
are neither by promise, by reward, nor friendship moved thereuntoo, wherefore
they are so much the more to be blamed and worthy of punishment, and so they
were hanged. I understood farther, that the Clearke by whom the cause was
pleaded, did not present nor yet take any writing that was brought him in the
behalf of Licio, neither admitted any one to speak that desired to answer
for him. O great shame said I, which although if be suffered on earth, that the
Clearkes be favorable, yet with more honesty they take the writings, although
they put them not into the Court, but rather say they be lost: but this is the
very act of the devil. The like was found in the Judges, for that I knew it
could not be uprightly done, that the Sentence was so soon given: wherein I
blamed the Judges much, saying unto them, that a plea in a manner for two
strawes is not commonly ended in a year, and some not in ten, nor yet twenty:
and you dispatch a matter touching the life of an honorable Fish in one hour.
Whereunto they could not answer me ought to excuse their fault: but the King
sent express commandment, that he would have the matter dissembled withal
as touching them, because it concerned his royal authority: and so I did, but
therewith I well perceived and saw, that the gracious and mighty hand of him
that humbles when he will, and exalts whom it pleased him, ruled among them,
and likewise in the wicked General: for where covetousness and envy enters,
it corrupts all things. For the which cause the King of Persia punished a
wicked Judge most grievously, causing him to be executed, and after flean,
whose skin he nailed up over the seat of Justice, placing the Judges son in
his fathers seat: whereby the Barbarian King did very well provide in most
strange manner, that no Judge after that time should be corrupted. To the same
end, it is said by a wise man, That where affection reigns, reason has no
place: and that the good Lawier did commit very few causes unto the Judges,
but rather let them be determined by law, because the Judges are many times
corrupted, either by love, hatred or gifts: whereby they are induced to give
many unjust judgments. For which cause the Scripture says: O you Judges take
no gifts, which blind the wise, and subvert the words of the just. This I
learned of my good master, with all the rest of my experience in the law: who
(as it is reported) was better learned, than either Bartolus or Seneca. But to
return unto my first purpose. I told ye the King sent word it should be so,
although it went wholly against my mind. In the mean time, the General by
the Kings commandment, had a voyage to make, which was with a great Army to
invade the Sturgeons, whom we presently overcame, making their King
tributarie: for the which he delivered hostage, with condition to pay yearly
for a tribute unto our King a great sum of money, and withal to deliver him
one hundredth female Sturgeons, and one hundredth males: which male Sturgeons
because they are a dainty fish, the king eat them at his own table, and the
females he kept for his pleasure. After that, our General went against the
Porpeses, which he overcame, and brought under our subjection. Wherewith the
number of our armed Tonnies grew so great and puissant, that we held many
kind of fishes in subjection under us, all which became tributaries and gave
pledges, as we said before. Then our Captain (not being contenced with the
victories past) armed himself against the Cocodriles, which are a kind of
most fierce fishes, and live sometime in the sea, and sometime on the land,
with whom we had many battles: and although we lost some, yet for the most
part he bare away the victory. But it was no marvel that we lost some,
because (as I said before) those kind of fishes are very fierce and cruel,
great bodied, with great teeth and long tuskes, wherewith they tare in pieces
as many of us as they could reach into their paws: and yet for all their
fiercenes, we many times put them to the worst, unless if were sometimes when
they saw themselves ouer-pressed by our Tonnies, then they forsook the water,
and took the land, and so they escaped. Which our Captain Licio perceiving, in
the end left them, after he had spoiled great numbers of them: and he himself
likewise received great damage, and lost the good Melo his brother: which
caused no small grief throughout the whole Army. But our comfort was, that he
died like a valiant Tonnie: for it was reported unto us for a truth, that
before they killed him, he in person with his sword (wherewith he was very
nimble) killed more than a thousand Cocodriles, and yet they had not killed
him, if it had not chanced, that they flying, and he after them, he suddenly
fell upon the land, and there stayed, by which means (not being able to be
seconded by his company) the enemy tare him in pieces. In the end, good
Captain Licio returned from the wars, the most renowned fish that then lived
in the seas, bringing with him great and rich spoils, which he gave wholly
unto the King, without taking any thing for himself. At his return, his
Highness received him with such countenance and entertainment, as belonged unto
a fish that had done him so great service and honor, and withal bestowed most
liberal rewards upon him, as also unto those that had followed him: in such
manner, that every one found himself contented and pleased. And the King to
show the greater favor unto Licio, mourned for Melo his brother the space of
eight days, and so did we al. Your worship must understand, that the mourning
among the fishes, is, that when they are sad and mourn, during that time they
speak not, but only by signs ask what they desire to have. And this is the
manner that is observed among them, when as their husbands, wives, children, or
friends do die, they mourn in that sort as I said before, and keep it so
straightly, that it is holden for a great ignomie, and that the greatest that
may be found within the seas, if when they mourn they chance to speak, until
such time as the King sending unto them, wills them to leave mourning: and
then they speak as they did before. I heard it reported among them, that a Lord
(for the death of a Lady whom he loved, and kept as his friend) mourned in his
own Country for the space of ten years, and for all that the King could do,
he might not cause him to leave off mourning, because that at such time as he
sent him word to leave off, he sent word to beseech his Grace, to cause him to
be killed, rather than leave off mourning: which he could not do. And which is
more, I was told (wherein I took great pleasure to hear it) that his
servants perceiving his long silence, some of them at a month, others another
month, and other some at two months, as they desired to speak, forsook his
house, so that in the end he had not one left: and here with his mourning
continued so long, that although he had desired to leave it, he knew not with
whom to speak. When they told me this, I called to my remembrance diverse
talkatiue men, with whom I am very well acquainted, who never leave talking,
but as soon as one tale is ended, they begin again. And many times, because
they would not loose company, they cut off their tales in the middle, and
begin others, and so continue until the very night come upon them, yt they
must needs leave company, or else they would never have done, and the worst is,
that these men do not perceive how much they offend God and the world herein,
and I think are little less, then troublesome unto the devil himself, and he
that will be wise, let him fly the company of these fools, because like
requires like, for their pains, I wish they were vassalls unto this Barron:
and that during their abode with him, his friend might die, that I might be
revenged on them.

CHAP. X. How the King and Licio determined to marry Lazarus unto the fair
Lady Luna, and how they were married.
But returning unto our matter, the mourning, and sorrow, holden for the death
of Melo, being past, the king sent word that with all speed the number of
armed Tonnies should be new supplied and increased, and that they should go
seek more arms, which was presently done. At which time it seemed good unto
the king to marry me, to some one whom he thought good, and thereupon he dealt
with Licio about the same, unto whom he committed the matter, but he would
willingly have been quit of the charge, because he knew somewhat by her, but
for that it pleased the king, he durst not otherwise do: so he brake the
matter unto me, being not a little ashamed to do it, saying: that he saw and
knew I deserved more honor, as my deeds witnessed, but the king had expressly
commanded that he should be the marriage maker. In the end, the matter being at
that point, it is my good fortune, said I unto my self, a nail is not good to
play at tennis withal, and a plague of such a ball as cannot be taken but at
the second rebound, and seeing it pleases God it shall be no otherwise, and
that it is for my profit and advancement, it is reason that I climb from a
priest unto a king. In the end I did it, and my marriage was solemnized, with
so great triumphs and feastings, as if it had been for a prince, being honored
with the degree of a vicount, that the king gave me with her, which if I had it
here upon earth, would do me much more good than in the sea, in the end from
the base or meanest Tonny, my name rose unto a Signior. In the manner my
signory led a tryumphant life, married very richly with my fair and new wife,
the Lady Luna, but much better with my king, not forsaking his service,
devising still how I might please and content him, seeing I found my self so
much bound unto him, so that there was no time by me omitted, wherein I made
him not merry, howesoeuer it fell out, but still I took care not to say any
thing whereby he might be grieved or angry, having always in memory, how
little they are esteemed and accounted off with great Lords, that tell them the
truth. Withal remembering the entertainment that Alexander gave unto the
Philosopher Calistines, for declaring the truth unto him, and by this means I
sped not ill: besides, I behaved my self in such sort unto both great and
little, that they sought my friendship almost as much as the kings. At the same
time I though to frame and confirm the estate of the sea, like unto that of
the land, whereupon I advised the king, and told him it were convenient that
seeing he bare the burden of all, he should reap the profit, and it was
thus: for that as then the Crown had no other rentes or revenues then only
the thirtieth part of all things that were sold, and when he held war for
a just cause concerning his Country, they gave him the fishes necessary and
convenient for the same wars, and paid for them, and only ten fishes for
his own table every day, I brought it to pass, that when they fished they
should every one give him as much, and that it should be a custom as it is
upon the land, and that they should allow him 50. fishes every day for his
own table: I caused it likewise to be ordained, that if any of his subjects
were called a Don, unless he were so by lawful and liniall dissent of
patrimony, he should pay a certain sum for a fine unto his highness, and this
statute I thought to be convenient, because the pride of the fishes is so
great, that both good and bad, rich and poor, all are Dons, as Don here, and
Don there, Don when, and Don where: I did this, calling to mind the
commendable behavior of the women of my country, that if any chance to fall
into that degree, either she shall be the daughter of an honest householder, or of
a squier, or else be married with some that is written worshipful, or unto some
other man of quality: for before they be such, and of good wealth, they call
them not by ye title of Don, but in the sea, not so much as the daughter of a
mean artificer, or a beggar (if she marry a man, although he be no Officer at
all,) but they presume within eight days after to put the name of Don upon
their tails, as if that name of Don would make them free from being the
children of dishonest parents, and of those that had no such titles, and as
though many of them should not be ashamed, least they give cause to have their
fathers taken out of their graves, and the memory of them to be again renewed,
and so their neghbors might laugh at them, and at their worshippes, which they
take upon them, knowing it not to be very sound, but therein they show
themselves to be the more fond and light headed. It seemed good unto ye king
to set it at a high rate, whereby in short space seeing it cost money, there
would not be many Dons found. Of these things, and of the new Impositions
most profitable for the king, I informed his highness. And he perceiving my
great care and diligence in his service, was not slack in rewarding me, but
rather became more liberal and bountiful unto me. At the same time I thought
upon my poor Squier of Teledo, or rather upon his wise speeches, when as I
complained unto my self, that I could not find any Gentleman of account with
whom I might be, and if I chanced to find one, I understood him to be very
nigardly and sparing: Then he told me of that, which I after used in the sea,
as a thing very profitable for me, specially one point therein, whereof I was
very careful, which was, that I took great care not to say any thing unto
the king that might offend him, and as it is a great point of wisdom, I
altogether followed his humor, using great courtesy, and showing great favor,
unto such as he favored, although they nothing deserved it, and to such as he
liked not of, I used them hardly, speaking evil of them, although I found it
not in them, and not refusing to do for any were they never so badde.
Remembering the said Calistines, that for saying the truth unto his master
Alexander the great, he caused him to be cruelly put to death, although his
death it might be esteemed a life, seeing it was for so just a cause, but now
no man uses it, but all seek to live in such manner, that I bent my self as
much as I could unto that humor, and by this means my soppe fell into the
honey, and my house was filled with rich riches, but although I was a Fish, I
had the understanding of a man, and the accursed covetousness which at this
day reigns so much in man, for that a beast having his natural food,
desires nor seeks not any more. As the Cock cares not for all the pearls
in the East, if he may have his belly full of corn, nor the Ox for all the
gold in India, if he have grass enough, and so is it with all other beasts,
only the beastly desire of man is never satisfied, specially if it be infected
with covetousness. I say this, because that notwithstanding all the riches I
had, (as there was not almost any king in the sea, that had more, yet I was so
pricked forewarde by that greedy covetousness, and not with any lawful
means, that I caused some to go unto the gulphes of Leon, and Yerro, others I
sent unto the banckes of Flaunders, where diverse ships full of men were cast
away, and to such places where any battles had bin fought upon the seas, from
whence they brought me great quantity of gold, so that I think they brought
me at the least five hundredth thousand Dollors, (a kind of Spanish money) the
king laughed when he saw me so rejoice, and to lie tombling upon my money, and
asked me what those vain things meant, seeing they were neither to be eaten
nor yet to be carried about me, whereat I said unto my self: If thou knew
what they mean as well as I do, thou would not ask me such a question, but
I answered him, that I meant to use them for counters, wherewith he was
satisfied, but after I came again to dwell on earth, as I will show you, a
plague of them all for any that I ever saw, and if I had al those here that
were brought me in the sea, I should have no need of any man, but then I must be
forced to keep them in some other such deep and secret place, least I might
happen to lose them. At that time I desired, if it had been possible, to find
a ship that would take and lade them in, (although I should give the half part
for the fraught,) and deliver the rest to my Eluira in Toledo, that with some
of them she might marry my daughter, for I was well assured that there were many
that would not refuse her, being the daughter of a Crier. And with this desire,
I skipped twice or thrice after ships, that came from the West, crying unto
them, above the water, that they might hearken unto me, thinking they would
understand me, and imagine my meaning, and although they were not faithful
messengers to carry the treasure, or some part thereof, unto Toledo, wherewith
they might profit men, and do them good withal, yet it would content my mind,
for the love I bear unto mankind, but when I called them, or they perceived
me above water, they presently cast hooks and darts at me, to kill me,
wherewith I turned and went again unto my house, sometimes I wished that
Toledo were a port of the sea, that I might fill it with riches, for that I
doubted not but my wife and my child should get some part thereof. And with
these and other thoughts and imaginations, I passed my time, and spent my life
in the sea.

CHAIP. XI. Lazarus going to hunt in a wood, having lost his company, he found
the Truth, and spoke with him.
I Being by fortune stayed from my company, found the Truth, which told me
that she was the daughter of God, and that she had descended down from heaven
upon earth, for to live there, and do good unto men, and how she had not left
any place unsought, but had visited all estates both great and small, and
although that in some great men's houses she found some entertainment, others
thrust her clean out of their doors, which their ingratitude perceived by
her, she said, had caused her to withdraw her self into a rock in the deep
sea, she told me of many marvelous things, that had passed among all manner
of men, which if I should write unto your worship, it would be over long, and
out of the matter, touching my troubles, when it pleases your worship to have
the whole discourse that passed between us, it shall be sent you, I being come
home, showed the king what had passed between me and the Truth.

CHAP. XII. How Lazarus departing from the Truth, going with the female Tonnies
to bring forth their young, he was taken in the Fisher men's Nets, and turned
again into a man.
GOing very cheerfully unto the Court, being greatly comforted with the words
that the Truth had used unto me, I lived for a time very merely in the sea,
and then the time drew near, that the female Tonnies should be delivered of
their young, of that voyage the King willed me to go, because he always sent
some strength with them, to defend them, and at that time Licio was sick, if
he had been well, I know he would have gone that voyage, and since I had
been in the Sea, I had gone three or four times, because every year once they
use the same order. In that voyage, I took with me ten thousand female
Tonnies, and there were above five hundredth thousand female Tonnies which were
all big with young.

We having taken our leave of the king, went on our journey, and in the end
entered into the straights of Gibraltar, and being past them, we came unto
Couil, and to Vexar, places under the dominion of the Duke of Medina Sodinia,
whereas they prepared an army ready against us, of the which I being
advertised, and that there we were wont to be hardly dealt withal, willed
them to take care of themselves, but they being desirous to be delivered in
that place, it being prepared ready for that purpose, how well soever they
looked unto themselves I know not, but this I am sure of, that in the space of
eight or nine days, I wanted above fifty thousand female Tonnies. Which
damage we perceiving, agreed to put our valiant Armed Tonnies with them into
the key of the Haven, and while that they were delivered of their young ones,
if the Fishermen sought means to take them, we would strike in among the
Fishermen and their Nets, cutting them asunder in small pieces, but we
deceived our selves, and found that our device did fall out clean contrary
to all our expectations, by reason of the great strength and skill that the men
used, which is much greater than that of the Tonnies, and so by their mighty
force they took us all, with an infinite number of the female Tonnies in one
Net, without in a manner receiving any damage of us, but rather great
gains, and as my companions perceived themselves taken, they were dismayed,
and therewith beginning to sigh, let their arms fall out of their mouths,
which I did not, but they took me with my sword, having therewith done
sufficient damage unto their Nets, and with me they took my fair and
second wife. The Fishermen wondering to see me armed in that sort, sought to
make me forsake my sword, which I still held very fast, but they pulled so
long thereat, that in the end, they pulled an arm and a hand out of my
mouth, (wherein I held my sword,) and then they perceived in my head, my
forehead, eyes, nose-thrilles, and the half of my mouth. They being much
abashed at this fight, held me fast by the arm, and others taking me by the
neck, began to pluck me out of my fishes skin, and as I was half out of
my case, I looked about, and perceived hard by me my poor wife Luna, in great
fear, and rather in more perplexity then the Fishermen, unto whom I began
to speak in man's language, and said; Brethren, discharge I pray you your
consciences, and let none of you offer to kill me with the brasser, for you
must know that I am a man as you are, but make an end of pulling me out out
of my skin, and I will declare great secrets unto you. I said this, because
many of my companions lay hard by me dead, and their heads broken in
pieces, with staves which the Fishermen had for that purpose: and then I
desired them of courtesy, that they would let that female Tonny next unto me
to swim away, because she had been my companion and wife a great time, and
they being greatly astonished to see and hear me, did as I desired them. But
at such time as my companion departed from me, weeping and in great fear, I
said unto her in my Tonnies language, Luna my sweet heart, I commit thee to
God, I pray thee come no more hither to be taken, but show the King and all
my friends what thou have seen, and I pray thee likewise to have a care of thy
honor and mine.

Which done, she without making me any answer, skipped into the water, and
went her way in great fear: us they took from thence, and in my presence
killed my companions, and cut them in pieces at the water side, and kept me
half a man and half a fish in the sand, with great fear lest they would burn
me: the fishing being ended ye day, they asked me many questions and I told
them the truth of every thing, praying them to pull me whole out of my fishes
skin, which as then they did not, but the same night they set me upon a Mule,
and brought me unto Siuil, presenting me unto the most noble Duke of Medina,
great was the admiration that both men and women had to see me, for that in
long time there had not any thing so wonderful happened in Spain. In that
case they held me for the space of eight days, during the which time, they
understood of me, what troubles I had passed: but at the end of eight days, I
felt my self not well in the part of my body that was Fish, and it spoiled
because it felt not the water, so I besought the Duke and the Duches, that for
the love of God, they would cause me to be pulled out of that prison, seeing I
was brought unto his grace, showing them what pain I felt, whereunto they
agreed, and it was appointed to be cried throughout all the Town of Siuil,
that I should be pulled out of my fishes skin, that thereby every man might
come and see my conversion, which should be done upon a scaffold set up in an
open market place before his lodging, that all men might behold it. The Dukes
lodging was hard by the Town of Siuil, all the streets entering into the
Market place were full, and not so much as the tops of houses, but were laden
with people, such an innumerable sort resorted thither at that time, then the
Duke willed them to go, and fetch me out of my Cage wherein they had kept me
ever since they brought me from the sea side, in the way I was much troubled,
because of the great multitude of people, that flocked about me, by which
means if I had not had Iron grates between me and them, without all doubt they
had smothered me to death. O good God said I, what alteration is there now in
me? for that I have seen a man in a Cage, although not greatly at his ease,
but I never saw a man turned into a fish. So they took me out and carried me
unto the market place, with fifty Holberdiers going about me, to keep the
people from me, and yet could very hardly do it.

CHAP. XIII. How Lazarus was openly upon a stage from a Tonny fish, converted
in Civil, unto a man.
THen I being set upon the scaffold, they began to pull me, some by that part
of my body that was out already, and others by the fishes tail, in such
manner, that in the end they pulled me out as naked as ever I came forth of
my mothers womb, and there lay the Tonnie, being nothing but a skin. Then
they presently gave me a cloak to cover me withal, and the Duke commanded
that a suit of his apparel should be brought me, which although they fitted
me not, yet I put them on: and then I was so feasted and visited by the people,
that during the time of my continuance there, I had in a manner no time to take
my rest, for that both night and day they ceased not to come and see me, and to
ask me diverse questions, and he that could get but a time to hear me, thought
himself happy. But within certain days after my conversion, I fell sick,
because the earth did alter me, being as then not accustomed thereunto, for that
between the nature of the sea and land there is great difference: so that then
I began to cleanse and purge my self, in such manner, as I thought verily that
my troubles and my life would have ended both together, I pray God deliver me
from this and other troubles. At the last, when I felt my self strong and able
to walk, I took my leave of my friends there, who full sore against their
wills granted it unto me, for yt they desired to have had me still there with
them, to hear the marvelous things that had happened unto me: whereunto I made
no conscience to add somewhat, which they verily believed, because they had
seen me so wonderfully converted. But in the end without staying any longer,
they let me go, and sent me away very well provided for my journey, and so
upon the day before the feast of Pentecost last past, I came unto Toledo, the
most desirous man in the world to see my wife and child, and embracing her a
thousand times, which manner of pleasure I had not had for the space of four
years, because it is not used in the sea, for there is nothing else but noddes
and kisses. I came into the Town by night, and went straight unto my house,
which I found without any body in it: for they were all gone unto my Master
the Priests house, where they were already gone to bed and asleep. But I gave
so many blows at the door, that therewith they wakened, asking me who was
there? I telling them, my wife Eluira answered me very sharply with a loud
voice: Away thou drunkard whatsoever thou art, that walk the streets at
this time of the night for to mock and deceive poor widows: coming now at
the end of three or four years, (that to my evil fortune God took away my
husband, and drowned him in the sea, in sight of his master, and of many other
that saw him sink down) to tell us a jest: and therewith she went to bed
again, without any more harkening unto me: wherewith I began again to call
and knock at the door. Then my Master the Priest being chafed, rose up, and
came unto the window, and with a loud voice said, what would that fellow have,
what kind of dealing is this? I would feign know who thou art, that in the
morning I may reward thee for this thy discourteous dealing, which at this time
of the night come unto men's doors that are at rest, telling them jests, and
making such a noise, that thou breakest both their sleep and their rest.
Signior (said I) let not your worship be offended, and if you desire so much
to know who I am, as much do I desire to tell it you. I am your Crier Lazaro de
Tormes. I had scarce uttered my words, but I felt a stone come buzzing cloase
by my ears, and that with a good will, and after that two or three more: which
striking against the stones in the street, for that it was paued, made the
fire to sparkle out of them. I perceiving the danger, and hoping for no better
reason at his hands for that time, went down the next street that lay before
me: and being a good way past the house, I stayed, and he was still in the
window, crying out alowd: Come again to mock us, and see how thou shall
speed. I remembered my self, and thought to have turned back, and once again
to prove the adventure, because I was not desirous to discover my self unto
any other. But because it was very late, I determined to pass the rest of
the night there, and in the morning to go unto mine own house.

But it fell out clean contrary: for not far from the place where I stood,
there was one of the Sheriffs of the Town, which kept watch about the same:
who taking my sword from me, led me unto prison. I knew some of my Masters the
Serieants that were with him, and calling them by their names, I told them who
I was: but they laughing at me, said, that it was more than three years past
that he whom I spoke of dyed in the Voyage of Argiel, and so went with me unto
prison, where I stayed till day light: which being come, when others made them
ready and prepared themselves to go to Church, and to keep so holy and
Festival day, I thinking to do the like, because I supposed I should be
known of them all: in came the Sheriff that had taken me, and putting a fair
pair of fetters on my heels, and a great chain about my neck, put me into
the house where the rack stood, saying, Let this Gentleman (counterfetting the
Justice, and naming himself to be a Crier) stay here these few days until
we may learn who he is, seeing you do walk by night to scale Priests houses,
and to seek after your best beloved, when your head is full. We came hither
in an evil hour said I unto my self, and then I said unto him, that I lived
not in any such sort, nor yet went abroad to do any such things. I cannot
tell whether you go or no said he, but even now I met the Priest of Saint
Saludors Church, coming out of the Sheriffs house, saying, that the last
night he had like to have been robbed, and the Thieves thought to have entered
his house by force, if he had not defended himself with good stones: and said
that one of the thieves named himself Lazaro de Tormes his Crier, and I told
him that I met you hard by his house, and that you said as much unto me, and
therefore I sent word that you should be safely kept. Then the Iailour said,
that Crier which you speak of, was once in this Town, but he died in the
Voyage unto Argiel, I knew him very well: God be merciful unto him, for he
was a man sufficient to carry two Stopes of wine with the best drinker
heereabout from one house unto the other, without any kind of staggering.

O unfortunate wretch that I am said I, which have not as yet ended al my il
fortunes, without doubt they will begin again to assail me: what should this
mean, that those whom I know, and am present in their company, and take them
for my friends, should now deny me, and not know me? But it is not possible
that fortune can cross me herein, that my wife should not know me, as being
the thing that I most desire, and she me. With that, I entreated the Keeper,
and gave him somewhat for his pains, that he would go unto her, and show her
that I am here, and that she would come and fetch me out of prison. And he
laughing at me, took the royal, saying he would do it: but it seemed unto
him that I was not in earnest, for that if I were he of whom I spoke, he said
he should know me, because (said he) I have seen him at the least a thousand
times here within the prison, coming to visit those that had been whipped:
and that he was the best Crier, and had the cleerest voice in all Toledo. But
in the end (I being so importunate with him) he did so much, that he brought
my Master the Priest with him: and when I heard him speak in the place where I
was, a candle being brought, I had as much joy, as they in Purgatory may have
when the time of their deliverance draws near: and weeping with grief, but
more for joy, I said unto him: O my good Master Rodrigo de Ieues chief Priest
of S. Saluadors, look upon this your good Crier Lazaro de Tormes, tormented
and laden with yrons, having for these three years passed the most strange
and wonderful adventures that ever were heard of. Whereat he held the candle
somewhat nerer unto my face, and said, The voice is Jacobs, but the skin is
Esaus. Brother (said he) it is true that in speech you somewhat resemble him,
but in iesture you are far different from him that you say you are. Then I
began to think with my self, and desired the Iailor to lend me a glass,
which he brought me, and when I looked into it, I perceived my self to be
changed in favor from that I was before, but specially in color, which I was
wont to have as red as a Pomegranade, I mean as the kernels of the same, and
now as the yealow of the shell, being wholly changed in countenance, whereat
I blessed my self, and said: Now my good Master, I do not marvel (being
thus as I am) that your worship nor yet any of my friends do not know me,
seeing that I know not my self: but worship has made me now to feel it.
wherefore Master Sheriff, I would desire you to give us a little liberty to
speak together, and you shall see that I have not told any lie. He did so,
and we being alone, I told him all the signs and tokens of things passed
between us, since we were first acquainted, naming the days and times. After
that I told him all that I had passed, and how I was turned into a Tonny, and
how long I continued in the sea, and what I did there, and that it was the
water that had so changed my color, and altered my iesture, which until then
I had not once looked into: so that in the end he stood still in a great
admiration, and said unto me. This that you say is well known here in the
City to be very true, that there was a man being a Tonny fish seen in
Civil, and besides that the tokens you give me are all true, but
notwithstanding I doubt it much to be so: but yt which I will do for you,
shall be to bring my Nurse hither, and peradventure she will know you better.
Wherewith I gave him hearty thanks, and besought him to give me his hand that
I might kiss it: and he gave me his blessing, as he had done many times
before, but for his hand he refused it unto me. Thus that and three days more
passed over, and at the end thereof in the morning the Justices Lieuetenant
with his afficers and Clearke came into the prison to me, and began to examine
me upon intergatories: which if I would not answer unto, they had commission
to set me on horseback, or to say more aptly to hang me up. Whereat I could
not choose but shed many tears, fetching most great sighs, and complaining
unto my self of my great misfortune that followed me continually: and with the
greatest and best reasons I could devise, I besought the Lieuetenant that as
then he would not torment me, because I was otherwise sufficiently vexed and
grieved, which to prove, I willed them to come near and behold my iesture:
whereat bringing the light somewhat nearer he said, Certainly I know not what
force may do in many things, but as far as I can perceive he is not
without great grief, which by his disposition may well be seen: let us leave
him at this time, until he be somewhat better, or else that he dies, and
quit himself of all, and so they left me. Then again I besought the Keeper,
that he would go unto my Masters house, and entreat him on my behalf to
accomplish his word and promise given unto me, that he would bring my wife
with him unto the prison: and therewithal I gave him another royal, (because
they never walk in vain). Thither he went, and returned me answer, that the
next day they both promised me to come: wherewith I being somewhat comforted,
that night I slept better than at other times. And in my dream me thought I
saw my Lady and friend the Truth, who showed her self very angry toward me
and said: Thou Lazarus do not seek to amend thy life, whereas thou did
promise me (being in the Sea) not to let me depart from thee, and now since
thou came forth, thou have in a manner never once looked upon me: for which
cause, the divine Justice has thought it good to punish thee in this, yt in
thine own Country and in thine house thou should not be known, but
should be put unto the rack, as an evil dooer. In the morning thy wife will
come, and thou shall be delivered with thy honor and credit. And so she
departed, leaving me very joyful of such a vision, knowing she said most
true, and that my punishment was most just, because the lies which I told and
mixed with my speech were so many and so great, although those that were true,
were very strange and wonderful of themselves, that they were sufficient with
the very fear in hearing of them to strike men dead: which fault I determined
to repent and amend, and for the same was very sorrowful. Morning being come,
my iesture and countenance became as it was at the first, and then I was known
both of my Master and my wife, and so taken out of prison and brought home to
my house, where I found my daughter almost big enough to make another. And
after I had rested my self for a time, I returned again unto my pot and my
cup, whereby in short space after I had my own proper iesture, and a pleasant
good life.

CHAP. XIIII. How Lazarus went unto Salamanca, and of the friendship he found
there, and of the disputation he held with the Rector, and how he dealt with
the Students of the University.
I Living somewhat at my pleasure, and being very well used and apparelled,
had a desire to travel from thence to see the Country of Spain, and to sport
and solace my self for a time, because I was in a manner filled with the
shadow of the sea. And thinking with my self whether I should goe^, at the
last I went unto Salamanca, where it is said the seven Sciences have their
dwelling place: and it was thus, that I had many times wished and desired to
prove if I could deceive any one of those Abbots or long gowned fellows,
which call themselves Licenciates. And as the town is full of them, so the
smell and savor of them stretches far and near, although I pray God keep
them from my house in the night time. I went therefore presently unto that
town: and thinking upon the sea; wherein I had been, I meruailed with my self
to beholo that I saw in the town, which was somewhat more than I had heard
reported of it, whereof I will tell you, specially of one thing that happened
unto me therein. I going along in one of the greatest streets, met a man riding
upon an ass, (and because as then I was somewhat small eyed and weary, I
could not go any further, nor yet turn backward without great pain) the man
began to cry out and say, Out of the way Signior Bachelor. I stird not, but
giving him a more honorable name, cride, Out of the way Signior Licenciado, out
of the way in the devils name: and therewith began to lay upon him with a
staff that I bare in my hand. Whereat you might presently have seen him kick
forwards and backwards: so that what with master Licenciado on one side, and
the Cauallero on the other, I never in my life saw better sport, nor a
Licenciado of his quality, unto whom all men gave place, or that had so many
people to behold him. But then I knew him presently to be one that caused
himself to be honored with great names, as I had done in the sea, because of
my force and valor, among the Tonnyes.

Yet nevertheless they did honor to others as well as unto me, for although
they called me Signior, yet they gave me no more liberty thereby, than I got
unto my self by force, among them. So that I assure your worship, if I should
continue long there, I would rather be the Asse-headed Licencioado, then poor
Lazarillo de Tormes. From thence, being among the prease, I went into a
College, where I saw so many Students, and heard so many voices, that I dare
say there was not one among them but was more wearied with crying, than with
wit. And among many of others that I knew (although not one of them knew me)
as God would I found one of my friends of Toledo, with whom I had bin
acquainted, and he served with two masters, which were of the best in the
College. He being a wise fellow, and waiting on them in their chamber, told
his masters of me, in such manner, that it was worth a dinner and somewhat more
unto me. True it is, it was after the manner of Colleges, a short dinner, and
little meat, ill dressed and worse served: for I assure you, there was never a
bone yt escaped without breaking and sucking. In dinner time we talked of many
things, and I replied again so well, that they both perceived I had gone further
for my experience, than they had done for their knowledge: then I told them
what had happened unto Lazarus, and that with such words, that they all asked
me, where I had studied, whether in France, Flanders, or in Italy, and if at
that time it had pleased God to have granted me but a word or two of Latin, I
had posed them all, but at the last I left off speaking, being not desirous to
give them occasion to ask me any more, lest they might propounde something
whereunto I could not answer. Nevertheless they thinking me to be an other
manner of man than I was, determined to have me openly defend certain
conclusions, and I because I knew them all to be Castilians, as I my self
am, so that without shame I might show my self before them all, refused not,
for he that knows how to behave himself among the Tonnies, which play but
with their snoutes, will make his party good enough with them that play but
with their tongues: The time was appointed to be the next day following, and
all the University were charged to be there without fail, for to hear us,
where your worship might have seen your Lazarus in greatest honor in the
City, set among so many Doctors, Licentialls, and Batchellers, that I assure
you, the tenth part of them were sufficient to till all ye fields in Spain,
and with the tithes thereof, to satisfy the whole world: there you might
behold so many colors of apparel, and so many degrees in the seats, that
there was no account made of a man, but of his degree. And before I went in
among them, they would have had me apparelled as they were, which Lazarus
refused, because that seeing I was a stranger, and not any student of that
university, they ought not to wonder at the same, but rather to judge by the
learning, (because the disputation was to that end) then by the apparel,
although it were unaccustomed. I saw them all in such order and so grave, to
say the truth, whosoever should say I had more fear than shame, or rather more
shame than fear, should not mock me. But to come to the matter, Lazarus being
set in his place, (behold what a student I was) every one seeing my Doctorall
presence, and how gravely I could behave my self, and in as good order as
they, the Rector desired to be the first that might dispute with me, although it
were not the custom among them. And so he propounded a question somewhat hard
and difficult to be answered: asking me how many Tons of water are in the
sea, whereunto (I being a man well studied, and it not being long since my
coming from thence,) knew very well how to answer: saying, he should cause
all the waters to be staid and kept in one place: which done, I would quickly
measure it, and then satisfy his demand. He hearing my short and ready
answer, such as the best of them all could not have mended, and being at a
stay, for that he thought to have posed me, finding it to be impossible with
that question to do it, left that charge unto me to measure it, and then to
tell him. The Rector being abashed with that answer, put an other argument
unto me, thinking to try my wit, to see if I would make him as pithie an
answer to the second, as I did unto the first: he asked me how many days had
passed from the creation of Adam, until that time: as though I had bin always
living in the world, with a pen in my hand keeping account of them, when as
to tell you the truth, I do not remember mine own, but only that I was once a
priests boy, and then a schoolemaisters boy, and such like, whereof I kept
better account than of my days. But this notwithstanding I answered him,
saying there was no more then seven, because that when those seven are past,
there follows other seven, and so it had continued from the beginning of the
world until that time, and should likewise continue so to the end of the world:
then your worship might have seen Lazaro esteemed a great Doctor, among the
Doctors, and a wise master of art among the Licentiates. Now the third
question was for to win the victory, and because I had waded so well out of two
of them, the Rector thought that in the third I would be graueled. Wherefore he
willed me to satisfy him in the third question: whereat I answered him very
readily, that I would do so, and that not only to his third, but to as many as
he would propounde between that and the next day. Then he asked me, where the
end of the world is? What Philosophers are these said I unto my self? for
seeing that I never went about the whole world, how can I answer him? But if
he had asked me the end of the water, I could have answered him somewhat
better. Yet I answered unto his question, and said it to be in the same place,
wherein we then were, and if he measured it he should certainly find it to be
so, offering if it were not true, that they should esteem and account me
unworthy to enter into any College, he perceiving himself shamde by my
answers, and that still thinking to give a good check, he received an ill
mate, put me the fourth question very boldly, asking me how far the earth is
from heaven. Your worship might then have seen me hake and spit, thinking how
to answer, for I was almost at a non plus, because he knew very well, that
I never went any such way, if he had asked me what manner of life the Tonnies
use, and what language they speak, I could have given better reason for it,
yet I was not therewith altogether grounded, but answered him, that heaven is
very near unto the earth, for that the songs that men sing here upon earth,
are heard up into heaven, how soughtly soever men sing or speak, which if he
would not believe, I had him go up into heaven, and I would sing here below
very soughtly, and if he did not hear it, he should condemn me for a fool.
I assure your worship, that at the same answer you might have seen the Rector
at such an exigent, that ceasing to propound any more questions, he left off,
referring the rest unto others: but when they saw him thus foiled, there was
not one of them that durst begin, but all leaving their places, said and
affirmed my answers to be most excellent. Whereat I never saw my self to be
so much honored among men, nor so much Signiored here, and Signiored there,
so that Lazarus his honor increased daily: which was partly the more, because
of the apparel the good Duke gave me, for if it had not been for them, those
long gowned fellows would have made no more account of me, than I did of the
Tonnyes in the sea, although I dissembled. But then they all came unto me, some
commending me for my prompt and witty answers, and others being glad to see
and hear me speak. Whereby (this my great ability being seen) the name of
Lazarus was in every man's mouth, and I walked through the City with more
buzzing and noise, than I did among the Tonnyes. My hosts bad me to supher
with them, and I was as willing to go, although I seemed to refuse them at the
first, making as though I were bidden by others: and to conclude we supt, I
need not tell you with what, because it was a Licenciates supper, after their
manner, although I perceived very well that the supper was prepared by
changing of books, and yet it was good enough. After we had supt, and the
cloth taken away, there was a pair of cards laid on the board for a
collation, which was a daily custom, and surely I was better learned in them,
than in the disputations of the Rector. At the last money began to be laid upon
the board, which I desired to see: and they as being very nimble in that art,
knew how to use a thousand shifts and flights to compass me in, I had almost
lost all my money, for that for a while it went but crossely with me, but at
the last I handled the matter so well, that they paid for all, and for the
supper likewise, and I put fifty royalls of plate in my purse that I got among
them. I would wish ye to beware of him that has bin a signior among the
Tonnies. Ever after they would take heed of Lazaro, and I to dispatch my self
away, prayed them to speak somewhat unto me in Tonnyes language: if not they
could not understand me.

But after that, fearing least they should offer me any injury, and because no
occasion might be had, I departed from them, thinking that I could not always
have good fortune at play. So I determined to return home again, making my
self merry with the fifty ryals I had gotten, and somewhat more withal, which
for their credits I will not presently rehearse: and coming to my house, I
found all well there, only that there wanted money. Then I called to mind the
Dollors that lie hidden in the sea, and therewith I began to be sad, and
thought with my self, that if I might speed as well as I did in Salamanca, I
would set up a school in Toledo, and though it were only to teach the
Tonnies language which I think no man but would desire to study it. But
thinking better upon the matter, I saw there was nothing to be gotten, because
it would be no profit to any man, wherewith I left off my devise, although I
could have been well content to have had the fame, to be the founder of a
University in so noble a City, and the inuenter of a new language never
known before among men. Hitherto I have showed you the course of my life,
since the voyage of Argel, what more shall happen, as time serves, your
worship shall be certified thereof. In the mean time, I rest wholly at your
commandment and service.

Yours, Lazaro de Tormes

FINIS.

