A PLAIN TREATISE TO LEARN IN A SHORT SPACE THE FRENCH TONGVE, DIVIDED IN
TWO BOOKS.

IE VIS EN esperance.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for certain of the Company.

Anno. M.D.LXXVI.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

A TRESILLVSTRE ET PVISSANT SEIGNEVR, MONSEIGNEVR, EDOVARD SEYMOVR BARON DE
BEAVCHAMP ET CONTE DE HERTFORD.
MOnseigneur, le coeur qui est acco^paigne de quelque bonne volunte, ou enuers
Dieu, ou enuers les hommes, se sent tousiours esguillonne a fair chose qui
puisse apporter instruction ou commodite aux autres. Or combien que ie confess
franchement que ie ne suis pas tell, que ce qui proceed de moy, soit digne de
venir en la lumiere des hommes: Toutesfoys considerant, que nostre deuoir est
de nous esuertuer (selon le peu qui est en nous) pour nous employer a un bien
commun, I'ay bien voulu enfaire un essay en ce mien petit traite, touchant
nostre langue Francoises Il est vray que ce n'a este sans en estre requis de
plusieurs, l'esquelz mesme mont employe pour l'apprendre, and ont estime que
mo^ labeur leur auoit grandement profitte, au judgment desquelz in ay beaucoup
defere, and ne leur voudroy refuser, rien qui fust en mon pounoir. Mais encores
que la chose, leur ait este aggreable, si est ce qu' il me sembloit ne
satisfaire, au bon vouloir que i'ay en leur endroit and de tous ceux de ce
Royaume slorissant. Neantmoins es^ant conseille voire persuade de mes amiss
(lesquels l'ont diligemment leu and trouue^ qu'il seroit profitable) ie me suis
d'auantage enhardi de le mettre en auant. Cependant d'autant qu'il sera expose
au judgment de plusieurs, and ne sera horse du danger de beaucoup de
detractions, tellement que s'il n'a la faueur de quelque grand and vertueux
personnage, a grand peine pourra-ilpasser sans estre naure. A ceste cause,
Monseigneur, confiderant les vertuz excellentes (desquelles vostre grandeur est
ornee, qui larend, encores plus respectable, and la debonnairete qui conuie un
chascun de se mettre en vostre protection, i'ay prins la hardiesse de le vous
presenter humblement, tant a fin d'estre fauorise and soustenu de vostre
autorite, que pour le receu^^^ (tell qu'il est) selon vostre grande benignite,
and de tell vouloir, comme par moy vostre treshumble seruiteur vous est offert
and present, non qu'il soit digne de vous, ou que vous en puissieZ reccuoir
quelque profit, veu que vousparlez autant bien and elegamment Francois
qu'onscauroit demander. Mais attendu qu'il peut apporter vtilite a d'autres qui
desirent d'apprendre nostre langue, and qu'estes un de ceux qui procurez and
aimeZ autant le bien and commodite d'un chascun, comme le vostre mesme, ie
m'assure que pour ceste cause vous y prendrez a tout le moins quelque
contentement, and principallement s'il aduient qu'il puisse profitter a
messeigneurs voz enfans: Car c'est ce que ie desire de tout mon coeur, and
prac. Dieu qu'ainsi soit. Quifera l'endroict monseigneur, ou ie prendray con^e
de vous pour le present, pressed auec vne affection a vous fair, and a eux,
treshumble service, comme des a present ie m'y voue, non pour un temps, a la
facon de ceux qui ne parlent que de la bouche, mais de tout mon coeur and toute
ma vie: Car le salaire de tell obligation est perdurable, a cause qu'il
proceed de virtue. Priant Dieu qu'il me face la grace de fair chose quisoit
digne de vostre Excellence and debonnairete, and qu'il vueille par sa grande
bonte and grace infinie vous donner, Monseigneur, toute largess de ces
benedictions and a toute vostre Noble posterite.

Vostre treshumble and tresaffectionne seruiteur G. Ledoyen De la Pichonnaye.

A plain Treatise to learn in a short space the French tongue (.?.)
THere be two and twenty letters in the French tongue, the which we will
expound after the order of the cross row, having first made to be
understood how they ought to be pronounced every one by it self, then joined
with others in any word: and afterward, when they do keep their sound,
and when they do lose it, or change it, for herein consists all the
difficulty of the tongue, my respect in this work is to strangers and
specially to English men, for whom I write, which marueyle (and not
without cause) for that often times we do not sound our letters, according
to their own nature, but do change them into an other sound, and sometime
we do not only so alter them, but leave them unsounded even as if they were
not written. First therefore they must presuppose that it is the nature of the
tongue as of many other, and also of their own, and they may not deny it,
for experience does show it, I will not say in some words but almost in
all, and yet they can yield no other reason for it, than use. But I do hope in
this my Treatise to do more concerning our tongue, not for to praise or extol
it, but to ondeuour to satisfy them, that are so desirous to learn it, and to
stir them up the rather so to do, for that hereby my mind is (with the
grace of God) to teach them: and I will yield them a reason, why this letter
here is sounded and that letter there is not, and why a letter is pronounced
in one place, and not in another, and also by what reason this letter here is
rather sounded with that letter there, then with another, and to conclude I
vvil omit nothing (if I can) that may be profitable and necessary for
Englishmen to know forthwith, to read well, to pronounce, and speak
French. For I will apply my self to them and to resolve the doubts that
they may move, vvherof oftentimes I have reasoned with certain, whom I did
so answer, that for the most part I contented them: in so much that already
knovving some part of their mind of this matter, it will be the easier for me
to make them understand it, co^ferring herein their tongue with ours, and
giving them examples thereof, for thereby the matter shall be unto them more
and more manifested, which being done, I shall think thereinto have much
eased many that were so laden with difficulties and doubts (that they did see
in our French Grammars, that they were constrained to give over and leave
all* yea, seeing them selves deceived by their Teachers, who promised unto
them mountains of gold, and made them believe th^^ (...) tongue was so
obscure as none could be more, but with the labor and industry, that they
should take, they would make it easy for them: and all this came to nothing,
and yet to a very great thing, considering the harm and tediousness that the
learners received thereof. Likevvyse I trust I shall again encourage those that
were in the way to learn it, the which I vvishe with all my heart: For I
desire nothing else in this world, but the profit and furtherance of every
one, and the rather because it is a deed of charity, of the which the
Heathen also have had some natural instinct, as may be seen by their books,
that they have left unto us in vvriting, where they all cry with one
accord, that we are not only borne for our selves, but for our Parents, for
our Country, and for all those that do us good, and that show themselves
charitable unto us. Now of devvtie I ought to procure the profit of them of
this Country, for the great benefits that we do receive of them, and let no
man think that I do set forth this for any other occasion, that is to say;
for lucre or any other vain thing, for he should be much deceived, and also I
vvoulde accuse him of the same vice. For even as he that has his mouth out of
taste, thinks that every thing that he eats is also evil sauouring and
corrupted, even so it is of those that delight to reprehe^de other, which they
never could do except they were stuffed and defiled, yea rotten with vices,
which they would cast (if they could) upon others. Therefore I pray the^ to
leave of such fopperies, for so they may be called, and let them bestow their
time in goodness, if they will that men esteem of them, as they vvoulde be
esteemed of. As touching the rest, if their perverse nature will needs be
occupied in such their biting actions, the truth will byte the^ so hard, that
their good name shall first feel the same and will make them to be cut with
their own svvorde. For that which moved me to take this matter in hand,
was the great love and affection that I bear to English men, and also the
request of many Lords and Gentelmen, with whom I have spent much time, being
conversant and communicating with them, of the pronounciatio^ of our tongue,
so that I durst not say them nay, although I have not been much trained up in
their tongue. But they have promised me, that if I doubted of any word,
touching the conferring of their tongue with ours, or in this translation,
that they vvoulde aid me. So that resting upon this their aid, and favor, I
did not then doubt to enterprise this little Treatise. And as concerning our
tongue, if I do not observe all things as I should, neither yet content the
students, as I would the blame must not be laid on me, seeing that not I
alone, but all those that have written of it, have not comprehended the forth
part of our tongue in rules or precepts: Notvvithstanding that which I could
not do, as I vvoulde, I have recompensed by labor as you shall see hereafter
in the order that I keep, as well in the expounding of every letter, as in
the knowledge of words, to vveete, of what part of speech they are. But
before we come to the understanding of the words, we must speak of the
letters, of which the words are formed: to the end that having the nature
of the simple, we may more easily come to the compoundes, as from letters, to
syllables, and from syllables, to words, and from words to speeches.
Therefore vvilling to expound first the letters, we must of nature and reason
begin at, A, for it is the first in order, and for to see the same clearly I
will write all our two and twenty letters in this manner

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. X. Y. Z.

A plain treatise to learn in a short space the French tongue, divided in
two books.
Of A.
A, Is pronounced plainly of the French men, opening a little more the mouth
than Englishmen do. A, ought to be sounded every where, and with every
letter, except when it is joined with, i, and, y, for then it loses his sound,
and it is pronounced as this, e, which we call masculine: as for example of,
ai, fair, to do fere, aimer to love emer, plaindre, to complain plendre, of
ay, feray, I will do fere, diray, I will say dire, ayderay, I will help
edere, and likewise in all other words where they shall be found. A, with an
accent in this sort, a, shows that the word following is a Noune of the
Dative case, and signifies in English this Article, To: as in deed it is the
Article of the dative case in our tongue, as in this example, donnez cela a mo^
maistre, give that to my master. Ditez a vostre Pere, que ie fais bonne chere,
Tell your Father, that I do make good cheer. A, without an accent betokens
the third person of Verbes of our second Preterperfect tense, as in these
examples, a dit, has said, a aim, has loved, a parle, has spoken, and so
of all such like. And last of all, A, also is a note of the third person, and
singular number of this Verb, ay, have, as Il a mon liver, He has my book.
Il a authorite, He has authority.

Of B.
B, is pronounced in this manner, be, as if the e, were always joined with it,
although that it be not there, neither ought to be there: but it is the nature
of it so to be pronounced in our tongue. B, among the vowelles is always
pronounced, and at the beginning of words, except at the end, and when it is
before some consonant. An example of the words where it is at the end: as
Plomb, Lead, and such like, of those where it is in the midst: as debte,
debte, debuoir, dewtie, because that, u, in this place after, b, is made a
consonant.

Of C.
C, is pronounced as this word, Ce, and keeps his pronounciation in all
words. It is true, that when it is written with a half circle underneath,
then it is pronounced as, S, and this is, when it is joined with, a, and, o: as
scauoir, knowledge, Francoys, Francis, facon, fashion. C, joined with, t, in
the end of a word is never expressed, but in the midst, it is, if it be
between two vowelles: as victorieux, victorious, acteur, a dooer, protecteur,
a defender, diction, a word, faction, a deed: also when it is joined with,
h, and, a, it is pronounced: as, sha, an example, champ, a field, Charretier,
a Charter, as if they were written thus, shamp, sharrtier, and so of others.

Of D.
D, is pronounced as this syllable, de, the which is expressed in all words,
except certain, as well in the beginning as at the end. An example of those,
where it is found in the beginning and not pronounced: as aduocasser, to
plead, aduenir, to come, adiourner, to adiourne, aduiser, to advise, aduertir,
to aduert, adiouster, to add. Of, D, at the end: as profond, deep, roud,
round, grand, great, quand, when, as if profond and the other were written
with, t, in this sort profont, etc.

Of E.
E, is pronounced diversely in our tongue because we make two sorts of E, the
one masculine, and the other feminine, in such sort, that according as it is,
so is it pronounced, we will speak then first of the nature of e, masculine:
which is pronounced plainly and more stronglye than the other, as the word
wherein it is more plainly declares, the which may yet more easily be
co^ceyues of them chiefly, that understand the Latin tongue. For our, e,
masculine, is like their latin, e, which they sound in the end of their
words: as me, me, te, the, se, himself, Domine, O Lord, amare, to love, and
so of all the other. The which, e, besides this caryeth a mark evident enough,
which is a sharp accent in this sort, e, so that a man shall never fail to
know it by this means, seeing it so noted over the head. As touching the e,
feminine, it is hard to pronounce it because that it has not any sign that
should make it to be known: And especially, the Englishmen cannot pronounce
it at the end of their words, because they be not accustomed so to do, as
may be seen in these words sort, concord, able. But I would require them to
accustom themselves to pronounce it, and in place that they make but one
syllable of sort, that they make thereof two, and so of other the like. And
would advertise those that have studied the Latin tongue to pronounce the
said, e, femini. as they pronounce, e, in the second syllable of verbes of the
third Coniugatio^: as in facere, to do, legere, to read, dicere, to say.
Now beside these two sorts of, e, e, there is yet found an other different,
notwithstanding from the other two: and it is always before S, be it at the
beginning, in the midst, or at the end of words: and is pronounced between
a, and, e, as the Latinistes do this diphtonge, ae, which may and ought to be
thus written, ae, as in these words aestre, to be, senaestre, a window,
aupraes, near. Now since we have told how they are pronounced, it is
necessary (following our order) to see whither they keep their pronounciatio^
and whither they alter not: e, masculine never changes his sound, nor this,
e, neuter: but, e, feminine is changed, as when it is joined with, n, and, m,
in one and the self same syllable, for then it is pronounced between, e, and,
a, turning yet more upon, a, than upon, e: as, entendement, understanding, as
if it were written with, a: thus, antandema^t, Empereur, an Emperor, as
Ampereur, except in these words bien, well, mien, mine, tien, thine, sien,
his, rien, nothing, combien, although, where it keeps his own pronounciation.

Of F.
F, is pronou^eed as this word here effe, which is expressed almost in all
words except some, to weete, those where it is put before, S, as for example,
beufs, beefes, oeufs, eggs, vifs, quick, fugitiss, fugitives, for otherwise
if, S, did not follow, it should be expressed.

Of G.
G, is pronounced in our tongue as this syllable Ie, compounded of, I, a
consonant, and, e, masculine, which letter ought to be observed diligently of
Englishmen. For this is it where with they find themselves much combred, and
especially when it is joined with, i, and, e, for then we pronounce it
otherwise than they do: they pronounce it as the Greeks, and as we do ke,
ki, as for example: give and gif, but a Frenchman would pronounce give, as if
it were written thus Ieue, by our I, consonant. So that Englishmen ought to
note upon this that always and so often as they shall see in our tongue, g,
joined with, e, or, i, they must pronounce it, as an, I, co^sonant: as in this
word geste, gesture, gist, lies, and all other such like, as if they were
written in this sort Ieste, Iist: Those which are exercised in the Latin
tongue may easily learn it, for we pronounce, g, even as the Latinistes do
the, g, when it is joined with, e, and, i: as, gero, I behave, gigno, I beget.
There remains to observe of this letter, g, that when it goes before, n, of
necessity it must be spelled and joined together with, n, following, and not
with the letters going before, striking the roufe of the mouth with the root
and flat of the tongue, and so join together these two letters: as thus,
compa-gnon, and not compag-non, these three, gua, gue, gui. ought also to be
well noted of the Englishmen, who in them would pronounce the, u, as in this
word: guarentir, to warrant, guarir, to heal: But they must take great heed
of it, and pronounce them, as if u, were not there at all, and as it were thus
written garentir, garir, even as they do pronounce this word Gabriel, or any
other word in their tongue which is written by, ga, an example of gue, as in
this word guerre, war, whereof the first syllable must be pronounced, as they
pronounce the first of this word give, except in this word, arguer, to argue,
where, o, is pronounced, an example of, gui: as guider, to guide, deguiser,
disguyse. For there, gui, is pronounced as Englishmen do the first, gi, of
Gilforde, it is true that there are some words excepted from this Rule of
gui, where, u, is pronounced: as esguillon, a stinge, esguille, a needle,
esguiser, to sharpen. G, in the end of the word, is not pronounced as g, but
in a manner as c: as in long, long, as if it were thus written lonc, g, is not
also pronounced in this word cognoistre, to know.

Of H.
H. is pronounced in French, as English men pronounce this word, ash, which
is called fresne, in our tongue: it loses his pronou^ciation in the beginning
of words, which be of two, three, and four syllables: as homme, a man,
honneur, honor, habillement, garment, heures, boures, except some, where it is
pronounced, as in hache, a spear, hachis, a gallymawfrye, haine, hatred,
hazard, hazard, hardi, bardie, hatif, hasty, haste, haste, and in words of
one syllable it is always pronounced: as horse, out, hault, high, and so of
others like. Also it keeps his pronounciation being joined together with all
the letters, except with, p, r, t, for with those it is not pronounced at all,
an example of, p: as fantasy, fantasy, philosophy, philosophy, phiole,
vial or bottell, phisicien, a physician, and then, p. and h, take the
signification of, f, an example of r: as Rhetoricque; Rhetorike, of, t: as
thalent, a talent, Theater, a game place, threfor, treasure.

Of I.
We do not pronounce I so broad as Englishmen do, which in deed pronounce
it so, that it seems to them which are not accustomed to hear the^, that
they pronounce this diphthonge, oi, ei, and, ai, in such sort that they have
also such a pronounciation in their latin, as in this word Domini, Lords,
which they pronounce, as if it were written in this sort domainai, and so of
others. And therefore to pronounce it well as the French men, Spaniards,
Italians, and specially they, which speak yet somewhat naturally the Latin
tongue and consequently have better the pronounciation than those which speak
it but by art. They must then strain the tongue more than they do, and
therewith strike a little, only against the roufe of the mouth and against the
fore teeth in opening them a little that they may eschew this broad and gross
sound that they have accustomed to give unto it. We have, I, a vowell, and, I,
a consonant as the Latins have, I, a vowell is before the consonantes: as
Ignorant, Ignorant, Imagination, Imagination. I, a consonant is known by this,
that it goes before a vowell in one and the self same syllable: as jamais,
never, jeunesse, youth, jaloux, ielous, jadis. sometime, ja, already, jeter, to
cast, jouir, to enjoy, joieux, joyous, just, just.

Of L.
L, alone by himself is pronounced as this word elle, which Englishmen must
observe, seeing by this word they may see how they must pronounce it more
openly: I mean alone, for a double ll, is not pronounced so openly, and
specially if these diphthongs, ai, oi, ei, and, ui, go before it, and any other
vowell follow it, and then it must be pronounced with the flat of the tongue
touching the roufe of the mouth, as young Scholars do pronounce the first
syllable of luceo, I shine, the second of saluto, I salute: as for example,
bailler, to give, veiller, to watch, grenoille, a frogge, bouillir, to boil,
and when it is between simple vowelles: as faucille, a sickle, bille, a bille,
fille, a daughter, and so of other, except ville, a town. syllabe, a syllable,
also, l, simple is pronounced in all places, as a liquide, that is l, m, n, r,
saving when it is before a Consonant in one and the self same syllable, and
then it loses his pronounciatio^, as in these words fills, a son, fols,
fools, fault, a fault, aultre, an other.

Of M.
M, is by it self pronounced in this sort emme, as if it were a word of
these two syllables, and it is always pronounced except at the end of words
where it is changed only into, n: as nom, a name, Adam, Adam, Abraham,
Abraham, for you must pronounce them as if they were written by, n, thus non,
Adan. etc. M. also after, e, is pronounced as, n: as Empereur, Enpereur, an
Emperor.

Of N.
N, ought to be pronounced as this word of two syllables, enne, the which is
pronounced in all words as well at the beginning, as in the midst, and at
the end: because it is a liquide, except, notwithstanding in the third
persons of Verbes of the Plural number. For there, n, before, e, is never
pronounced: example aiment, do love, aimoyent, did love, aimerent, loved,
aimeroyent, should love, aimassent, had loved, as if they were written
without, n, in this sort aimet, aimoiet, aimeret, aimeroyet, aimasset.

Of O.
O, is a vowell which is pronounced after our fashion in all tongues: And
therefore I will not stay more thereupon, I will only say that it keeps his
pronounciatio^ in all places except in a diphthong. For then it is changed
into e, masculine: as congnoistre, to know, congnestre, oeuure, a work, euure.

Of P.
P, is a consonant which is alone pronounced as this syllable, Pe, which being
put before another consonant is not pronounced, except in, apt, apt, also, p,
before, h, and a vowell loses his sound, for it is pronounced, as, f, an
example philosophe, a philosopher, as if it were written by, f, thus, filosofe,
and so of other the like.

Of Q.
Q, is pronounced as, cu, which is always joined with, u, and, a, u, and e, u,
and, i, u, and o, and notwithstanding you may not say, qua^, que, qui, quo,
quu, as in Latin, Italian, or English, but, qua, must be pronounced as if it
were written with, k, and, a, in this sort, ka, as for example quattre, four,
as, kattre, banqueter, to banquet, as banketer, antiquite, antiquity,
antikite, quo, and, quu, are not pronounced as ko, and, ku, but as, co, and,
cu, as it is easy to see in these examples quoter, to cote, as if it were
written, coter, and, quoy, what, as, coy, and, quu, always as, cu.

Of R.
R, of his nature is a letter very sharp and rude, which our tongue cannot
easily abide, we temper and mollify the sound of it, for otherwise in our
tongue it has no grace. Nevertheless I would not therefore you should be so
delicate, that you should altogether leave it, and that you should be like to
the women of Paris, who are so nyce that they can not pronounce it without
hurting their mouth (as they think) for in steed of saying Pere, Father, they
say peze, or, pese, and in steed of Mere, Mother, meze, or mese, but you must
keep a mean, between both.

Of S.
S, is pronounced as this word, esse, which for the first when it is between
two vowels loses his sound, and is turned into, z: as maison, a house,
saison, a season, as if they were written thus maizon, saizon. Otherwise it
keeps his own pronounciation but because it is not pronounced always,
chiefly being before another consonant: but in few, by reason of the co^course
of two consonants, which we think to be rude in our tongue, it is very
necessary to know in what words it is pronounced, and in what it is not
expressed: For this is it where the greatest part of those that desire to
learn our tongue, are hindere^, not knowing when they must pronounce it, or
leave it: which also is hard to know and almost impossible, if it be not by
great experience and long observation of the words. For they do but mock
themselves, and deceive other, that think to contain the same by certain
rules, and to forge them after their own fasie as may do, to the end to
feed men with such vanities. Therefore seeing of two burdens the less is to
be taken, I will set forth in the table following by the order of the cross
row all the words where the, S, joined with any consonant in one and the
self same syllable is pronounced: seeing that there is not of them so many, as
there be of them where, S, joined with a consonant is not pronounced, for he
that knows one, knows the other: forasmuch as he that knows the nature
of one contrary, he knows consequently the nature of the other.

A table of all the French words where, S, joined with an other consonant is
pronounced after the order of the letters.
A.
Abstenir, to abstain. Acoster, to meet. Acostable, familiare. aposturne, an
impostume. Asperger, to sprinckle. Assister, to assist. Apostat, an apostatate.
Aposter, to become an apostatate. Austere, severe. Auguste, noble.
B.
Bastille, a bulwark. Bastillo^, a little bulwark. Bosquet, a grove.
C.
Celeste, heavenly. Chaste, Chaste. Clistere, a glister. Confisquer, to
co^fiscate. Consister, to consist. Conspirer, to c^^spire. Constant, constant.
Constellation, a constellation. Constituer, to appoint. Constrister, to make
sad, and those that descend of them.
D.
Desespoir, despair. Destiner, to appoint. Destituer, to want. Detester, to
detest. Digestion, digestion. Discretion, discretion. Discret, discrete.
Discorder, to disagree. Discourse, a discourse. Discussion, a discussion.
Dispenser, to dispense. Disposer, to dispose. Disputer, to dispute. Distance, a
distance. Distiller, to drop down. distinguer, to distinguish Distrere, to
withdraw. Distribuer, to distribute. Domesticque, household. Disgrace,
disgrace. Demonstration, a demonstracion. Description, a description. Desastre,
mischaunce.
E.
Embuscade, a conspiracy, or laying in wait for. Escarpins, pumpes or pinsons.
Escrimeur, a fenser. Espace, a space. Esperer, to hope. Esprit, Spirit.
Estimer, to esteem. Estomac, the stomach. Escadron, an array. Esquif, a boat.
F.
Festin, a banquet. Fistule, a fistola. Frustrer, to frustrate.
G.
Geste, a gesture.
H.
Histoire, an History. Histrion, a stage player.
I.
Inspiration, inspiration. Instable, inconstant. Instamment, instantly.
Instinct, instinct. Instinguer, to provoke. Instruire, to instruct. Instrument,
an instrument. Intestins, the inward parts. Iuriste, a Lawyer. Iusques,
until. Just, just. Iurisconsulte, a lawyer.
L.
Luster, a show.
M.
Manifester, to manifest. Masquer, to mask. Modeste, modest. Moleste,
grievous. Monastere, a monastery. Monstre, a monser. Muscadet, muskadell.
Mystere, a mystery.
N.
Nonobstant, notwithstanding.
O.
Obscurcir, to darcken. Obstiner, to be or make obstinate.
P.
Pasteur, a pastor. Pastenades, carret roots. Persister, to persist. Peste,
plague. Postuler, to require. Presque, almost. Proscrire, to write for.
Prosperer, to prosper. Prosterner, to prost^^^. Protester, to pro^^^^.
Postposer, to set after. Posterieur, latter. Posterite, posterite. Posthume,
one borne after his fathers death. Post, a post. Postidate, a day deferred.
Q.
Quaestion, a question.
R.
Respirer, to breath. Restituer, to restore. Restaurer, to restore.
S.
Superstition, superstition. Suspect, suspect. Suspendre, to hang up.
Sultenter, to sustain. Subministrer, to serve under.
T.
Testament, a testament. Testicule, a stone. Testifier, to testify. Testonner,
to rub with a comb. Transcrire, to write out. Transformer, to transform.
Transgressor, to transgress. Transmettre, to transmitte, or se^^^e ^uer.
Transmuer, to remove from one place to another. Transporter, to transport.
Transposer, to transpose. Triste, sad.
As for these four last letters following, that is to say u, x, y, z. There
are not found any words which begin by them, where S, looked with an other
consonant is pronounced, behold therefore all that I could gather upon this
letter, S, that might be profitable and necessary for the students.

Of T.
T, is pronounced as this word, Te, which in all words keeps his
pronounciation except in the end of nounes, wherein it is not expressed, but in
the end of verbes it is pronounced softly, to the end, (...), masculine be not
sounded after it, so that to do this we may not strike much with the tongue
against the roufe of the mouth, but as little as a man can, not opening the
mouth to much, for fear of falling into the fault of the Bourguignions
Wallons, which pronounce it so strongly that of a word of two syllables they
make three: as of mengent, they eat, they will make mengente, donnent, they
give, donnente. Therefore I advertise you to pronounce this letter, T, rather to
softlye, than to much for our tongue requires it.

Of V.
V, is pronounced in shutting the mouth and closing the lips round together,
which is both a consonant and a vowell: a consonant, when it is before an other
vowell: as vous, you, vostre, yours, voir, to see, and a vowell, when it is
before a Consonant: as luster, a show, doucement, sweetly, rude, rude. Now we
must note, that as it is a vowell, it is not pronounced after, q, nor after, g,
as for example of, q, quantite, quantity, quattre, four, which words
English men must pronounce, as if they were written by, k, and, a, in this
sort kantite, kattre: of, g, as langue, a tongue, bague, a ring, which they
must pronounce also leaving the, u, and pronouncing the, e, that abides with
the, g, as they do their a, or else between both if they were written thus,
langa, baga, mittigating notwithstanding, as much as they may the
pronounciatio^ of the, a, in tourning it upon, e.

Of X.
X, is pronounced as if, i, were joined together with it, in this sort, Ix,
which being at the end of words has the sound of, S, as cheuaux, horses,
cheueux, hears, beaux, fair, deux, two, but in the midst, betwixt two
vowels, it has the signification of two letters that is to say, c, s: as in
these words Alexandre, Alexander, exemple, example, which must be pronounced as
if they were written by, c, s, in this manner ecsemple, Alecsandre.

Of Y.
Y, is rightly called of us by the name of Greek, for it is also a vowell of
ye Greeks, which keeps in all places his pronounciation, and is like to our
vowell, i, being never changed, but when it is after, a, for then the
pronounciation of it is turned into our, e, masculine.

Of Z.
Z, is pronounced as this word, zedes, and because English men pronounce it as
we do, I will not stay any more thereof. True if is that at the end of words
we pronounce it as, S.

Of Diphthongs.
WE have four principal diphthongs, which are changed: of which I will
speak, for as for the other diphthongs there needs no mention to be made of
them, seeing they are pronounced as they be written: the four are these ai,
ei, oi, ui, of which ye three first be changed into, e, masculine, and the
fourth into, i: an example of ai, aimer, to love, emer, of ei, pleindre, to
complain, plendre, of oi, congnoistre, to know, congnestre, of ui, bouillir,
to boil. There is yet an other diphthong, which I will not leave out because
it is changed also into, e, and that is, oe: as coeur, a heart, ceur, oeuure, a
work, euure, soeur, sistet, seur.

Of Synalepha.
Synalepha, is a figure by the which, e, feminine is not in a manner
pronounced, for when two diverse words run together whereof one ends in, e,
and the other begins with an other vowel, the, e, which is at the end, is,
as it were not pronounced, and if it be pronounced, it is very little: as in
this example bonne annee vous doint Dieu, a good year unto you give God. Il
aim a fair cecy, ou cela, He loves to do this, or that.

Of Apostrophe.
This figure Apostrophe, is always and so often as these words of one
syllable, to weete Ie, te, me, se, de, ne, le, que, ce, do go before other
words that begin with vowels: For this vowell, e, which is in the said
words of one syllable is eaten up and taken away because of the concurrence
and meeting of the vowell in the word following, and in the place of that
which is so eaten up, we put this half circle, which shows the figure of
Apostrophe, as for example of, Ie, j'enuoye, I do send, of, te, je t'ay
escrit, I wrote to thee, of, me, Il m'a dit, He told me. Of, se, Il s' est
humilie, He humbled himself. Of, ne, Il n'est point icy, He is not here. Of,
que, O qu'il est excellent, Oh how excellent he is. Of, ce, c'est icy un don de
Dieu, this here is a gift of God. Of, le, l'esprit viuifie, the spirit
quickens, we may also hereunto add these of one syllable, si, ma, re, and
this word of two syllables, grande, as for example of, si. S'il est vray je
vous croy, If it be true I believe you. Of, ma, m'amie, My woman friend. Of,
re, r'amenteuoir, to remember. Of, grande, grand' esperance, great hope.
Grand'e asseurance, great assurance.

Of the running together of consonants in diverse words.
When two Consonants follow one another, and meet together in diverse
words, the one in the end of a word and the other in the beginning of the
next word following, the same which is at the end, is never pronounced, as for
example, Ie me recommande a vos bonnes graces, I do commend my self unto
your good graces, which must be pronounced as if, S, were not there at all: in
this wise, Ie me reco^mande a vo-bonne-graces, but you must therefore pause a
little upon the vowell which goes before, S, it is true that this rule takes
no place, when after a Consonant which is in the end of a word, there
follows a Comma or point, because then it is pronounced: as in this example,
Ie vous remercie messieurs, pour les grands biens, les grands plaisirs, and
honnestetez, que vous me faites, sans toutefois, l'auoir metite, I thank you
my masters, for the great benefits, the great pleasures, and honesty that you
do to me without, notwithstanding, my desert.

The second Book.
Having sufficiently declared the nature of the letters, and how they be
pronounced by themselves, and joined together, and in what places they keep
their pronunciation, and also where they lose it. There remains now to
speak of words, and how they may be known one from another. And to know
this well, it is necessary to see how many parts of speech there be, or kinds
of words. Of which there are nine: the article, the Noune, Pronoune, the
Verb, the Participle, the Aduerbe, the Conjunction, the Preposition, and the
Interiection: Of which we will treat orderly.

Of the Article.
The Article is a certain way to guide and lead us easilye to the knowledge
of the Nownes: for it is as the sign that shows the thing signified. There
be two sorts of Articles, the one is, un, one, and vne, one: and the other,
le, the, la, the. Which Articles have both gender and number: As for the
gender, they have it, insomuch as every article is either of the masculine or
feminine gender. Of the neuter gender there is no Article in our tongue. If
they be for the masculine gender, in the singular number they end in, un, and
in, le, in the plural, vns, and les, if they be of the feminine gender, they
make in the singular number, vne, and la, and in the Plural, vnes, and, les.
Le, is for the Nominative case singular of nounes of the masculyne gender: as,
le maistre, the master, le pere, the father, le fills, the son, and so of
other like. La, is for the feminine: as, la dame, the Lady, la femme, the
woman, la maistresse, the Maystresse. For the genitive case singular, de, of,
du, of the, d'un, of one, for the masculine: as, Jesus Christ fills de Dieu,
Jesus Christ son of God, Cecy vient de la bonte du Roy, this comes of the
goodness of the King. Ie parle d'un homme, I speak of a man. For the
feminine, de la, of the and, d'une, of one: as, le mari de la femme, the
husband of the wife, la beauty d'une dame, the beauty of a Lady. A, to, au,
to, for the Dative, masculine, and feminine: as, Ie declaray cela a mon
maistre, I declared the same to my master, I'ay dit cecy a Marguerite, I told
this same to Margaret. The Accusative is like the Nominative. O, serves to the
Vocative, as well masculine, as feminine. Par, by, de, of, du, of the, d'un, of
one, pour, for, de la, of the, and d'une, of one, he Articles which show the
Ablative case of the singular number, whereof de, du, d'un, be for the
masculine only: as Il est nay de Iean, he is borne of John, Il vient du
chasteau, he comes from the Castle, Il a apprins d'un bon maistre, he has
learned of a good master. De la, and D'une, are also for the feminine only.
Il sort de la ville, be comes out of the town, Il est estime d'une femme, he
is praised of a woman. But, par, and pour, are as well for the Masculine, as
for the Feminine. Now, le, and, la, for the nominative plural, have only,
les, which serves them both. Un, has vns, and vne, makes vnes. The genitive
plural makes des, of, for, the masculine and feminine, d'uns, of one, for the
masculine, d'unes, for the feminine. For the Dative, aux, to the, for the
masculine and the feminine. The Accusative is like the Nominative. The Vocative
is like to the Vocative singular. And the Ablative plural, to the Ablative
singular, which Articles be always set immediately before the Nownes
substantives: And beside them, there are also many Pronounes, that help us
very much for to know to discern nounes substantives from other parts of
speech, of which we will speak hereafter.

Of a Noune.
The noune is the name of a thing which may be seen, touched, heard, or
understood: as the name of my hand, ye name of my body, of a table, of a
book, or other ye like. Every noune is either Substantive or Adjective: The
noune substantive is the same that may be of it self, and has no need to be
joined with another word to signify the nature of a thing: for simply in it
self and alone, it shows the same wholly: as, homme, a man, maistre, a
master, pere, a father, maison, a house. The noune Adjective is that which can
signify nothing of it self, but must be always joined with a Substantive in
this sort, bon homme, a good man, heureux maistre, a happy master. mauuais
charpentier, an ill Carpenter, malheureux enfant, an unhappy child. Also a
noune substantive is divided into two, into a noune proper, and into a noune
common. A noune proper, is that that agrees to one only thing, and to one
only person, as this noune Iean, John, is proper only to all those that are
called by this name, and not to others. A noune common is attributed to many
things: as maison, a house, pere, a father, homme, a man, liver, a book,
table, a table, lict, a bed, chappeau, a hatte, bonnet, a cappe. nounes
substantives have six accidents, that is to say, Gender, Number, Person,
Deriuation, Composition and Declenson.

Of the first Accident.
There be two sorts of genders, masculine and feminine, which, as we have
said here before, are known by the Articles that go before them, and also by
their signification, of which we will now speak. For the masculine gender, we
have to note, that all names of men, of dignity, of office, of occupation, of
parentage, or affinity, of Months, of money, of trees, of little trees (except
the Vine tree) all names of beasts male, briefly all verbal nounes, or other
that belong only to men, are of the masculine gender. As also all those which
belong to things feminine, are of the feminine gender: as the names of women,
of fruits, of Cities, and others, which we will treat of hereafter according
to their termination. All nounes ending in, i, or, y, ain, air, ant, ent, as,
eau, eux, ien, ier, ir, in, oir, vr, eur, ont, or, and, is, Ils, or in any
other consonant whatsoever, are of the masculine gender, which is easy to be
known: notwithstanding, although that a man may well comprehend this same in
this sort, yet I will not omit to set down some examples to make the thing
more clear whereof the question is: as for example of, i, or, y, amy, a
friend, apuy, a stay, enrichi, enriched. Of ain, vain, vain, prochain,
near, grain, corn, humain, human. Of air, viaire, a grave, affair
business. Of ant, aymant, loving, constant, constant, fayneant, an idle body,
nonchalant, retchlesse, vaillant, valiant. Of crit, diligent, diligent,
ornement, an ornament, habillement, an habillement, argent, silver. Of, as,
amas, a heap, bras, an arm, fatras, baggage. Of eau, veau, a calfe, pourceau,
a hog, manteau, a cloak, chappeau, a hat. Of, eux, vitieux, vicious, ambitieux,
ambitious, couuoiteux, covetous, honteux, shameful, amoureux, amorous,
courageux, courageous. Example of, ien, chien, a dog, bien, good, maintien,
countenance, ancien, an ancient. Of, ier, sentier, a footepath, entier, whole.
Of in, voisin, a neighbor, cousin, a cousin. Of, ir, desir, desire, plaisir,
pleasure. Of, oir, vouloir, will, pouuoir, power, and so of other terminations,
which every man may see in reading. For it should be more tedious than
profitable, to give example of them all, seeing that even of themselves they
are easy enough to comprehend, and so this shall suffice for the masculine
gender. Now of the feminine. All nounes endyng in this, e, masculine, (except
cost, a side, and all Participles therein ending,) be of the feminine gender,
and those also which end in, ion, son, and e, feminine, saving that we must
except certain which end in, e, feminine, and yet are of the masculine
gender, the which may be known easily by the Article going before: as le pere,
the father, le friar, the brother, and a very few others. It is true that all
Verbes infinitive ending in, e, feminine, insomuch as they be made nounes by
virtue of the Article which goes before them, be also of the masculine gender,
as, le boire, the drink, le dire, the saying, le fair, the doing.

Of the second Accident.
The number is either singular or plural. The Singular is known by the
terminations (which I have hertofore declared) and by the Article: and the
Plural partlye also by the Article, but commonly by his Singular, which ending
in any vowel, forms the Plural by putting to, s, x, or, z, at the end: as
homme, a man, ho^mes, men, merci, mercy, mercis, mercies, loy, a law, loix,
laws, virtue, virtue, vertuz, virtues, bonte, bounty, bontez, bounties, The
nounes Substantives ending their singular in, m, n, p, r, have, s, for the
forming of their plural: as in these words, nom, a name, noms, names, bien,
good, biens, goods, champ, a field, champs, fields, honneur, honor,
honneurs, honors. Those that end in, eu, eul, al, eau, ail, have their Plural
in, x, and those also which end in ault, changing only, t, into, x. Of the
noune singular ending in, c, d, f, g, q, t, is made the Plural by putting to,
z. Now we must here note, that there are some nounes in our tongue that have
only but the Plural, and do all end in, s, which shall be one of the notes
to make them to be known, together with their Article: as, les Rayns, the
reins, les tenebres, the darkness, les meurs, the manners.

Of the third Accident.
The person is the third Accident, which is easy, and therefore we will
declare it briefly. It is then to be understood that every noune is of the
third person: as, homme, a man, table, a table, pierre, a stone, boys, wood,
liver, a book, maison, a house.

Of the fourth Accident.
Every noune substantyue either is derived of an other Substantive, or of an
Adjective, or of a Verb. Nounes diminutiues that end in, ette are derived of
nounes feminines that end in e, feminine: as of Ieanne, Ione, Ieannette,
little Ione. Of femelle, a female, femelette, a little female. Also those
nounes Deriuatiues that end in, ceau, come of nounes ending in on: as of,
lion, a lion, lionceau, a little lion, larron, a thief, larronceau, a little
thief, heron, a heron, heronceau, a little heron, except homonceau, a little
man; which comes of this word homme, endyng in, e, feminine. There be other
names Deriuatiues that descend of names Primitiues ending in, on, which
notwithstanding end not in, ceau, as the other going before, but in et, as of
garcon, a boy, garconnet, a little boy, cochon, a pyg^e; cochonnet, a little
pigge, and in, ette, as of, chanson, a song, chansonnette, a little song,
maison, a house, maisonnette, a little house. Those nounes that end in a
consonant, make their diminutiues in et, as, corpse, a body, corpset, a little
body. Other nounes ending in, e, feminine, and yet be of the masculine gender,
do form their Diminutiues, by putting to, c, with the, e, as sign, a mark,
signet, a little mark, liver, a book, liuret, a little book. Of those nounes
that end in, eau, do come such as end in, el, or in, et, as of aigneau, a
lamb, aignel, or, aignelet, a little lamb, oiseau, a bird, oisel, or,
oiselet, a little bird, tonneau, a tun, tonnel, or, tonnelet, a little
tun, bandeau, a thing to blindfielde, bandel, or, bandelet, a little thing to
blindfielde. Last of all, those nounes which signify the seasons of the time,
do form their Diminutiues by a double, ee, as, an, annee, a year, matin,
matinee, a morning, iour, iournee, a day, nuit, nuitee, a night. Nounes
perteyning to men, or to the masculine gender endyng in, ard, form their
Diminutiues in, eau, as, bastard, a bastard, bastardeau, a little bastard,
bragard, a ruffler, bragardeau, a little ruffler, paillard, a whoremonger,
paillardeau, a little whoremonger. And of those we also deryue nounes of the
feminine gender, in adding, e, to, ard, as, paillard, a whoremonger, paillarde,
a whore, bragard, a man ruffler, bragarde, a woman ruffler, bauard, a pratler,
bauarde, a woman pratler. We find of them others endyng in, aige, which are
deryued of nounes of diverse terminations, as, cord, cordaige, a cord, baggue,
a bag, baggaige, baggage, fruit, fruit, fruitage, fruitage, bend, a band,
bendage, binding. Some do end in, aille, as, couardaille, a cowardly
multitude, which comes of, couard, a cowarde. Some come of latin words, by
adding only to them, n, as of this latin word, pronuntiatio, pronunciation,
we make a French word, by addition of, n, in this sort, pronunciation, of,
perditio, perdition, perdition, of, consolatio, comfort, consolation. Of
Adiectyues as well masculyne as feminyne, ending in, e, feminine, are deryued
nounes ending in, re, with, e, masculyne, as of, humble, humble, humilite,
humility, facile, easy, facilite, easiness, lasche, cowardly, laschete,
cowardlynesse, grave, grave, grauite, gravity, except some that end in, esse,
as for example, of foible, feeble, foiblesse, feebleness, triste, sad,
tristesse, sadness, sage, wise, sagesse, wisdom. Some ending in, ent, or,
ant, do form their Diminutyues by changing, t, into, c, and thereunto
addyng, e, feminyne, as, prudent, prudent, prudence, wisdom, constant,
constant, constance, constancy. There be many other Adiectyues, of which are
formed many nounes which we will handle in their place when we shall speak of
the Adiectyue. It rests now to see those nounes which be formed of Verbes. Of
all the Preterimperfect tenses, of the present tense of Verbes, are formed
nounes, changing, oys, (in which they end) into eur, as of parloys, I did
speak, parleur, a speaker, faisoys, I did, faiseur, a doer, disoys, I said,
diseur, a sayer. And some in, ement, as of parloys, I did speak, parliament, a
speaking, sentoys, I did feel, sentiment, a feeling. Some nounes are formed of
the Infinityues, changing their termination into, ure, as, engendrer, to
engender, engendrure, generation, nourrir, to nourishe, nourriture, nourishing,
escrire, to write, escriture, writing.

Of the fifth Accident.
Every noune is either simple or compound, the simple is it that is by it
self, without being joined with another word or syllable, as homme, a man,
femme, a woman, liver, a book, table, a table. As touching nounes compound,
there be of them three sorts, some are compounded of two perfect words, as
beau pere, a father in law, bellemere, a mother in law, gentilhomme, a
gentleman. Others are compounded of two words imperfect, as this word,
Dimanche, Sunday. And those of the last sort, are also compounded of two,
whereof the first is imperfect, and the other is perfect, as for example, in
this word licol, a halter.

Of the sixth Accident.
The declenson of nounes in our tongue, is very easy, seeing that it has but
two terminations in all cases, the one in the singular, the other in the
Plural. Therefore for all the nounes, I will set here but one declenson, by the
which all may be declyned, so that he that knows to declyne this noune, may
declyne all the other.

The singular number.
Nominative and Accusative. Chartier, a Carter, the masculine. Le Chartier, the
Carter. the masculine. Chartiere, a woman Carter. the feminine. La chartiere,
the woman Carter. the feminine. Un Chartier, one Carter. masculi. feminine Vne
Chartiere, one woman Carter. masculi. feminine
the Gem. and Ablati. case. De Chartier, of a Carter. for the masculine. Du
Chartier, of the Carter. for the masculine. d'un Chartier, of one Carter. for
the masculine. De la Chartiere, of the woman Carter. the feminine. d'une
Chartiere, of one woman Carter. the feminine.
The Dative case. A Chartier, to a Carter. the masculine. Au Chartier, to the
Carter. the masculine. A la Chartiere, to the Carter. the feminine. A vne
chartiere, to one carter. the feminine.
The Vocati. case. O Chartier, O Carter. the masculine. O le Chartier, O the
Carter. the masculine. O Chartiere, O Cartresse. the feminine. O la chartiere,
O the Cartresse. the feminine.

The Plural number.
the Nom. and Accusa. Chartiers, Carters. the masculine. Les Chartiers, the
Carters. the masculine. Chartieres, women Carters. the feminine. les
chartieres, the women carter. the feminine.
the Genit. and Ablati. De Chartiers, of Carters. the masculine. Des Chartiers,
of the Carters. the masculine. De chartieres, of women carters. the feminine.
Des chartieres, of the women. the feminine.
The Dative case. A Chartiers, to Carters. the masculine. Aux Chartiers, to the
Carters. the masculine. A Chartieres, to women carters. the feminine. Aux
Chartieres, to the women. the feminine.
The Vocative cas. O Chartiers, O Carters. masculi. femini. O Chartieres, O
women carters. masculi. femini.

By this declenson a man may easily decline all other nounes as well
Substantives, as Adjectives and Comparatiues, as well of the Feminine as of the
Masculine Gender.

Of the noune Adjective.
Following the order of nature, we will handle the Noune Adjective, after the
Substantive, for in our tongue: it is also set commonly after, as depending of
the Substantive the which it does in deed, as it appears by his nature and
definition, where it is said that it cannot be, nor signify any thing of
himself, if it be not joined with a Substantive, we will then treat thereof
in the best and easiest manner possible. For it must be confessed that it is
somewhat hard, specially to show by a certain rule how it may be known and
discerned from the Substantive, except it be in understanding the sense of the
sentence where they shall be found together. And then a man shall see easilye,
which of the two names, (which are joined together without a particle
copulative, or this word, de,) is the Adjective. Besides, we say that the
Adjective in our tongue goes most often after the Substantive, for that, it is
as a sign, or quality, agreeing to the substantive: as, cheual blanc, white
horse, pain brun, brown bread. Notwithstanding it is not so in all adjectives,
for some of them go before the Substantive: as, bon, vin good wine, bell homme,
a fair man, the other be ^ut and placed before and after the Substantive, as
it seems good, which the reader may better observe in reading, than
otherwise. Adjectives have five accidents, that is to say: Gender, Number,
Comparison, ^eclenson, and Deriuation.

Of Gender.
A noune Adjective has the masculine and feminine Gender as the substantive.
As touching the mascul. Gender, it shall be known by the termination, for all
the Adjectives that end in any Consonant whatsoever, and in whatsoever vowell,
except in, e, feminine, be of the masculine Gender. Also there are many of
them, which end in, e, feminine, that nevertheless are of the masculine
Gender, but those being taken away, all the other that end in, e, feminine, be
of the femin. Gender: as, belle, fair, blanch, white. excellent, excellent,
ronde, round, grande, great, longue, long, and other such like saving some
that be of the doubtful Gender, that is to say, as well of the masculine as of
the feminine: as brave, brave, difficile, hard, facile, easy, and all the
Adjectives ending in able: as, probable, probable, abominable, abominable,
equitable, rightful, favorable, favorable.

Of Number.
The Number, shall be easy to know by that which I have said of it upon the
nounes Substantives: for who so knows the one, knows the other, seeing that
herein they be a like, and that of the adjective is partly known by the
termination, as that of the Substantive, and also by the substantive, whereof it
depends and which is next to him. For if the Article shows that the
Substantive, is of the singular number: it shall follow that the Adjective,
that is joined with it, by the same means shall be of the singular number: as
le bon homme, the good man, you may see, bon, which is of the singular number,
as also the Article, le, shows: les bons ho^mes, the good men, bons, is of
the plural Number, as it is also manifest by the Article, les. Briefly, to
speak in few words, the Adjective agrees with his Substantive in Gender,
in Number, and in case, as in Latin.

Of the Comparison.
The Adjectives that receive Comparison, may be known easily by these
particles, plus more, or fort, very, which go before them, the which is a
general rule, saving in these two, bon, good, and, mauuais, evil, which we
call irregular, because they be not as the other: for bon, makes his
Co^paratiue, meilleur, better. and mauuais, makes, pire, worse, but as
touching their Superlatiues they be of the same that others be. The Adjectives
that signify diminishing have for their Co^paratiues these wroodes, moins,
less, and moindre, lesser, and those which signify excess, have this
particle, trop, to, as trop grand, to great, trop long, to long. The
superlatiues are known by these words, tres moult, most, or issime, as some
do now say, as for example of, tres, and of, moult, tresbon, or moult bon,
very good, tres excellent, or moult excellent, very excellent. Of those that
end in issime, as bonissime, excellent good, grandissime, passing great,
excellentissime, most excellent.

Of the Declenson.
For because that the Declenson of nounes Adjectives is like to that of the
Substantives, I will send you to that which I have said here before of it.
For he that knows how to decline a noune substantive, knows how to decline
a noune adjective, seeing yt it varieth no more in his cases, than the
Substantive.

Of the Deriuation.
I will not stay much upon this Accident, seeing it should be but to consume a
long time for a small thing, and therefore you shall content your selves herwith
to be advertised, that some be derived of nounes Substantives: as of, barbe, a
bearde, barbu, a bearded man. Other Adjectives of other Participles: as of,
honorant, honoring, honorable, honorable. But we need not break our brains
from whence they come, so that we know they be Adjectives, and what they
signify, for with time and experience the other may he learned.

Of the Pronoune.
A Pronoune, is a part of speech or kind of word very like to the Noune,
which men use, to show things that are understood by it. Now the better to
know this kind of word called a pronoune, we must know how many of them
there be, and for the playner declaring of them, we will set down these six
sorts: Primitiues, Deriuatiues, or Possessiues, Interrogatiues, Relatiues, and
Demo^stratiues, whereunto may be joined Partitiues. Distributiues, and
Numeralles.

Of the Primitive.
There be seven Primitiues, Ie, I, tu, thou, or vous, you, Il, He, for the
masculine, elle, she, for the feminine, l'on, on, and, se, it, whereof these
three last, serve as well for the masculine as the feminine. And it must be
noted (as we have said) that they be always joined with Verbes to declare
what persons there be understood, whither the first, the second, or else the
third. But it is very requisite to known whither they be put before or after
the Verbes. For Englishmen might thereby be encumbered, because that they do set
them always after verbes, except in the Nominative case, where they be
foremost, but in French they be always before the Verb in what case soever
they be. Furthermore, they have four accidents Number, person, Gender,
Declenson.

Of the Number.
As touching the Number, I will make no long discourse for that they have the
singular and plural, as nounes and other parts of speech, which are declined.

Of the Person.
They have three Persons, Ie, for the first, Tu, or vous, for the second, Il,
elle, l'on, on, se, for the third.

Of the Gender.
The first and the second (which be, Ie, and, Tu, or vous,) be as well for the
masculine as for the feminine, elle, is only for the feminine, Il, for the
masculine, and the three other last that is l'on, on, se, are indifferently for
the masculine and feminine.

Of the Declenson of, Ie.
For the singular. Nominative, Ie, or moy, I. Genesis and Abla. de moy, or a me,
of me. Dative, a moy, or me, to me. Accusative, moy, or me, me.

It has no Vocative.

For the plural. Nominative, Nous, We. Genitive and Ablative de nous, of us.
Dative, a nous, to us. Accusative, nous, us.

Of the Declenson of, Tu.
For the Singular Nomin. Tu, thou, toy, or vous, you. Genitive and Abla. de
toy, of thee, de vous, of you. Dative, a toy, to thee, te, a vous, to you, or
vous. Accusative, te, thee, vous, you. Vocative, O toy, O thou.
For the Plural. Nominative and Accusa. vous, you. Geni. and Ablative, de
vous, of you. Dative, a vous, to you, or vous. Vocative, O vous, O you, or
vous.

As touching, moy, me, and, toy, thee, we must observe that they serve
specially for aunsweres, Interrogations, and Admiratio^s, without expressing
the Verb, Ie, and, Tu, and Vous, are always before the Verb, except when
they are Interrogatiues, for then they be after: as dis ie bien? say I well?
escris tu? writest thou? escriuez vous? write you?

Of the declenson of, Il.
For the singular. Nominative, Il, he. Genitive and Abl. de luy, of him, le,
him Dative, a luy, to him. Accusative, le, him.
For the Plural. Nominative, ils, they. Genitive and Ablati. d'eux, of them.
Dative, a eux, to them. Accusative, les, them.

Of the Pronoune, Elle, which is for the feminine of the third person.
For the singular. Nominative, elle, she. Genitive and Ablatyue, d'elle, of
her. Dative, a elle, to her. Accusative, la, her.
For the Plural. Nominative, else, they. Genitive and Ablati. d'elles, of
them. Dative, a else, to them. Accusative, les, them.

Of Se.
For the singular. Nominatyue case lacks. Genitive and Abla. de soy, of
himself. Datyue, a soy, or, se, to himself. Accu^atyue, soy, or, se,
himself.

And so of his Plural.

Se, is put before the Verb, and soy after, whereunto is joined very often
this word mesme. As to the two other last, which are, l'on, on, they be
vndeciyned, and are signs of verbes Impersonals: as on dict, it is said, on
f^ict, it is done, l'on parle, men say.

Of Pronounes deriuatiues or possessiues.
We have of them five, mon, mine, ton, thine, son, his, nostre, our, vostre,
your, whereof from the three first be deryued these feminynes here, ma, mine,
ta, thine, sa, her. For the two other be as well for the masculyne, as the
feminine. To the rest, they have three accidents, Gender, Number, Declenson.
For the first, they be of the masculyne and of the feminyne gender. Of the
masculyne, as, mon, mine, ton, thine, son, his. Of the feminine, ma, ta, sa.
They have the singular and Plural number, the singular, as, mon, mine, ton,
thine, son, his, ma, mine, ta, thine, sa, her, nostre, our, vostre, your. The
Plural, as, mes, mine, tes, thine, ses, his, nostres, ours, vostres, yours,
or, nos, ours, voz, yours. And they are also declyned, but it is without
changing of the termination in their case. True it is that the Article
changes, but in such sort, as in other nounes that are declyned.

Of Pronounes interrogatiues.
The Pronounes interrogatyues, are, qui, who, que, what, quel, who, quelle,
what woman, or thing, which change not the termination in declyning, and
therefore we call them indeclinable, and specially qui, and que, which have one
only termination for the singular and plural number. But quel, and quelle,
do varye in the plural. For quel, makes quels, which, and quelle, quelles,
which. It is also to be noted, that they be Relatyues taking away the
interrogatiue point, and this word lequel, the which, and laquelle, the which,
which make in their Plural, lesquels, the which, and lesquelles, the which.
Besides which there is yet one which is, en, which must be well observed, for
it is worthy noting, because that under the two letters which it contains, it
signifies sometimes, not only two or three words, but (that more is) a
whole and perfect sentence: and is always put before the Verb, to signify
and show those things which are in question: and also to discern it, from the
Preposition, en, which is before nounes Substantyues, and after the Verb. An
example then of, en, a Relatyue, is this, l'en parleray, I will speak thereof,
that is to say, I will speak of that thing whereof mention has been made: for
by this Relatyue, en, an other sentence is presupposed, pronounced of some one
that asks, or demands, as in this other example: Il en fera plus que vous,
that is to say: he will do more in this or that, than you.

Of Pronounes demonstratiues.
There is but one Pronoune demonstratiue, which has the masculine and feminine
gender. The masculine is declyned in all cases of his singular, ce, or, c'est,
this, as ce personage, this person, c'est homme, this man: And it must be
marked by the way, that, ce, is put with nounes which begin with a consonant,
as ce chien, this dog, ce cheual, this horse. And c'est, with those that
begin with a vowell, as ce'st homme, this man, c'est oeuure, this work. In the
Plural it only has ces, these. The demonstratiue feminine has ceste, this,
for the singular number, and for the plural, ces, or, cestes, these. Now they
have many compoundes, which keep the same fashion of declyning. It is true
that they end diversely, as, cestuy-cy, this here, ceux cy, these here,
cestuy-la, this there, ceux-la, those there, celuy-cy, this here, ceux-cy,
these here, celuy-la, this there, ceux-la, those there. And for the compoundes
of the feminine, ceste-cy, this here, cestes-cy, these here, or, ces-cy, these
here, ceste-la, this there, cestes-la, these there, celle-cy, she her,
celles-cy, these here, celle-la, she there, celles-la, these there. As to these
two here, cela, this there, and cecy, this here, they serve to show things
without life: as if you would buy clothe, lynnen, or other things without
life, you ask (without expressing the thing) in this sort, co^bien cecy?
co^bien cela? how much this? how much that? cestuycy, celuy-cy, cestuy-la,
celuy-la, and their feminines, cest^-cy, ceste-la, celle-cy, celle-la, serve to
refer, or to declare a thing, which is not named: as if a man ask, Qui a
fait cela? who has done that same? cestuy-cy, this here. etc. cestuy-la,
ceste-cy, ceste-la. But if the thing be expressed, then it shall be set
between this demonstratyue, ce, or, cest, and this little word, cy, as, qui a
dit cela? who has said the same? ce bon personnage-cy, this good person here,
ce bon personnage-la, cest homme-cy, this man here, cest homme-la. And for the
feminine, ceste femme-cy, this woman here, ceste femine-la.

Of Partitiues and Distributiues.
I find that of them there be ten principallye, that is to say, aucun, any,
quelqu'un. some one, chacun, every one, tout, all, null, none, tell, such,
autre, another, autruy, another, maint, many, quelque, some, quelconque,
whosoever. The which form their feminines in adding, e, as aucun, aucune,
quelqu'un, quelqu'une, and their Plural in, s, as, chacun, chacuns, tout, tous,
null, nuls. Behold all the changing they have, for in respect of ye declenson
they be undeclined.

Of Pronounes of number.
There be infinite Pronounes numerals (that is to say of number) which cannot
well be known but by use, and by the number that they do note. And they be
also vndeclyned, and have diverse terminations, as, un, one, deux, two, troys,
three, quattre, four, cinq, five, six, six, sept, seven, huict, eight, neuf,
nine, dix, ten, onze, eleven, douze, twelve, treze, thirtene, quatorze,
fourtene, quinze, fiftene, seize, sixtene, dixsept, seauentene, dixhuict,
eyghtene, dixneuf, nynetene, vingt, twenty, and so of other, as well simple as
compounde, I say compounde as well in multiplication of Number, as otherwise.
But it must be known, how men shall know them that are not compounded by
multiplication, from the simple, and this shall be partly by their termination,
which is, ^^me, as, un, one, vnieme, the first, deux, two, deuxieme, the
second, and so of the other. But some men may ask me, to what end men use it?
to whom I will answer, that it is for the order, the place, or degree of
things, that we number: as, le deuxieme, the second, le troisieme, the third,
le quatrieme, the fourth, this is understood in order, as ye see.

Of the Verb.
The Verb, is a kind of word which is coniugated by moodes and by tenses,
and shows the things that have action and Passion, as when I say, l'aime, I
love, I show that I do some thing in loving, and when I endure and suffer or
receive the friendship of any one toward me, I say Ie suis aim, I am
loved. The Verb is Personal, and Impersonall. The Personal is so called
because that it is joined with persons, or for that it represents them, to
the end to show to whom belongs the action and passion that is signified
by it, as in this example, Ie pry Dieu, I pray to God, Ie sers a luy seul, I
serve him alone, behold the Pronoune, Ie, I, which shows evidently the
person. Now the Impersonall is so called, because it is without expressing, or
naming any Person: and it may be also called indefinite, forasmuch as it
defines not nor brings in any thing doing or suffering, as in these examples
here, on dit, It is said, on faict, it is done. And forasmuch as it is easy
to know it, we will speak but two words before we come to the Personal.
Although we ought to handle it at the end, keeping our order, we must then
only observe one thing for to know it, to were that so often as these
particles, l'on, and, on, be found before any Verb, whatsoever, that Verb
may be called Impersonall, as for example, l'on dit cela, men say the same, on
faict tell chose, men do such a thing. But besides these, there be some other
Verbes Impersonals where this particle, Il, is put before them, as these four,
Il faut, it must be, Il conuient, it is meet, Il appartient, It appartayneth,
Il rest, It recteth, there are also others, which have, Il, before them, but
they be formed of the third person of the Verb Substantive, which is, Est,
is, and an adjective, which follows after it, and Il, goes before them both,
in this sort, Il est necessaire, It is necessary, Il est conuenable, It is
meet, Il est vtile, It is profitable, Il est doutteux, It is doubtful. Il est
bon de fair tell chose, It is good to do such a thing.

Now rests to speak of Verbes Personalles with the greatest method and
facility that may be, because that it is a thing so Intricate (and as I may
say) so confused that men dare not meddle with it, but are discouraged by
means whereof they attain not the knowledge of our tongue. And truly I have
found by experience that there be many in this country, yea and in ours also,
who for want of knowledge of the Verbes, do every foot miss, when they
speak: which they seeing, are so ashamed, that they stay in the midst of
their course, and there leave all, with the long time and great labor that
therein they have spent, the which I have lamented many times, especially
having regard to the great desire and affection that Englishmen have to learn
the tongues, and other virtuous things worthy to be remembered, for this cause
I have been well willing to take a little pain, to the end that their good
will should not be vain or frustrate in such sort that I have read and over
read, seen and over seen, searched again and again, all the means to make
them understand how many sorts of Verbes we have: and how they may be
known, and of what tense they be, and what tense they show, and how they be
formed. For as men say in a French proverb: c'est ou gist le lieure, here it
is where the hare lies, and the greatest force of the matter consists, that
we entreat of, seeing that the Verbes govern the Nounes in their cases and
make them to have there full sense: and without them they can signify nothing,
for without the Verbes, they be as confused, and without order; we must note
then that there be in our tongue six sorts of Verbes the which are known by
the diverse termination of their Infinitiues: for as many Infinitiues as there
be of diverse terminations, so many Coniugations we make, for I find that as
they end diversely in their infinitiues, they have also diversity in their
Coniugations, some do end, in, er, as aimer, to love, monstrer, to show,
others in, die, as tordre, to wreath, mordre, to byte, in, ir, as, venir, to
come, in, o^r, as aperceuoir, to perceive, in, orre, as, clorre, to shut, and
in, re, as, lire, to read, fair, to do, ^ire, to say.

Of the forming of the Indicative mood of Verbes ending in, Er. etc.
The Verbes ending in, er, form the Present tense of the Indicative Mood by
taking away only, r, from their infinitive: as for example, of parler, to
speak, parle, speak, so that putting before, Ie, it signifies the first
Person, and so forth, and is coniugated in this sort, as all the like are.

For the Singular. Ie parle, I speak. Tu parles, thou speak, ou vous
parlez, or you speak. Il parle, He speaks.
Plural. Nous parlons, we speak. Vous parlez, you speak. Ilz parlent, they
speak.

Of, aimer, to love, we have also Singular. I'aime, I love, Tu aims, thou
love, vous aimez you love. Il aim, He loves.
the Plu. Nous aimons, we love. Vous aimez, you love. Ilz aiment, they love.



Except some Verbes defective: as, aller, to go, which form there Present
tense in, yr greek in this sort For the Singular. Ie vay, I go. Tu vas, thou
go, ou vous allez. or you go. Il va, he goes.
the Plur. Nous allons, we go, Vous allez, you go. Ils vont, they go.



Those that end their Infinitive in, dre, form their present tense, taking
away, r, and e, and adding after the, d, (which remains) z, or, s, as of,
tordre, to wreath, tords, wreath or twist.

For the singular. Ie tords, I wreath. Tu tords, thou wreathest, ou vous
tordez, or you wreath. Il tord, he wreathteth.
Plural. Nous tordons, we wreath. Vous tordez, you wreath. Ils tordent, they
wreath.

Except, attaindre, to attain to, and attendre, to wait for, where, d, is also
taken away with the r, and the, c, and in their place is put an, s: as of
attaindre, to attain to, attains, attain, attendre, to attend, attens,
attend, as for example.

For the singular. I'attains, I attain to. Tu attains, thou attaynest, ou vous
attaignez, or you attain to. Il attaind, he attayneth.
Plural. Nous attaignons, we attain to. Vous attaignez, you attain to. Ilz
attaignent, they attain to.

And so of, attens, I tarry they that end in, ir, form their Present tense
in, iens, as of tenir, to hold, tiens, I hold. Of, maintenir, to maintain,
maintiens, I maintain, in this sort, For the singular. Ie maintiens, I
maintain. Tu maintiens, thou maintaynest, ou vous maintenez, or you maintain.
Il maintient, he maintayneth.
Plural. Nous maintenons, we maintain. Vous maintenez, you maintain. Ils
maintiennent, they maintain.

And so of others, but not of all, for there are of one sort that end in, ir,
which form their present tense in, is, changing, r, into, s, as co^uertir, to
convert, conuertis, I convert, assopir, to wax drowsy, assopis, I wax
drowsy, banir, to banish, banis, banish, thus For the singular. Ie banis, I
banish. Tu banis, thou banishest, ou vous banissez, or you banish. Il banit, he
banisheth.
Plural. Nous banissons, we banish. Vous banissez, you banish, Ils banissent,
they banish.



There must also be excepted out of these here, consentir, to consent, and such
like, mourir, to die, querir, to seek, dormir, to sleep, which have their
present tense ending diversely: as consentir, to consent, has, consens, I
consent, mourir, to die, meurs, I die, querir, to seek quiers, I seek,
dormir, to sleep, dors, I sleep.

The Verbes Insinitiues in, oir, make their present tense in, oy, as of,
aperceuoir, to perceive, apercoy, I perceive, deuoir, to owe, doy, I owe,
conceuoir, to conceive, concoy, I conceive, as it appears in coniugating
them, but one for all shall suffice.

For the singular. I'apercoy, I perceive. Tu apercoys, thou perceynest, ou vous
aperceuez, or you perceive. Il apercoit, he perceyueth.
Plural. Nous aperceuons, we perceive. Vous aperceuez, you perceive. Ils
aperceuent, they perceive.

From these here, are five excepted whereof two make their present in, ay, as
scauoir, to know, makes, scay, I know, auoir, to have, ay, I have. And thus be
they coniugated.

For the singular. Ie scay, I know. Tu scays, thou know, ou vous scauez, or
you know. Il scait, he knows.
Plural. Nous scauons, we know. Vous scauez, you know. Ils scauent, they know.

And, auoir, to have has For the singular. I'ay, I have. Tu as, thou have, ou
vous auez, or you have. Il a, he has.
Plural. Nous auons, we have. Vous auez, you have. Ils ont, they have.



Which is a Verb that helps the other, as you shall see. As touching the
other three, that is to say, valloir, to be worth, vouloir, to will, and,
pouuoir, to can, they end otherwise than those that went before, for valloir,
to be worth, makes his Present tense in, aux: as, For the singular. Ie vaux, I
am worth. Tu vaux, thou art worth, ou vous vallez, or you are worth. Il vaut,
he is worth.
Plural. Nous vallons, we are worth. Vous vallez, ye are worth. Ils vallent,
they are worth.



But, vouloir, to will, and, pouuoir, to can, end in, eux, as vouloir, to
will, veux, I will, pouuoir, to can, peux, I can For the singular. Ie peux, I
can. Tu peux, thou can, ou vous pouuez, or you can. Il peut, he can.
Plural. Nous pouuons, we can. Vous pouuez, you can. Ils peuuent, they can.



The Verbes that make their Infinitive in re, form their Present tense taking
away, re, and putting to, s, as of dire, to say, dis, I say. escrire, to write,
escris, I write, fair, to do, fais, I do, lire, to read, lis, I read, in
this manner For the singular. Ie dis, I say. Tu dis, thou say, ou vous dites,
or yo^ sa^ * Il d^^* he says.
Plural. Nous disons, we say. Vous dites, you say. Ils disent, they say.
For the singular. I'escris, I write. Tu escris, thou writest, ou vous
escriuez, or you write. Il escrit, he writes.
Plural. Nous escriuons, we write. Vous escriuez, you write. Ils escriuent,
they write.



For the last they, which end in, ore, form their Present tense, changing,
re, into, s, as of, clore, to close, clos, I close, and his Compounds, and
other like, and they be coniugated thus For the singular. Ie clos, I shut. Tu
clos, thou closest, ou vous clouez, or you close. Il clost, he closes.
Plural. Nous clouons, we close. Vous clouez, you close. Ils cloent, they
close up.



Of the forming of the Preterimperfect tense^
The Preterimperfect tense is formed in all verbes of what termination and
conjugation that they be, by the first person of the plural number of the
Indicative mood, and Present tense, changing, ons, into, oye, or, oys, as of,
aimons, we love, we have I'aimoye, or, I'aimoys, I loved, but most commonly,
oys, as of, faisons, we do. faisois, I did, disons, we say. disoys, I said,
monstrons, we show, monstroys, I showed, and so of all the six verbes without
exception. Therefore I will not tarry long herein, for it shall suf^yce to
coniugate one for all, seeing that by the same shall be known the coniugating of
the others. So then of nous aimons, we love, we have, I'aimoys, I loved, in
this sort: For the singular. I'aimoys, I loved. Tu aimoys, thou louedst, ou
vous aimies, or you loved. Il aymoit, ^e loved.
Plural. Nous aimions, we loved. Vous aimiez, ye loved. Ils aimoyent, they
loved.



Of the forming and termination of the first Preterperfect tense.
The first Preterperfect tense of our tongue has rivers terminations,
according as his Infinitiues end diversely. The verbes which end in, er, make
this Preterperfect herein, ay, or, e, masculyne, as some say, but most
commonly in, ay: as, For the singular, I'aimay, I loved. Tu aimas, thou
louedst, ou vous aimastes, or you loved. Il aima, he loved.
Plural. Nous aimasmes, we loved. Vous aimastes, ye loved. Ils aimerent, they
loved.



They which end in, dre, have this Preterperfect in, dis, as of, tordre, to
wrest, tordis, I wrested, thus: For the singular. Ie tordis, I wrested. Tu
tordis, thou wrestedst, ou vous tordistes, or you wrested. Il tordit, he
wrested.
Plural. Nous tordismes, we wrested. Vous tordistes, ye wrested. Ils
tordirent, they wrested.



Except prendre, to take, which makes prins, I took. As, For the singular. Ie
prins, I took. Tu prins, thou tookest, ou vous prinstes, or you took. Il
print, he took.
Plural. Nous prinsmes, we took. Vous prinstes, ye took. Ils prindrent, they
took.



Touching those that end in, ir, some form this Preterperfect in, ins, as for
example, retenir, to keep.

For the singular. Ie retins, I kept. Tu retins, thou kepst, ou vous retinstes,
or you kept. Il retint, he kept.
Plural. Nous retinsmes, we kept. Vous retinstes, ye kept. Ils retinrent, they
kept.

As much must be said of these Verbes, maintenir, to maintain, resiouir, to
rejoice, preuenir, to prevent. The other be like to their Indicatyue mood as
touching their termination, as, assopir, to wax drowsy, assopis, I waxed
drowsy, banir, to banishe, banis, I banished, conuertir, to convert,
conuertis, I converted. Ouir, to hear, is excepted, as we may see in
coniugating it, in this fashion: For the singular. I'ouy, I heard. Tu ouys,
thou heardest, ou vous ouystes, or you heard. Il ouyt, he heard.
Plural. Nous ouysmes, we heard. Vous ouystes, ye heard. Ils ouyrent, they
heard.



They that end in, oir, form and end their first preterperfect in, u, as of
aperceuoir, to perceive, aperceu, I perceived, conceuoir, to conceive, conceu,
I conceived, deceuoir, to deceive, deceu. I deceived, valloir, to be worth,
vallu, I was worth, vouloir, to will, voulu, I willed, pouuoir, to be able,
peu, I could. And they be coniugated thus: For the singular, I'aperceu, I
perceived. Tu aperceuz, thou perceyuedst, ou vous aperceustes, or you
perceived. Il aperceut, he perceived.
Plural. Nous aperceusmes, we perceived. Vous aperceustes, ye perceived. Ils
aperceurent, they perceived.
For the singular. Ie peu, I could. Tu peus, thou could, ou vous peustes, or
you could. Il peut, he could.
Plural. Nous peusmes, we could. Vous peustes, ye could. Ils peurent, they
could.



Auoir, to have, and Scauoir, to know, be excepted, the which make their first
Preterperfect in, ay, as the verbes in, er. The verbes that end in, re, make
all their first Preterperfect in, is, as of, dire, to say, Ie dis, I said,
escrire, to write, escriuis, I wrote. And For the singular. I'escriuis, I
wrote. Tu escriuis, thou wrotest, ou vous escriuistes, or you wrote. Il
escriuit, he wrote.
Plural. Nous escriuismes, we wrote. Vous escriuistes, ye wrote. Ils
escriuerent, they wrote.



And so of their like, except cognoistre, to know, boire to drink, croire, to
believe, taire, to be silent, plaire, to please, repaistre, to seed. The which
have their first Preterperfect in, u, like to those that end in, oir, of which
we have spoken heretofore.

Of the forming of the last Preterperfect tense.
The last preterperfect tense may be known generally in all sorts of Verbes, by
the three persons of this verb, ay, have, which be as signs and tokens of it.
And for the better knowledge of it, I will show it by the coniugating of one
verb, which shall serve for all. Let us take, aimer, to love, which has For
the singular. I'ay aim, I have loved. Tu as aim, thou have loved, ou vous
auez aim, you have loved. Il a aim, he has loved.
Plural. Nous auous aim, we have loved. Vous auez aim, ye have loved Ils ont
aim, they have loved.



So that the persons of the verb, ay, are as you see, for the Singular. Ay,
have. As, have, ou auez, or have. A, has.
Plural. Auons, we have. Auez, ye have. Ont, they have.



Of the forming of the Preterpluperfect tense.
The Preterpluperfect of all verbes is always formed of the Preterimperfect of
this verb, ay, that goes before it, which is for the singular for the first
and second person, auoys ou auiez, auoit, for the third. For the Plural,
auyons, auyez, auoient. Let us join it then with some verb whatsoever, and we
shall make therewith a Preterpluperfect, in this sort: For the singular.
I'auoys aim, I had loved. Tu auois aim, thou had loved ou vous auiez aim,
or not had loved. Il auoit aim, he had loved.
Plural. Nous auions aim, we had loved. Vous auiez aim, ye had loved. Ils
auoient aim, they had loved.
For the singular. I'auoys dit, I had said. Tu auois dit, thou had said, ou
vous auiez dit, or you had said. Il auoit dit, he had said.
Plural. Nous auions dit, we had said. Vous auiez dit, ye had said. Ils
auoient dit, they had said.

And so of all the other.

Of the forming and termination of the future tense Indicative.
All verbes have their termination alike in this Future tense, to wete, for the
singular, ray, ras, or, res, and, ra, for the Plural, rons, rez, ront, as we
may easily see by the coniugating of all verbes, if we had leisure to recyte
them. But because it should be a thing long and tedious, we will content our
selves with one example, seeing that by it all other shall be known. Let us
keep then our ordinary verb which is aimer, to love, for so much as it is
like to others in this tense. It has For the singular. I'aimeray, I will love.
Tu aimeras, thou will love, ou vous aimerez, or you will love. Il aimera, he
will love.
Plural. Nous aimerons, we will love. Vous aimerez, ye will love. Ils
aimeront, they will love.
For the singular. Ieferay, I will do. Tu feras, thou will do, ou vous ferez,
or you will do. Il fera, he will do.
Plural. Nous ferons, we will do. Vous ferez, ye will do. Ils feront, they
will do.



Of the Imperative mood.
The Imperative has but the second and third person as well in the singular,
as in the Plural. And as for the second person hereof, it is easily known in
all sorts of verbes, seeing that it is always like to the second person of ye
present tense of the Indicative mood, saving that it has not ye pronoune
primitive, to weet, tu, thou, ou vous, or you, as for example, aims, love
thou, ou aimez, or love you, dis, say thou, ou dites, or say ye, proposes,
propou^d thou, ou proposez, or propound ye, and so others. The third person of
this Imperative is known also in all verbes by this Particle, que, which goes
before it, not altogether immediately: for the Pronoune primitive (that is to
say, Il, for the singular, and, Ils, for the Plural) is next unto it, but this
particle, que, and the Pronoune Il, and, Ils, be joined together, as if it were
but one word, by the figure Apostrophe, by the which (as we have already
said) the, e, of, que, is eaten up, because that the other vowell which is,
i, is joined unto it in this sort, qu'il aim, let him love. qu'il die, let him
say, qu'il face, let him do. And in the Plural, qu'ils aiment, let them love,
qu'ils disent, let them say, qu'ils facent, let them do. And therefore behold
how we shall coniugate together these two persons of the Imperative.

For the Singular. Aims, love thou, ou aimez, or love you. Qu'il aim, let him
love.
For the Plural. Aimez, love ye. Qu'ils aiment, let them love.

The Imperative has two Future tenses, the one is called affirmative, and the
other negative, which have but the second and third person as their
Imperative, and have always before them as signs, these particles, fay, ou
faites, guard, ou gardez, voy, ou voyez. An example of the Future affirmative,
For the Singular. Fay que tu aims, see that thou love, ou faites que vous
aimez, or see that you love. Fay, ou faites, qu'il aim, see that he love.
For the Plural. Faites que vous aimez, se that ye love. Faites qu'ils aiment,
see that they love.
For the Singular. Guard que tu parles, take heed what thou speak, ou
gardez que vous parliez, or take heed what you speak. Guard, take heed, ou
gardez, or take you heed, qu'il parle, that he speak.
For the Plural. Gardez, take ye heed, que vous parliez, that ye speak.
Gardez qu'ils parlent, take ye heed that they speak.
For the singular. Voy que tu faces, see that thou doe' ou voyez que vous
faciez, or see that you do. Voy, see. ou voyez, or see you, qu'il face, that
he do.
For the Plural. Voyes que vous faciez, see that ye do. Voyez qu'ils facent,
see that they do.



As much thereof may a man say of the Future negative, but that there must be
added a negation, as, For the singular. Fay que tu ne parles, see that thou
speak not, ou faites que vous ne parliez, or see that you speak not. Fay ou
faites qu'il ne parle, see that he speak not.
The Plu. Faites q^ vous ne perliez, see that ye speak not. Faites qu'ils ne
perle^t, se that they speak not.

And so of others.

Of the Optatiue.
The Optatiue is known in all Verbes by this particle of desiring, Ie pry
Dieu, I pray God, ou Dieu vueille que, or God grant that. In the rest it is
like to the Present tense: as for example For the singular. Ie pry Dieu, I
pray God, or dieu vueille que j'aime, God grant that I love. Tu aims, thou
love, ou vous aimez, or you love. Il aim, he love.
For the Plural. Dieu vueille que nous aimons, God grant that we love. Vous
aimez, ye love. Ils aiment, they love.



This Optatiue has four tenses, as the Indicative, to wete ye
preterimperfect, Perfect, Preterpluperfect, and Future tense.

Of the Preterimperfect of the Optatiue.
This Preterimperfect is known by this Particle, pleust a Dieu que, I would it
did please God that, and also by his termination, which is in the Singular in,
usse, in insse, in, isse, in, ass, and for the Plural, in, ussions, inssions,
issions, and, assions: An example of those, which end in, usse, For the
Singular. Pleust a Dieu que je cogneusse, I would it did please God that I
knew. Tu cogneusses, thou know, ou vous cogneussiez, or you knew. Il
cogneust, he know.
Plural. Nous cogneussions, we knew. Vous cogneussiez, ye knew. Ils
cogneussent, they knew.



An example of them which end in, insse, For the Singular. Pleust a Dieu que
je prinsse, I would it did please God that I took. Tu prinsses, thou tookest,
ou vous prinssiez, or you took. Il print, he took.
For the Plural. Pleust a Dieu que nous prinssions, I would it pleased God,
that we took. Vous prinssiez, ye took. Ils prinssent; they took.



An example of, isse, For the singular. Pleust a Dieu que je fisse, I would it
pleased God that I made. Tu fisses, thou made, ou vous fissiez, or you made.
Il fit, he made.
For the Plural. Pleust a Dieu, que nous fissions, I would it pleased God,
that we made. Vous fissiez, ye made. Ils fissent, they made,



An example of these that end in, ass, (which all verbes ending in, er, do)
For the singular. Pleust a Dieu, que j'aimasse, I would it pleased God, that I
loved. Tu aimasses, thou louedst, ou vous aimassiez, or you loved. Il aimast,
be loved.
For the Plural. Pleust a Dieu, que nous aimassions, I would it pleased God,
that we loved. Vous aimassiez, ye love. Ils aimassent, they loved.



Of the Preterperfect.
This Preterperfect has also for one of his signs, Dieu vueille que, God
grant that, ou a ma volunte, or I would: And besides this sign it has an
other, which is the Present tense of the Optatiue mood of this verb, ay, thus
For the singular. I'aye, I have. Tu ayes, thou have, ou vous ayez, or you have.
Il ait, he has.
Plural. Nous ayons, we have. Vous ayez, ye have. Ils ayent, they have.



In such sort that adding any Verb what we list to the Persons of that tense
of the Verb, ay, this Preterperfect shall be formed, as for example, For the
singular. Dieu vueille, que j'aye aim, God grant, that I have loved. Tu ayes,
thou have, ou vous ayez aim, or you have loved. Il ait aim, he has loved.
For the Plural. Dieu vueille, que nous ayons aim, God grant, that we have
loved. Vous ayez aim, ye have loved. Ils ayent aim, they have loved.



Of the Preterpluperfect.
This Preterpluperfect is known generally in all sorts of Verbes by the
Preterimperfect of the Optatiue of this Verb, aye, which comes of, j'ay,
which is in this manner coniugated For the singular. Pleust a Dieu, que j'eusse,
I would to God that I had. Tu eusses, thou had, ou vous eussiez, or you
had. Il eut, he had.
For the Plural. Pleust a Dieu, que nous eussions, would to God, that we had.
Vous eussiez, that ye had. Ils eussent, they had.



So that Coniugating it with what Verb so ever this Preterpluperfect is so
formed, as in this one example for all For the singular. Pleust a Dieu, que
j'eusse aim, I would to God, that I had loved. Tu eusses, thou had, ou vous
eussiez aim, or you had loved. Il eut aim, he had loved.
For the Plural. Pleust a Dieu, que nous eussions aim, would to God, that we
had loved. Vous eussiez aim, ye had loved. Ils eussent aim, they had loved.



Of the Subiunctiue mood.
The Subiunctiue ^^^h four tenses, the Present, Preterimperfect, the
Preterperfect and the preterpluperfect. The present, is like to the Present
tense of the Optatiue: saving, that we put in steed of, Pleusta Dieu, would
to God, veu que, seeing that, ou combien que, or although that, j'acoyt,
albeit, si, if, quand, when. as For the singular. Veu que j'aime, seeing that I
love. Tu aims, thou love, ou vo' aimez, or you love. Il aim, he loves.
For the Plural. Veu que nous aimons, seeing that we love. Vouz aimez, ye
love. Ils aiment, they love.
For the singular. Combien que je dis, although that I say. Tu dis, thou
say, ou vous dites, or you say. Il dit, he says.
For the Plural. Combien que nous disons, although that we say. Vous dites, ye
say. Ils disent, they say.



And so of all others.

Of the Preterimperfect.
This Preterimperfect in all Verbes is like to the Preterimperfect of the
Indicative Mood, as you may see there, or else ending in, rois, and then this
particle, quand, goes before it, as For the singular. Quand j'aimerois, when I
loved. Tu aimerois, thou louedst, ou vous aimeriez, or you loved. Il aimerois,
he loved.
For the Plural. Quand nous aimerions, when we loved. Vouz aimeriez, ye loved.
Ils aimeroient, they loved.



It has also the termination of the Preterimperfect of the Optatiue, whereunto
I do send you, to see that which I have spoken of it there, only there is
give unto it for a sign, this Particle, Combien que, although that, which
always goes before it.

Of the Preterperfect.
This Preterperfect is as the second Preterperfect of the Indicative mood:
(but that there must be added for his signification this particle, veu que,
seeing that, which is put before it) or as the Preterperfect of the Optatiue,
by adding in steed of, Dieu vueille que, God grant that, Combien que,
although that.

Of the Preterpluperfect.
This Preterpluperfect is known by the Preterimperfect of the subiunctiue
mood of this Verb, ay, by joining with it, the first Person of the second
Preterperfect tense of the Indicative mood of any Verb whatsoever. Now the
Preterimperfect of the Subiunctiue of this Verb, ay, is coniugated in this
sort For the singular. Quand j'aurois, when I had. Tu aurois, thou had, ou
vous auriez or you had. Il auroit, he had.
Plural. Nous aurions, we had. Vous auriez, ye had. Ils auroient, they had.



Now let us join with it, for example the first Person of the second
Preterperfect of, j'aime, ou dit, ou fait, which is, aim, dit, fait, we shall
then find for the first person of the singular that it is, quand j'auroys
aim, when I had loved, quand j'aurois dit, when I had said. quand j'aurois
fait, when I had done, and so of others, for the second Person, tu aurois,
thou had, ou vous auriez aim, dit, fait, or you had loved, said, done, for
the third, Il auroit aim, dit, fait, he had loved, said, done. For the
Plural, quand nous aurions aim, dit, fait, when we had loved, said, done,
vous auriez aim, dit, fait, ye have loved, said, done, Ils auroient aim,
dit, fait, they had loved, said, done. And that which I say of these three
Verbes must be said of others. This Preterpluperfect may also be known by the
Preterimperfect of the Indicative mood of this same Verb, ay, which is auoys,
as For the singular. Veu que j'auoys aim, seeing that I had loved. Tu auoys
aim, thou had loved, ou vous auiez aim, or you had loved. Il auoit aim, he
has loved.
For the Plural. Veu que nous auions aim, seeing that we had loved. Vous
auiez aim, ye had loved. Ils auoyent aim, they had loved.



Or else like to the Preterpluperfect of the Optatiue of the said Verb, ay,
example.

For the singular. Combien que j'eusse aim, although that I had loved, Tu
eusses aim, thou had loved, ou vous eussiez aim, or you had loved. Il eut
aim, he had loved.
For the Plural. Combien que nous eussions aim, although that we had loved.
Vous eussiez aim, ye had loved. Ils eussent aim, they had loved.

And so of all others. For you may not think that because I put so often this
Verb aimer, for example that I would not have this to be understood, as
well of other Verbes as of it, but seeing that all other Verbes may be
comprehended by one example I take this enough then as the first that comes.
Notwithstanding when they differ I do show it, and have showed it, bringing
then an example of all the kinds of Verbes that differ: as you may see in that
which I have said heretofore.

Of the Infinitive.
The Infinitive, first has neither number, nor Person, and touching the
terminations of it, I will not now speak because I have treated amply enough
thereof in the beginning of the Verbes, where we showed how many sorts there
were of them and how they ended. Therefore when you shall doubt of a Verb, you
must have recourse to that which I have already said.

Of the Preterpluperfect of the Infinitive.
This Preterpluperfect has always before it for a mark and sign, this
Infinitive auoir, to have, as auoir aim, to have loved, auoir dit, to have
said, auoir parle, to have spoken, auoir mange, to have eaten.

Of the Future.
The Future has before it this particle, que, and as concerning the rest, it
is like to the Future of the Indicative: as For the singular.. Que j'aimeray,
that I shall love. Que tu aimeras, that thou shall love, ou vous aimerez, or
you shall love. Qu'il aimera, that be shall love.
For the plural. Que nous aimerons, that we shall love. Que vous aimerez, that
ye shall love. Qu'ils aimeront, that they shall love.



Of the Gerundine.
The Gerundine is formed of Infinitiues by adding this particle, de, which
goes before the Infinitive in this sort, le moyen d'aimer, the way to love, la
faculte de parler, the faculty to speak, d'escrire, to write, de paindre, to
painte, and so of others. We have another kind of Gerundines which is formed
by the participle of the present tense ending in, ant, adding this particle,
en, before the participle, as en aimant, in loving, en disant, in saying, en
faisant, in doing, en parlant, in speaking, and there is a third kind of
Gerundines, which is formed of the Infinitive and of this particle, pour, or Il
faut, which go before: as pour aimer, for to love, pour dire, for to say, pour
fair, for to do, Il faut aimer, he must love. Il faut escrire, he must write,
the Supine may be formed after the same sort.

Of the Participle.
There be two participles of the Infinitive, the one that comes of the Verb
active, which ends in, ant, as aimant, loving, faisant, doing, parlant,
speaking, and the other which comes of the Verb passive: as aim, loved,
dit, spoken, fait, done, whereof we will treat more largely hereafter.

Of the Verb Passive.
To know well the verb Passive, we must coniugate one, by the which all the
other may be coniugated, putting before it the verb Substantive for a sign
thereof, which in coniugating varieth the tense, as it were alone by it self.
We will therefore set forth one example for all, in this sort.

The Indicative mood and the present tense.
For the singular. Ie suis aim, I am loved. Tu es, ou vous estes aim, thou
art, or you are loved. Il est aim, he is loved.
Plural. Nous sommes aimez, we are loved. Vous estes aimez, ye are loved. Ils
sont aimez, they are loved.

The Preterimperfect tense.
For the singular. I'estois aim, I was loved. Tu estois ou vous estiez aim,
thou wart, or you were loved. Il estoit aim, he was loved.
Plural. Nous estions aimez, we were loved. Vous esties aimez, ye were loved.
Ils estoient aimez, they were loved.

The first Preterperfect.
For the Singular Iefus aim, I was loved. Tufus, ou vous fustes aim, thou
wast or you were loved. Il fut aim, he was loved.
Plural. Nous fumus aimez, we were loved. Vous fustes aimez, ye were loved.
Ils furent aimez, they were loved.

The second Preterperfect.
For the singular. I'ay este aim, I have been loved. Tu as, ou vous auez este
aim, thou have or you have been loved. Il a este aim, he has been loved.
Plural. Nous auons este aimez, we have been loved. Vous auez este aimez, ye
have been loved. Ils ont este aimez, they have been loved.

The Preterpluperfect.
For the singular. I'auoys este aim, I had been loved. Tu auoys, ou vous auiez
este aim thou had, or you had been loved. Il auoit este aim, he had been
loved.
For the Plural. Nous auions este aimez, we had been loved. Vous auiez este
aimez, ye had been loved. Ils auoient este aimez, they had been loved.

The Future.
For the singular. Ie seray aim, I shall be loved. Tu seras, ou vous serez
aim, thou shall, or you shall be loved. Il sera aim, he shall be loved.
Plural. Nous ferons aimez, we shall be loved. Vous serez aimez, ye shall be
loved. Ils seront aimez, they shall be loved.

Of the Imperative mood, the Present tense.
For the singular. Fay que tu soys aim, see that thou be loved, ou que vous
soyez aim, or that you be loved. Face qu'il soit aim, se that he be loved.
For the Plural. Faites que vous soyes aimez, see that ye be loved. Facent
qu'ils soient aimez, see that they be loved.

Of the Optatiue in the present tense.
For the singular. Dieu vueille que je soy aim, God grant that I be loved. Tu
soys, ou vous soyez aim, that thou, or you be loved. Il soit aim, he be loved.
Plural. Nous soyons aimez, we be loved. Vous soiez aimez, ye be loved. Ils
soient aimez, they be loved.

The Preterimperfect.
For the singular. Dieu vuelle que je fusse aim, God grant that I were loved.
Tufusses aim, ou vous fussiez aim, thou were, or you were loved. Il fut aim,
he were loved.
Plural. Nous fussions aimez, we were loved. Vous fussiez aimez, ye were
loved. Ils fussent aimez, they were loved.

Or else as the Preterimperfect of the Indicative, by putting before it for a
sign, o si, O if: as, O si j'estois aim. etc. O if I were loved. etc.

Of the Preterperfect.
For the singular. Dieu vueille que I'aye este aim, would God that I have
been loved. Tu ayes este aim, ou vous ayez este aim, thou have been loved, or
you have been loved. Il ait este aim, he has been loved.
For the Plural. Nous ayons este aimez, we have been loved. Vous ayez este
aimez, ye have been loved. Ils aient este aimez, they have been loved.

Of the Preterpluperfect.
For the singular. Pleust a Dieu que I'eusse este aim, would it pleased God
that I had been loved. Tu eusses, ou vous eussiez este aim, that thou had,
or you had been loved. Il eust este aim, he had been loved.
For the Plural. Nous eussions este aimez, we had been loved. Vous eussiez este
aimez, ye had been loved. Ils eussent este aimez, they had been loved.

The Future tense is like to the Present tense of the Optatiue mood.

Of the Subiunctiue mood, and of his Present tense.
The Present tense of the Subiunctiue mood is coniugated as the present tense
of the Indicative, saving that it has before it for a sign, veu que, seeing
that.

Of the Preterimperfect.
For the singular. Quand Ie serois aim, when I should be loved. Tu serois, ou
vous seriez aim, thou should, or you should be loved. Il seroit aim, he
should be loved.
Plural. Nous serions aimez, we should be loved. Vous seriez aimez, ye should
be loved. Il seroient aimez, they should be loved.

Or else as the preterimperfect of the Indicative mood, in giving him this
sign, veu que, seeing that, or as the preterimperfect of the Optatiue.

Of the Preterperfect.
This preterperfect tense is coniugated as the preterperfect of the Optatiue.

Of the Preterpluperfect.
For the singular. Quand I'aurois este aim, when I had been loved. Tu auroys,
ou vous auriez este aim, thou had, or you had been loved. Il auroit este
aim, he had been loved.
For the Plural. Nous aurions este aimez, we had been loved. Vous auriez este
aimez, ye had been loved. Ils auroient este aimez, they had been loved.

Or as the Preterpluperfect of the Indicative mood.

Of the Future.
For the singular. Quand Iauray este aim, when I shall have been loved. Tu
auras, ou vous aurez este aim, thou shall, or you shall have been loved. Il
aura este aim, he shall have been loved.
Plural. Nous aurons este aims, we shall have been loved. Vous aures este
aimez, ye shall have been loved. Ils auront este aimez, they shall have been
loved.

Of the Infinitive mood.
Estre aim, To be loved.

For the Preterperfect and Preterpluperfect.
Auoir este, aim, To have or had been loved.

Of the Future.
Que Ie seray aim, that I shall be loved, ou I'espere que Ie seray aim, or I
hope that I shall be loved.

The Participle is formed, taking away from the passive the verb Substantive,
as aim, loved, and so of all the rest.

Of the Participle.
The participle is a part of speech, which is so called, because it proceeds
of the nature of the Verb, and of the Noune. Now we have in our tongue two
only sorts of participles: whereof the one comes of the verb Active, and is
called a participle of the present tense: and the other of the verb passive.
That which proceeds of the verb Active, ends in, ant, and is formed of the
preterimperfect of the Indicative mood of the verb active, of whatsoever
coniugatio^ it be, changing, oys, into, ant, as aimois, loved, aima^t, loving,
disois, said, disant, saying, faisois, did, faisant, doing, parlois, spoke,
parla^t, speaking, and so of others. Of which participle, is formed the
participle feminine, by adding, e, feminine at the end, as, aimant, aimante,
disant, disante, faisant, faisante, for all the other which end in, ant, be of
the masculine gender.

The Participle that descends from the Verb passive is formed of the first
person of the Indicative mood, by taking away the Verb substantive, which is
joined unto it: as we have said in Coniugating the Verb passive, je suis
aim, I am loved, dit, said, fait, made, declare, declared, estime, esteemed.
There must then be taken away these particles, je suis, and behold the
participle formed in this sort, aim, loved, dit, said, fait, made, estime,
estime, dest tue, destitute, and so of others, whereof comes the participle
feminine by adding, e, feminine, as aim aimee, dit dite, fait faite, estime
estimee.

For the rest, because, that these participles be declined as the nounes of
which we have spoken amply enough, I send you thither. For it is all one in
this respect of adding the Article, le, and, un, for the masculine, la, and,
vne, for the feminine, as for example of the participle active, l'aimant, the
loving, et un aimant, and a loving, for the masculine, and for the feminine,
l'aimante, et vne aimante, example of the participle passive: for the masculine
l'aime, the beloved, le dit, the said, et un aim, and a beloved, un dit. one
said, for the feminine, l'aimee, la dite, et vne aimee, vne dite. As for the
plural number there needs but to add, s, at the end of the singular, and
it shall be formed, as l'aime les aims, l'aimee les aimees, l'aimant les
aimants, l'aimante, les aimantes, etc.

Of the Aduerbe.
The Aduerbes be words, which be not declined (as these three last sorts of
words that is to say, Conjunction, Preposition, and Interiection, of which
we will speak consequently hereafter) and join themselves to Verbes to make
that to be more clearly understood, which those Verbes signify and to
fulfill and accomplish their signification, as the Adjectives are joined to
Substantives, as for example, let us take j'aime, I love, a man knows not
whither it be of much or little love; or otherwise, if there be not joined unto
it an Aduerbe, as, grandement, greatly, ou legerement, or lightly, and so
others, but then it is known with what love one loves: as je l'aime
grandement, I love him greatly, Il aim legereme^t, ou bien peu, he loves
lightly or very little.

There are of diverse sorts of Aduerbes: some wherewith men use to signify or
tell the time of a thing: as auiourd'huy, To day, demain, to morrow, hier,
yesterday, l'autre iour, the other day, apres demain, after to morrow, tous
les iours, every day, quand ou comme, when, or as, cependant que, whiles,
maintenant, now, desia, already, a ceste heure, at this hour, tantost, anon,
incontinent; incontinent, si pris si mis, by and by, longuement, a long while,
tousiours, always, tousiourmais, for ever, quelquefois, sometimes, aucunefois,
any time, jadis, in time past. souuent, souuentesfois, often, oftentimes, peu
souue^t, seldom, jamais, never, cy apres, hereafter, par cy apres, hereafter,
doresanaua^t, from henceforth, ores, but, deuant, before, auant, before, tant
que, so long, jusques a tant que, until so long as.

Some be to signify the place, as when one asks, ou est il? where is he? or
else, ou est il all, whither is he gone? men answer in this? sort, Icy,
here, la, there, illec, there, en ce lieu-la, in that place, en ce lieu cy, in
this place, aupres near, pres, nygh, dedans, within, horse, without, dehors,
abroad.

And for the answering of this question, of d'ou vient il? from whence comes
he? It is said, d'icy, of this place, de la, from hence, d'illec, from thence.

For this: Par ou est il pass? which way went be? One answers, Par cy, this
way, par la, that way, par illec, by that place.

For this question, de quel cost va il? on what side goes he? One answers
in this manner, verse ce lieu cy, toward this place, par icy, hitherto par ce
cost icy, on this side, par ce cost la, on that side, verse ce cost la,
toward that side, droict en auant, right before, a trauers, overthwart,
deuant, before, arriere, behind, en arriere, backwarde.

Some serve to reckon, or number: as vne foys, once, deux foys, twyce,
troysfois, thrice, quatre soys, four times, and so of the other.

Some signify and show order: puis apres, afterward, apres, after, en apres,
after that, cy apres, hereafter, consequemment, consequently, Some be to ask:
quoy? what? pourquoy? wherefore? de quoy? why? ou, where? d'ou, from whence?
par ou, whereby? comment, how? quand, when? For to call, hau, how, vien ca,
come hither, st. whist, hist.

For to answer, hau, how. Now it is true that this last is somewhat rude,
so that in the place of hau, we use these phrases, plaist il, pleases it you,
que vous plaist il? what shall it please you? and English men this word,
tantost, anon. For to answer assuredly: Ouy, yea, il est ainsi, it is so,
pourquoy non? why not?

For to affirm or confirm, sans point de fault, without any fail, certes,
certes, vrayeme^t, truly, veritablement, verily, certainement, certainly, pour
certain, for certain.

For to deny, non, no, ne, not, nenny, no, nullement, not at all.

For to exhort and give courage, or sus, go to, or auant, now, courage,
courage, bien bien, well, well, or ca, go to.

For to wish: a la mi^nne volunte, I would, pleust a Dieu, might it please
God, Dieu vucille, God grant, si, if, ou, or, o si, o if.

For to signify some things that are to be done together: ensemble, together,
quand and quand, by and by, tout d'une venue, all at once, tout d'un coup, all
at one chop, ensemblement, likewise, tout d'un train, all in a row, ausi bien,
as well.

For to elect and chose, mieux, better, et mais bien, and but well, in this
sort, non pas cecy, not this, mais bien cela, but well that.

For to separate, a part, a part, a l'escart, by it self, mais singuliereme^t,
but specially. As in this example, je vous en remercie tous mais
singulierement, I thank you all of it, but specially, mais nommement, but
namely, principalleme^t, chieflye, particulierement, particularly,
speciallement, specially, vous mon bon amy, you my good friend.

For to signify in what manner, seauamme^t, skilfully, prudemment, wisely,
vaillamment, valiauntly, diligemment, diligently, and so of others, which show
the quality of the thing.

For to signify quantity, great or little, or for to augment, fore, very,
beaucoup, much, moult, much, trop, to much, grandement, greatly, bien, well,
As in this sentence, tu sois le bien venu, as for thee be thou welcome, peu,
little, gueres, little, un peu, a little, trop peu, to little, un bien peu, a
very little, le moins du monde, the least of the world, tant soit peu, be it
never so little, presque, almost, is one of them also, so that, the negation
goes before it, in this sort, je ne voy presque goutte, I see not almost a
whit.

For to diminishe or make less, a grand peine, skarce, peu a peu, little and
little, tout bellement, fair, posement, softly, petit a petit, by little and
little, presque, almost, enuiron, about, peu pres, well nigh, Il ne s'en faut
gueres, there lacks but little of it, nullement du mo^de, by no means in the
world, peu s'en faut, little lacks.

For to make comparison between two, or many, aussi, also, tant, so much,
autant, as much, si, so, plus, more, and moins, less, which be words that
serve to show comparison of things, and have after them, que, comme, ou, de,
as, or, of, which are always one of the members of the Comparison: as in these
examples, Il est aussi scauant que vous, He is as learned as you, Il n'est pas
tant prudent que cault, He is not so wise as subtle. Ie suis autant son amy,
que ou comme celuy qui l'est par dessus tous, I am as much his friend, as he
that is above all other. Le plus excellent de tous, the most excellent of all,
le moins sage de tous, the least wise of all.

For to show, Voy-le-cy, Here it is, voy-le-la, there it is, voy-cy, behold
here, voy-la, behold there.

For to doubt, Paraduanture, peradventure, Il peut bien estre, It may well be,
il se peut bien fair, it may well be done, il est possible, it is possible, Il
est bien possible, It is very possible, d'auenture, by chance, par cas
fortuit, perchance, come fortune voulut, as fortune would, it is very true,
that as to me I allow not these kinds of speaking, seeing that they smell more
of Paynimes than the Christian speeches. And so I would gladly advertise you by
ye way to leave this word Fortune, which these old dreamers Paynimes and
Idolatours have forged in their fond brains.

For we must use this word, Dieu, God, and have it always in our mouth in
all our doings, and affairs, seeing that all things are and do come by his
divine providence, without the which nothing can be.

Then in place that men say, de cas fortuit, perchance, comme fortune voulut,
as fortune would, we must say: comme Dien voulut, as God would, cecy ou cela
se peut fair, this or that may be done, voire s'il plaist a Dieu, to weete, if
it please God, the which must be added.

For to show likeness or resemblaunce, or Comparison, or example: Comme, as
ainsi, so, ainsi que, so as, ainsi comme, even so, comme si, even as, tout
ainsi que, like as.

Of Conjunctions.
Conjunctions are words, which serve for to join and knit together other
words or sentences, of which there be diverse sorts.

Some be to join only: as these, et, and, aussi, also, example of, et, and,
Il est bon et honneste, he is good and honest. Of, aussi, also, S'il vous
offense, il in'offence aussi, If he offend you, he offends me also,
d'auantage, moreover, pareillement, likewise, non seulement, not only, mais
aussi, but also, en outre and qui plus est further and that more is, au rest,
to the rest, au par sur, moreover, en apres, afterward, outre ce, beside
this, mesme, mesmement, also, namely.

The other for to join together that which we would understand a part: as,
mais, but, example, Il est rich, mais meschant homme, He is rich, but a
wicked man, voire mais, yea but, Il est bien vray que, It is very true that,
vray est que, true it is that, or then, autrement, otherwise, sans cela,
without that, mais aussi, but also: Ou, or, is a Conjunction to conioyne two
things, of which we would affirm the one: as in this example, Il est bon, ou
mauuais, he is good, or evil.

Some serve for to yield reason, car, for, pour ce que, for that, pourquoy,
wherefore, qua^d a ce que, as to this that, and puis que, and since that, donc,
then, attendu que, considering that, veu que, seeing that, pourtant, by so
much, pour autant que, for as much as.

For to make exception, except, except, sinon, but, ^ors, saving, si, if.

To show a thing that follows of another, pour autant que, for as much as, as
pour autant que vous auez la fieure, vous auez chauld, forasmuch as you have
the Ague, you are whot, puisque, sythens that.

For to conclude, donques, then, parquoy, therefore, par ainsi, by this, and
pourtant, and therefore, pour ce, for that.

To show that, that which we say, causes no let, or hinderaunce, Iacoit,
albeit, Co^bienque, although that, encores, yet, veu que, seeing that,
toutesfois, nevertheless, neantmoins, nevertheless, si est ce que, yet is it
so that, nonobstant, notwithstanding, pourueu que, so that, au moins, at least,
a tout le moins, at the uttermost, these two last serve for to demand that
the least yet may be granted us: as in this example: Si vous ne voulez
m'ayder, au moins n'empeschez les autres de ce fair, If you will not help me,
at the least let not other to do it.

Of Prepositions.
The Prepositio^s are words that be put before other words, and therefore they
are so called. As when a man speaks of a place, of an order, or tells the
cause why, we say, Il est en la chamber, he is in the chamber, Il est le
second apres cestuy la, he is the second after that same, Ie l'ay fait a cause
de luy, I have done it for his cause.

Then we must know how many of them there are, and how they be placed, which
may rather be seen by examples, than by rules or precepts. And therefore I
will endeavor to discharge my self herein, the best that I can. It is true
that if there do remain some behind that I show not, you may not for that
be offended, for it is a small thing, and which may easily be learned in the
French dictionarie: and beside that, man's memory is so weak, that it is
almost impossible to hold all things at the fingers end. Then for the better
understanding them, we will give examples of them. And first, these six
Prepositions, a, au, to, aux, to the, de, of, du, of, from. des, of the, d^e
govern Nounes and V^rbes: as for example of, a, and, de, aller a la ville, au
presche, aux prieres, to go to the town, to the sermon, to prayers. Of, de:
Venir de la ville, du presche, des prieres, to come from the town, from the
sermon, from prayers. We say also, estre a Londres, to be at London, au
march, in the market place aux estuues, in the hot houses. A, and de, with a
Substantive, serve for an Adjective: as, homme a cheual, a pied, de cheual, de
pied, a man on horseback, a horseman, a foreman, on foot. So we say: quelque
chose de bon, some good thing, homme de bien, a good man. A. sometimes with the
Infinitive mood Present tense, signifies the Future tense, or quality of
some duty. As: chose a aduenir, a thing to come to pass, besongne a fair, a
work to do, chose a dire, a thing to say, chose a taire, a thing to keep
secret. De, without an article, is joined with a noune of matter, quantity,
and instrument, as, couronne d'or, a crown of gold, couppe d'argent, a cup
of silver, espee de fer, a sword of iron, un peu de feu, a little fire. This
Preposition, des, is put in this manner, des le commencement, from the
beginning, des nostre enfance, from our chyldehoode. Depuis, and Iusques,
follow one another in one sentence, after this sort: Depuis le haut iusques
au bas, from above until beneath, Depuis soleil couchant iusques au point du
iour, from the Sun going down until the break of the day. Depuis, is set
alone when it signifies some space of time, as, Ie ne l'ay point veu depuis ce
temps la, I have not seen him sithence that time. Example of par, as, par
courroux, by anger, par sa fault, by his fault. Of, pour, pour peur de honte,
for fear of shame, cecy est pour moy, this is for me, faices cela pour vostre
profit, do this for your profit. Pour, with the Infinitive present tense,
signifies somewhat to come: as, Il est pour estre grand personnage, he is to be
a great personage, pour enrichir sa maison, for to enrich his house, pour
arriuer auiourd'huy, for to arryue to day. Of parmy: parmy la fenestre,
through the window, parmy les champs, through the fields, parmy la ville,
through the town. Of Apres: le second apres le roy, the second next the king,
apres vous, after you. Of pres, and, aupres: seez vous prez de moy, sit you
nigh me, venes aupres de moy, come near me. Of sans: sans cecy je fusse all
aux champs, without this I had gone into the fields, sans le sceu, without
knowing, I'ay fait cela sans qu'ils s'en soyent apperceuz, I did the same, and
they perceived it not. Of, deuant: deuant tous, before all, deuant le roy,
before the king. Of, auecques, or, auec: auec peine and trauail, with pain and
traueyle, venes auec moy, come with me, allez auecques elle, go with her. Of
en, and, es: en, is for the singular. As, Il est en Egypt, be is in Egypt: Es,
for the Plural, as, Il est es deserts, he is in the deserts, es montaignes,
in the mountains. There be of them yet some, as, enuers, toward, verse,
toward, sur, upon, soubs, under, sus, above, dessus, above, dessous, beneath,
selon, after, ches, unto, or, at, and very few other, the practice of which
you may easily see in reading Authors. For there they may be best learned. And
therefore it suffyceth us to have showed you with the finger, where the
founteyne is, that you may drink thereof when you are dry.

Of the Interiection.
Interiections be words that men cast, and set between or in the midst of
a matter, the affection of him that speaks, there be diverse sorts of them.

Some serve to call: as, hay, hau, how.

For to ask, haa? hagh?

For to perceive, ha, ha, ah, ah.

For to cry, haro.

For to make men hold there peace, houysche, hush, mom, paix, momme, peace.

For to bid men beware, gare, take heed.

For to laugh, ho, ha.

For to lament, helas, las, less, he, hemy, alas.

For to marueyle, a, oya, dieux, dea.

For to be sad, O.

For to abhor, fie, fie.

FINIS.
ADVERTISSEMENT AVX LECTEVRS.
POVR cae que c'est peu de chose, d'auoir la cognoissance des regles sans la
practique. I'ay bien voulu a la fin de ce mien traite vous aduertir, de les
practiquer en les estudiant. Et pour ce fair, il vous faut auoir quelques
petis livers Francoys pour le co^mencement, touchant les matieres que vous
appeterez, comme ceux qui veule^t lire les Escritures saints, ils en peuuent
auoir d'aussi exquis and eloquens qu'on scauroit excogiter, comme le nouueau
Testament, l'Institution Chrestienne de Maistre Iean Calvin, ses sermons
lesquels se peuuent trouuer separez, and plusieurs autres bons livers, tant
grands, que petis escrits, des plus excellents and renommez personnages de
nostre temps. Et quant a ceux qui se delectent aussi de lire des livers sur
quelque autre subject, je les veux admonnester d'achater un petit liuret
Intitule le Theater du Monde, lequel est a bo^ droict ainsi appelle, veu qu'il
contient, non seulement le Theater du monde, quant a la matiere, mais aussi
pour la quantite du liver. Le Theater and le Thresor de l'elegance and purete
de nostre langue. Il y en a d'autres qui sont aussi fort bons and delectables
pour la diversity des maticres qu'ils contienent, comme le liver des propos
memorables, le liver des Facecieuses nuits, le liver des nouuelles de la Rain
de Navarre, ou c'est qu'on peut descouurir les astuces de ce mo^de, and le
moyen de s'en donner guard, and maints autres semblables discourse lesquels vous
pouuez scauoir des Libraires, toutesfois and quantes que vous voudrez, il ne
faut seulement que leur demander en general quelque bon liver Francoys de tell
grandeur, and sur tell and tell matiere, and ils le vous enseigneront
incontinent. Au rest d'autant que je me doubt, que vous n'entendrez pas tous
les mots que vous lirez, je vous conseille d'auoir par mesme moye^, un petit
Dictionnaire Francois and Anglois, ou Francois and Latin (a ceux qui
l'entendent) car vous y trouuerrez facilement, selon l'ordre des lettres, la
signification de tous les mots and puis apres vous voirez aisement au premier
liver de ce present traite, comme il les faut prononcer, and puis au second de
quelle party d'oraison ils sont, and s'ils sont Noms quels noms, de quel
nombre, and de quel cas, and s'il sont Verbes, en quel meuf, and en quel temps
vous les colloquerez, and ainsi des autres parties. Voila ou je clorray le
petit ruisselet de la petite source, qu'il a pleu a Dieu me donner l'eau du
quel (s'il luy plaist) vous seruira pour arrouser, and fair croistre des
Herbs de nostre langue Francoise, au jardin de vostre memoire, qui vous seront
par apres, no^ moins odoriferantes, que profitables, tellement que si je voy,
que vous luy faciez des co^duits, pour le receuoir, and que voz Herbs en
verdoyent, je suppliray nostre bon Dieu, qu'il vucille en tell sort croistre
les veins de la source de mon esprit, que je puisse de mieux en mieux fair
chose qui soit a vostre bien, and contentement, comme je le pry qu'il vous
maintienne en bonne prosperity. Ainsi soit-il.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE REAders.
Because that it is a small matter to have the knowledge of rules without
practice, I thought good at the end of this my treatise to advertise you to
practice the same, as you learn them. And for the doing hereof, you must get
some little French books to begin withal, which touch the matters that you
are desirous of. As they which will read the holy Scriptures, they may thereof
have so exquisite, and eloquent as a man can devise, as the new Testament, the
Christian Institation of M. John Calvin, his Sermons, which may be found
severally, and many other good books, as well great, as small, written by the
most excellent and renowned men of our time. And as for them, which are
delighted to read books upon some other matter, I would admonish them to
buy a little book Entitled: le Theater du Monde, which is worthily so called,
seeing that it contains not only the glass of the World, as concerning the
matter, but also for the quantity, of the book, the glass and Treasure of
the eloquence and pureness of our tongue. There be other also, very good and
pleasant, by reason of the diversity of matters, which they contain: as the
book of Propos memorables, the book of Facecieuses nuicts, the book of
Nouuelles de la Rain de Navarre, where a man may discover the subtle
practices of the world, and the mean to take heed of them, and many other
such like discourses, the which you may know of the bookesellers, as often and
when you will, you need only but ask them generallye, some good French
book, of such a bygnesse, and upon such, and such a matter, and they will
show it you by and by. As touching the rest, forasmuch as I doubt, that you
will not understand, all the words that you shall read, I counsel you to
have likewise a little Dictionarie, French and English, or French and Latin
(for them that understand it.) For there you shall find easilye, after the
order of the cross row, the signification of all words. And afterward you
shall see easily in the first Book of the present Treatise, how they are to
be pronounced and after in the second, of what part of speech they be, and
if they be Nounes, what Nounes, of what number, and of what case: and if they
be Verbes, in what mood, and in what tense you shall place them, and so of the
other parts.

And thus do I shut up the little River of the little spring, which it has
pleased God to give me, the water whereof, (if it be his will) shall serve you,
to sprinckle, and make to grow, herbs of our French tongue, in the Garden of
your memory, which shall be to you hereafter no less pleasant in smell, than
profitable, so that, if I see that you make passages to receive the same, and
that your Herbs thereby may spring. I shall beseech our good God, that he
would in such sort increase the veins of the Spring of my understanding, that
I may the better do the thing, that may be to your profit and contentation, as
I pray him, to maintain you in good prosperity. So be it.


