THE SIXTY SIX ADMONITORY Chapters of Basilius, King of the Romans, to his
Son Leo, in Acrostick manner: That is, the first letter of every Chapter,
making up his name and title.

Translated out of Greek by JAMES SCVDAMORE. *

Printed at Paris.

M.DC.XXXVIII.

Quod Foelix, faustumquesit, SERENISSIMO PRINCIPI CAROLO VVALLIAE PRINCIPI,
POTENTISSIMI REGIS CAROLI, MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, etc.

REGIS FILIO.

HAEC BASILII IMPERATOris ad suum Filium Leonem capita Admonitoria ex Graeeis
Anglica facta.

Dicat consecratque IACOBVS SCVDAMORVS.

OF THE Author.
BASILIVS the Author of this Treatise, (who calls himself King of the
Romans, as their manner was) succeeded Michael in the Eastern Empire; and is
said to have restored the state of the Empire, which was much decayed by the
ill government of Michael. He reigned with Michael one year, and after him
nineteen. He dyed in the year 889.

BASILIVS HIS PRECEPTS.
Sixty six admonitory Chapters of Basilius, King of the Romans, to his son
Leo, in Acrostick manner; That is the first letter of every Chapter, making up
his name and title.
BASILIVS BY Christ, King of the Romans, to Leo his beloved son, and
Coemperour.
CHAPTER I.
Of Instruction.
INSTRVCTION is a thing, that does much profit the life of man, and is much to
be esteemed, not only of Kings, but also of private men. For it greatly
benefits them that have it, both in respect of the body and soul. It benefits
the one, by the meditation of divine Oracles, and the other by the exercise of
laudable works: or by the use of laudable exercises. Therefore I thy Father and
Coemperour do exhort thee, my beloved son, to be guided by it in the
government of thy Kingdom. For it is both an ornament to Royalty in present,
and does make the rulers to be renowned for ever. For as the Sun not shining
upon the earth, all things are obscure, and indiscernable: So the soul being
without Instruction, all things are confused, and out of order. Embrace
th^rfore Instruction, and thou shall attain to a virtuous life. For virtue
only of all possessions is immortal.

CHAP. II.
Of right Faith.
MAKE Sincere Faith in Christ the principal and sure foundation of all thy
life, that is, account true Faith the principal of all things in this life,
and the ground of thy happiness here and hereafter. Worship the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, the consubstantiall Trinity, one and the only God,
without dividing or confounding the same. And believe the Dispensation or
Incarnation of God the word in the flesh, by which the world was delivered from
the bondage of corruption, as the law or doctrine of thy Mother the Church
does teach thee. This Faith is the perfection of all virtues. This Faith is the
sum and Chief of all good things. Therefore keep this Faith safe, as a
special thing committed to thy charge, with which thou have been brought up
from thy swaddling clothes. I taught thee it: Do not shame me thy loving
Father by being unlike to me. For it is the work of paynters indeed to draw
in colors the Portraits of Princes: but the Children of Kings ought to prove
living Images and Portraits of the virtue of their Fathers.

CHAP. III.
Of the honor which is to be given to Priests.
Keep thy understanding sound in orthodoxe opinions, and exceedingly honor
thy Mother the Church, which by the Holy Ghost has been a noursing Mother to
thee, and by the grace and favor of God in Christ by my means has set a
crown upon thy head. For if thou oughtst to reverence and honor thy Parents
according to the flesh, much more oughtst thou to honor with exceeding honor
those that have begott thee by the Spirit of God. For they do impart but a
temporary life to their Children; but these do procure unto us an everlasting
life by regeneration. Honor therefore the Church that thou may be honored of
God; and reverence the Priests as our spiritual Fathers and mediators toward
God. For the honor of Priests redounds to God. For as for thy sake, it is
reason, that thy servants should be honored, so it is a holy and religious
work for Gods sake to honor his Priests; and as the honor which is done unto
them, does reach unto God; so the dishonor which is done unto them, does
exceedingly provoke God to anger.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Judgment and Retribution to come.
BELIEVE that the world is subject to corruption, seeing it had a beginning,
but that after corruption it shall be changed again into incorruption. For
none of those things, that are made by God, shall return into nothing,
although the trangression of sin has together with us condemned every
creature to dissolution: But expecting again the creature, I mean, the world
to be incorruptible, confess also the Resurrection of the dead, and expect
that there shall be a just Judgment and trial of the things that have been
done of every one. For no evil shall escape the divine Judgment without
punishment, neither shall any good lie hid unrewarded. Neither think that the
rewards of good works are mortal, nor that the punishments of evil works
shall ever have an end. For both have everlasting continuance, and in both
there shall be Eternity.

CHAP. V.
Of Alms.
ALMS does oftentimes, according as the Scripture says, repriue from death,
and life seems as it were to be bought for money, when God for our life and
salvation suffers himself, as it were, to be bribed. Therefore scattering
mortal riches upon earth, thou do gather immortal riches in heaven: and
besides, it procures unto thee the blessings even of this world also. And in
very deed, doing good to others, is wealth inexhaustible. For by scattering it
is gathered, and by giving it is again received; and not only with blessings
of this life does it make them rich that possess it, but also it does make
them happy with blessings of the world to come.

CHAP. VI.
Of care and vigilance.
KEEP continually in thy mind the manners of thy parents, and according unto
them diligently perfect and square thy life. For we do neither carelessly or
negligently carry our selves, in those things which we strive to effect, but
do labor to set our selves before thee, as examples and patterns of virtue,
thinking negligence worthy of reprehension, and esteeming labor praise-wortly.
And use not things of this life out of season, and unfitly, but exercise thy
self to enjoy the seeming good things of this life, as one that must dye at
last; and mind the obtaining of the good things to come, as one that is to live
everlastingly: That is, use the things of this life, so as a mortal man should
use them, that by the right using of them, thou may get eternal good
things. He that uses them otherwise, does, as our Author says, use them (...)
out of season, or unfitly.

CHAP. VII.
Of conversation with good men.
BE conversant often with thy Ghostly Physicians, that thou may be well and
healthy in thy soul. For thou may learn of them, what thou oughtst to
desire, and from what things thou oughtst to abstain, and with what men to be
conversant, and whom to avoid and abhor, and how thou should order thy
life, that thou may not fall into many inconveniences. And if thou will take
this course, thou may truly attain to the full perfection of virtue.

CHAP. VIII.
Of virtue.
ALL the desirable things of the world do not so much adorn a King, as the
riches of virtue. For beawty and comeliness is withered either by diseases or
by time; and wealth does begett idleness and pleasures: and strength does
adorn the body with victories, but does hinder the faculties and endeavors of
the soul. But the possession of virtue is more profitable to them that have
it, then riches, and greatness of birth: And those things, that seem
impossible to others, by the help of God, it makes them to be possible.

CHAP. IX.
Of Lust.
LET not lust and the desire of a fair body overcome thee, because such a
thing is to be esteemed but as a little dust. Therefore be not proud of bodily
nobility, nor despise meannesse of birth, neither be taken with beauty, nor
abhor these that are hard favored: but consider the beauty of the soul, and
spiritually love the soul. For that love is only true and immortal, not which
as soon as it is obtained, does presently decrease and vanish, but which after
it is obtained, does daily increase more and more.

CHAP. X.
Of Goodness of manners.
THOU have received a Kingdom of God, keep it safely, as a precious thing
committed to thy charge. Do not seem an ill keeper of that, which is given
unto thee, neither do any thing ignoble or unworthy of it; but as thou were
preferred in dignity before other men, to reign, so labor to excel all thy
subjects in virtue also. For virtue is better then all dignity. If therefore in
respect of dignity, thou have dominion and Sovereignty over all other men, but
in respect of virtue art excelled by any, thou art a King in respect of that
which is less; but in very deed thou art not a King in respect of that which
is greater, but art a subject to others. Be not therefore a King only in name,
by being excelled by others; but be a true King indeed, by ouercomming all, in
respect of virtue.

CHAP. XI.
Of Temperance.
GOD will then give thee victories and trophyes over thy enemies, when thou thy
self shall set up trophyes and gain victories over thy passions. For
ouercomming thy invisible enemies, that is, thy passions, thou shall without
doubt overcome also thy visible enemies. But he, that like a slave is overcome
and carried away with pleasures, God will not honor him with any noble and
brave victory: whereas he which by his own labor shall gain the victory over
his passions, for a manifest sign of retribution of the good things to come,
shall receive from God, as a due unto him, victory also over his visible
enemies.

CHAP. XII.
Of Faithful friends.
DELIGHT more in friends that strive to express their affection toward thee,
in that they are true friends, then in that they are near of kin unto thee.
For the freindship which kindred makes, proceeds not from virtue, but from
nature, which may justly be accounted such love, as comes not from volontary
choice; but the freindship of good friends proceeds from free election and
virtue. And the one has Nature for its law, and the other, God. And goodness
in true friends, is better then consanguinity, in any occasion, wherein one has
need to use a friend: and that which is voluntary, as is freindship, is better
then that which is necessary, as is consanguinity. For kinsmen have oftentimes
supplanted kinsmen for small matters: But true friends not weighing the gain
of the whole world, have not preferred even their very life, before the love of
their friends.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Valor, and Prudence.
BOTH honor and approve bodily strength, if it be adorned with Prudence. For,
as much as it is able to profitt, being joined with wisdom; so much without
wisdom it uses to hurt them that have it. For strength joined with wisdom,
makes the character of a man. But if foolishness accompanies it, it is the
character of a wild beast. Therefore do not aprooue those, that have strength
not guided with discretion; but those that do govern it with wisdom. For
strength without wisdom is to be named audaciousnesse; but strength with
wisdom is termed valor.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Humility.
VVOVLD'ST thou have God gracious toward thee, be thou also gracious toward
thy subjects. For although thou art made their Lord, yet thou art their fellow
servant. For we have all of us, one and the same Lord, eue^ the Lord of the
whole world; and we have one and the same original of all our kindred, namely
earth, although we little clotts of earth are puffed up one against another.
Therefore thou, that art but higher dust, remember thy self, and know
certainly, that howsoever thou art lifted up on high from the earth, thou shall
surely again be brought down to the earth, and then thou will never be lifted
up against lower dust. Remember thine own offenses against God, and thou will
forgett thy neighbors offenses against thy self.

CHAP. XV.
Of Prudence.
CONSIDER with thy self that Prudence is most precious to all men; and that it
is procured to all men by diligence. All men do praise it as a good thing, but
all men do not labor to gain it, wherefore thou will rarely find one, that
has attained it. Therefore, do not thou thy self only labor to be endued
with wisdom, but reverence and honor also him that has it; be conversant
with him day and night. For such a one only is able to do thee very much good
in respect of thy soul, and those things which seem unto thee oftentimes
impossible to be done at a pinch, these things by his means, with the help of
God, thou shall easily bring to pass. For either thou must be wise thy self,
or follow wise men, in whom God indeed does take delight to be as upon his
Throne.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Truth and Lying.
LET the gravity of thy manners be of no less credit, then thy words, that not
only when thou speak, but also when thou hold thy peace, thou may have
reverence. But do not approve of those, that are plausible in speech, and
that do not confirm their words by deeds. For there are some, that can speak
fairly, but in doing are very cold. Therefore neither be thou such a one, nor
admit others that are such to be about thee: but make much of them, and make
them near unto thee, which do not so much adorn their manners with their
words, as their words with their manners. And be not so shameless to talk of
those things, that thou have done, which thou art ashamed again to do:
neither think to do those things, which thou art ashamed to talk of.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Meditation of divine Oracles.
AS tender plants being watered, do flourish and bring forth fruit; so also
thy understanding (my Son) being watered with the meditation of divine words
shall yet more and more increase, and bring forth the fruits of virtue. For
fitting nourishments do fatten the body: but spiritual sayings do nourish
the soul. And whereas the delight, that proceeds from bodily food, reaches
but to the throat, and does but increase corruption: the nourishment of the
soul brings everlasting delight, and does procure incorruption, and is
turned into incorruption. Meditate therefore such profitable sayings, that thou
may take pleasure in the fruits of them, and may well order thy Kingdom.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Counsel.
NOTHING is more safe then good counsel, and nothing more dangerous then
execution of an action without taking advice before. Therefore that thou may
safely do those things that thou would, take advice before thou do them.
For after the action, there is no place for that consultation, vhich should
have gone before: but between former consultation and action, thou may by
after consultation change thy advice. Consider therefore the end of every
thing, and so proceed to action. But make use of those Counselors, which have
with good advice ordered their own affairs; but not of such, as have ill and
unadvisedly managed their own businesses. For he which has ill carried his
own business, will never give good counsel concerning other men's affairs.
But do not ask advice of them, that are unseen in those things, whereof thou
would be advised, nor yet of those that do use to flatter thee. For the one
sort, like blind men will give advice without knowledge, and the other sort
will assent to thy opinion, to please thee. But especially consult vith them,
which have a right knowledge in business, and which are wont to find fault
with those things, which thou do amiss. For these only are worthy to be put
in the number, and to be entrusted with the place of friends and Counselors.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Chastity.
KEEP thy self chaste not only in thy body, but also even in thy very mind.
For as an impure life does separate us from God, so also a chaste life does
bring us near unto God. Therefore let thy light shine forth before those that
are under thy subjection, and be a good example to thy subjects. For if thou
thy self wilt not Keep thy self chaste; vith what face will thou command it
to thy subjects? For they also will be brought to do the same things, as they
shall see thee do. For subjects naturally in a manner use to be changed, and
conformed to their Governors. Therefore, as, if thou do not live well, thou
shall be a cause of the hurt of thy subjects, so exercising chastity, with
other virtues, thou shall procure good to all thy people, and shall gain from
thence a great reward to thy self, by making not only thy self, but also all
thy subjects to be temples of God.

CHAP. XX.
Of the honor which is to be given to Parents.
THOU have received a crown from God by my hand, requite him that gave thee
it, with a present worthy of it. Honor God, who has honored thee, by
honoring him that begat thee. And thou shall honor me, not, as some of my
subjects, either kneeling to me, like them, or waiting in such manner upon my
person, or using acclamations toward me, (For these things do not become one
that is a King,) but by making high account of virtue, and exercising
temperance, and adorning thy mind, and affecting learning, by which the minds
of young men are much adorned, and in a word, so making thy self to be a worthy
King on earth, and to resemble the King of heaven. For he only that can attain
to virtue, shall be justly accounted the Image of God, who has raised him up
to that honor, and next after God, shall justly be beloved of his subjects,
and shall be worthily honored, as a common benefactour, that does good both to
himself, and to his people.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Justice.
THAT thou may preserve thy Majesty and Government without blame, do not
thou thy self go about to do those things, which thou will find fault with
others for doing. For subjects do use shrewdly to weigh the actions of their
Governors. But if thou will observe this rule, thou shall effect these two
great things, that is, thou shall both keep thy self free from all blame, and
thou shall teach thy subjects, both when thou hold thy peace, and when thou
speak, to exercise all virtue. But if thou do do contrary to those
things which thou speak, thou shall have thy conscience to be thy accuser;
whereas if speaking good things, thou do also do the same, thou shall have
those that shall weigh thy life, to be both witnesses and imitators of thy
goodness.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Bounty.
BE ignorant of none of them, that do make suites unto thee, or that do seek
dignityes of thee, and when thou know what they are, do good to those that
are good. For by this means thou shall always gain love, and that which is
more, thou shall gain love that is stable, and subject to noe changes or
chances. For doing of good is a sure treasure laid up in good men as in a safe
treasury; and manyfold thanks are in them stored up for thee, as a debt to be
paid thee in due time. But he which does good to evil men, nourishes a
serpent in his bosom, which for a while being there cherished, when it finds
its fit time, does requite its benefactor with a venomous bite. For as strange
dogs do bark at strangers, though they give them meat, so evil men do
wrong those that do them good, as if they did hurt them: whereas doing good
to good men, thou shall, as it were, multiply thy self, by making many
friends, and shall have one soul guarded about with the eyes of many friends
about thee.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Friends.
MAke them thy friends, and nearest servants, which have before been good to
other Friends or Masters. For what they have done to them, they will not think
much to do for thee. For he which has been good and affectionate toward his
former friends, it may be thought he will be good and affectionate toward thee
also. But he which has been naught and negligent, and unwilling to do any
thing for his former Friends, or Masters, will scarce ever prove himself
affectionate and profitable toward thee.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Contempt of Riches.
NOT so much greatness of dignity, as contempt of riches, does she we the
high and free mind of a King. For in this the loftiness of his mind is most
apparent. But this is contempt of riches, not in vain to hoard them up in
bags, but to distribute them bountifully upon necessary occasions. But these
things are necessary for a King, and more then for others, namely to do good
to his friends, and to take revenge of his enemies; both which things the way
to effect, is by expense of money. Therefore if thou would show thy self
high in all things and especially in understanding, be a contemner of riches,
seeing that even those things which thou have, are not only thine own, but
do belong also to thy fellow-seruants, and especially to the poor and to
strangers. Therefore of things, which thou oughtst to esteem common, make
particular benefitt to thy self, by doing good to others, and so thou shall
be highly accounted, and much esteemed for understanding.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Drunkenness.
AVOID drinking companies. For drunkenness is a contrary thing, and an enemy
to wisdom. For when wine tyrannizeth over the mind, it is in like case as
vnkilfull Coachmen, who being not able to govern the chariot, do let the
horses turn with them this way, and that way, and do cause great laughter to
those that behold them. So the understanding being in this case, it is
necessary that the soul also should continually fall in to many mischiefs.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Making a Friend.
THOU may easily make a friend whomsoever thou will, if thou do speak good
of him in his absence, to them that shall tell him of it again. For praise
uses to be the beginning of freindship, but dispraise is the beginning of
enmity. But if thou would more assure unto thee those friends, which thou
have already gotten, praise those that are absent, before those that are
present. For so thou may seem to praise those that are present, in those
that are absent. But try friends in straights and hard times. For many are the
friends of those that are in prosperity. And esteem those true friends, which
do love, not for gain, but for the very virtue it self of love. For other
freindship then this, which serves its own turn, is accounted in this respect
a kind of Merchandise, and not Freindship.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Riches and Covetousness.
DO not tinke much to use lawful means, He means money.
for the increasing of that whereby thou may advance thy state and Kingdom.
(...) for (...) which phrase I am told was usual in that age.
But thou shall best preserve thy subjects, if thou shall diligently advance
the publik treasure, but such as is gathered by just, not raked together by
unjust means; nor raised out of the tears of the oppressed. For riches, if
they be justly gathered will much benefitt the possessour, and will procure
strength to the Kingdom. But if they be raked together unjustly and out of
the tears of the oppressed, they do both frett away that which is gathered
together justly, and do draw on the vengeance of God, who by his law
commands us to observe that which is just. For fire does not so destroy
stubble, as wealth wikedly and unjustly gathered together does destroy even
that also which is justly gathered.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Patience.
BE not too forward to pick quarrels with thy subjects, for that will be
grievous to them, neither be thou forward to find fault with those, with whom
thou do converse, for this will be odious unto them. Neither delight in
immoderate laughter, for this is not becoming a well bred man, but be patient
toward them that do amiss, and be gentle in punishments, be grave in thy
manners and behavior, be mild in thy speech, be of a courteous and affable
disposition. For all these things will make thee to be dearly beloved of thy
subjects, and will make thee to be called rather a Father, then a King.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Truth, and Lying.
MAke great esteem of true speech, both to use it thy self, and to make
others near to thee, that use it. For so thou shall seem to be sure, and
constant in all things which thou do speak and do, and shall preserve
firm, and free from suspicion the love that men bear unto thee. For if thou
art suspected to use false speeches, although thou art exalted to be a King;
yet being found to do things unworthy of such a dignity, thou will make thy
subjects to be always fearful and full of doubts of thee. For; as much as
truth does make the man that has it to be beloved, so much false and
deceitful speech does make him, that does practice it, to be hated.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Government.
HE is the best Physician, which does apply fitting medicines to diseases. And
he is a good King, which does set over his subjects such Magistrates as shall
defend them when they are wronged. For as it belongs to a Horseman to know
the virtue of every horse, and to a Hunts-man perfectly to know his best
hunting dogs, and to a Captain to know his soldiers, what virtue every one
of them has, that in pitching a battle he may have the best of his soldiers
to set out, so it belongs to a good King to know the manners, and
conditions, and virtues, and dispositions of the Magistrates that are under
him, that being ignorant of none of them, he may fitly assign every one to the
place, that is fit for him, and that he may put out such as are the pests of
the state, and that he may entrust godly and virtuous men to order the
government of the Commonwealth.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Counsel and Consideration.
AS to agree with ones self is the character of a wise man, and one that is
praiseworthy, so to be contrary to ones own words and deeds, is a thing to be
dispraised, and not becoming a generous man, and far from the way to get a
good reputation. Therefore those things, which thou would either speak, or
do, never utter without consideration, that thou may never be found to be
contrary to thy self. For want of advice is the root of this mischief. But
if thou do all things with good advice, and so cuttest up the root of it,
thou will never be found to be contrary to thy self.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of making good Laws.
THOU shall make thy own disposition an un written Law to thy subjects, and
thou shall preserve an everlasting memory of thy government, if thou thy self
shall follow the laws that have been well made by the Kings that have been
before thee, and if thou shall inuiolably observe them in thy government. And
whatsoever thou shall compel thy subjects to observe, much more impose upon
thy self a necessity of observing the same. For it thou thy self do not
govern by the laws of Emperors that have been before thee, neither will
others observe thy decrees. And so laws being overthrown by one another, will
fill the vhole life of man with trouble and confusion, by which oftentimes
whole Nations have fallen unto ruin.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of naughty men.
CAST out such men as are the pests of the state, and never entrust to such men
a place of government, least thou also should seem to be like unto them,
and to delight in their injustice. For men will lay the blame on thee for those
evils which they do, and will think thee a partaker of their evil
disposition, and thou shall render an account of them to God. For the
preferring of naughty men does truly show the nature of them by whom they
were preferred, and the evil that they do, all men do impute to them that
preferred them. Therefore take especial care of advancing good men to be
Magistrates, that their good report may be thy honor, and that thy subjects
may impute unto thee the good which they do. For to be praised of the people
is better then great riches.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Mercy, or Alms.
DESIRE wealth, not for pleasure, but for necessary uses, either that thou
may help those that are in adversity, or that thou may give to them, that
are willing to dye for others. He means soldiers.
For all other desire of wealth does not only not profitt, but does rather
procure hurt. For wealth, which a man has, not to do good withal, is the
minister rather of vice, then of virtue; but that which a man imployeth in good
uses, may much profit them that have it, both in respect of their souls and
bodies: Partly, when it is bountifully bestowed on those that want it, and
partly when it is distributed to good friends. For both are bounty, although
they are called by different names.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the love of Friends.
NOTHING seems to be stronger then love. And there is nothing in the world to
be valued to a true friend. Do thou therefore observe the laws of freindship
with thy true friends in all times, and places, that they also may hold their
love to thee firm and sure whithout suspicion. And be not of an unthankful
disposition. For it is a part of piety, to requite them that have done thee
good. And he which is unthankful, is an enemy to himself. For a good turn
being requited, is multiplied, but being not requited, it does destroy even the
favor, that was first bestowed. Therefore if thou will be thankful thou shall
have many, that shall strive to show their affection toward thee, and many
that shall seek to do thee grateful service. But if thou be unthankful,
thou will get noe friend at all, with whom thou may live a pleasant life,
though all men feign freindshipp toward thee.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Speech and silence.
BE wise and prudent in learning the conditions of every one, and in approouing
good men, and in abhorring naughty men. But consider before in thy mind,
whatsoever thou would speak, least that thy tongue running before thy wit,
thou should be vpbraided to speak at random. For in any company, when thou
have considered, that, which thou would say, is yet in thy power, if perhaps
after thy first opinion, thy second seems better: But when thou have spoken
once, thou can not speak contrary to those things, which thou have already
spoken, if thou desire to speak and converse, so as no man may find fault
with thee. But the matters, whereof it is necessary thou should speak, are
these, either those things which thou do know; or those things which the
time requires. But in all other things, it is better to be silent, then
talkatiue.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Alms.
GIVE alms bountifully to them that need; that thou may gain mercy of God
the Lord of all. For piety is properly a giving part of our goods to them that
want. And think that day lost, in which thou do not do good to some body,
in lieu of those good things which thou have received of God. Get therefore the
habit of giving alms, that thou may receive again the like of God. Incline
thine ear to suppliants; receive with a tender heart, and a favorable eye
those that make suites unto thee. Pity the tears of widows, and do not
reject the mournings of Orphans. For as we do to others, the same also shall
be done to us, and as we hear the poor, so we shall be heard of God, and
with the same eyes, as we see the afflicted, God will behold us. Therefore as
thou would wish God should be toward thee: be thou also such toward thy
servants. For what measure thou shall give, with the same measure it shall be
measured unto thee again.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
That all things here are unstable.
KNOW, My child, that this life has nothing stable, nor firm, nor
unchangeable. For things do change this way, and that way, and like a wheel,
that is rolled up and down, that vhich is upward is carried downward, and
that which is downward is carried upward. Therefore neither be lifted up with
prosperity, nor be cast down with adversity. But be in both, stable and
unchangeable; setting thy mind only to do that which is good, and committing
the rest to God. For when thou art in prosperity, thou ought not to be
bifted up for fear of adversity: And when thou art in adversity, suffer not
thy self to be dejected, in hope of prosperity. For that is pusillanimity, and
not becoming the courage of a King. For that which is to come, is unknown.
Therefore neither be thou ever found immoderately mourning, or laughing. For so
thou will seem to be wise, and may escape the evils, which do proceed
from both the extremes. And they which do talk of thy actions, shall have no
cause to find fault with those things, which happen unto thee.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Care.
IMPOSE upon thy self this necessity, of having a will to ouersee all things
thy self, and not to suffer thy self to neglect any thing. And this I say
because that thou being a King, have nobody over thee upon earth, which can
compel thee. But although thou do reign over all on earth, yet even thou
also have a King in Heaven. If therefore He as being God has a care of all
things, so also thou ought to neglect nothing, as being a King under God.
For, as those things, which are diligently ouerseene and ordered by thee, do
receive from thence great benefitt, so those things that are neglected, do
insensibly fall to ruin. For if in all matters, Little things are not to be
neglected, then much more does that prouerbiall sayng hold in that, which
concerns a King.

CHAP. XL.
Of Guard.
HOW sure a guard to a Kings person, with the favor of God, is the good will
of his subjects? when all men receive good of him, and do expect the suffering
of noe tyranny at his hands. But as, thou ought to preserve thy Majesty,
that the treacherous practices of thy enemies may not prevail against thee,
so, thou ought to keep thy self free from passions. For reason defines,
that from both of them there is fear of treachery, and great danger. But the
treacherous practices, which thy enemies make against thy body, can bring but a
temporary death; but the treachery against the soul, that proceeds from
passions, does procure punishment, which ouer-liues even death it self.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the Kingdom of Heaven.
MANY Kings have inhabited this earthly court, but few have dwelt in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Labor therefore, my beloved son, that thou may not
only rightly order this Kingdom by the goodness of thy manners, but that
thou may inheritt the Kingdom of Heaven by good works, and virtues. For to
day, this is thy court, and to morrow, perhaps it shall not be thine, and
after to morrow, it shall be another bodies, and the day after that, another
bodies, so that indeed it is never any bodies. For if it so often changes
its Masters, it has indeed noe true Master. Therefore seeing that we must
pass from this power here, let us labor by virtue to get in exchange that
Kingdom, which has only immortality and perpetuity, without need of a
successor. As for all other things, they are fading and transitory.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Remembering God.
IF thou make thy conscience thy law, and wilt not suffer that to be done to
others, which thou would not have done to thy self, thou will never incur
the blame of doing amiss. And if thou shall think upon God also, as one, that
ouerseeth, and weighs all thy actions, as indeed he does, thou will not dare
to sin, either openly, or in private. For although thou think those
things, which thou do in secret, are hidden from others; yet thou will be
ashamed to do ill before thine own conscience, and before God the ouerseer
even of the secret places of the soul. For men may perceive our bodily
actions, but the only eye of God, to which nothing can be hid, does see the
things that are in the depth of the soul, and as, the Sun shining, nothing
is hid in the open air; so, God beholding our actions, nothing can be
concealed.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Receiving Gifts.
GIVE dignities freely, and do not sell places of honor for gifts. For he
which buys a place of government for a price, does much more buy those that
he is to govern, that trusting on thy receiving bribes, he may without fear
look to take bribes himself also. But diligently enquire, and ask, and
prefer them to places of honor (if thou will cast corruption and bribery out
of the state) which do seek those places freely, and not with bribes. For he
which gives any thing for a place of honor, does look to gain by his place,
as one that by giving gifts, buys a power to receive gifts, and so buys a
power to do injustice. For he which comes to a place by bribes, will never
learn to do any thing without taking of bribes; and having thee for a teacher
of bribery, who ought to be a punisher of it, he will not only take bribes
himself, but also will compel others that are under him, to do the like.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Injustice.
HE which does wrong, does not committ so great a sin, as he which permitts
wrong. When therefore any one that is wronged, comes unto thee, do not neglect
his affliction, that thou may not give way to those that would do wrong. For
he which is wronged, does repose all his hopes in thee only, and under the
protection of thee, whom he thinks to have for a revenger of injustice, he
seeks for reason of him, that did the wrong. And there is great reason, that
the suppliant should obtain his right by thee, seeing that it is just, that
wrong should be repressed. But if thou do permit injustice, and give way
to him that does wrong, and do neglect him that is wronged, and when thou
alone art able to take revenge of him that has done the wrong, do make no
regard of Justice, where then shall the poor soul hope for refuge? of whom
shall he receive Justice, but from God, who will require an account of thee for
thy negligence? Therefore do justice to him that has suffered wrong, and take
revenge of him that has done the wrong, least that in those things, which thou
do neglect, thou thy self should seem to consent with those that do
wrong, and make thy self guilty and accountable for other men's offenses.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Mortality and Immortality.
IN respect of thy body, thou art mortal, but in respect of thy soul, thou
art immortal. Therefore provide mortal things for thy flesh; but think of
immortal things for thy soul. Put ornaments on thy body, as things that are
mortal, upon that which is mortal; But put on immortal happiness upon the
soul, as it being immortal. For although thou art set on high upon a Throne,
yet after a time thou shall come down from it. And though thou do strive to
subdue the whole earth, yet after thy death, thou shall not inherit more space
of ground, then three cubits. Therefore as one that art mortal thy self, mind
thy Royalty that is but mortal: But as one that art immortal, purchase and
procure unto thy self an immortal Kingdom, by virtue, and good works. For,
for this cause thou were preferred to mortal power, that by it thou might
gain an immortal. Kingdom.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of Magistrates.
HAVE the same thought of those that are under thee as thou would have of
thy self, if thou were a subject in their place. And do what thou can, that
they may be well iffected to thy government. For they reign most sweetly,
which do most gently use their subjects, and who most esteeming those that are
worthy, do good unto them, and do no wrong to those that are unworthy: But
thou shall get most creditt and glory, if thou shall assign to every one their
proper place, and if thou shall appoint places of government to those that are
worthy to be governors, and if likewise thou shall cause those that are under
their government, neither to carry themselves insolently toward their
governors, not yet to be insolently used by them. Therefore know every one,
and so fitly order the matters belonging to Governors, and to those which are
under government, that Hearts may not, seem to rule over Lions but Lions over
Hearts.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of Peace.
THOU shall make thy self happy even without pains, if thou do endeavor to
settle peace in those parts of thy Kingdom, that are at odds, and if thou do
cast all enmity and contention out of the State, and if thou do teach thy
subjects, to embrace peace, and love; and if thou shall make them to be
contemptible, that do begett enmity, and make them near unto thee, that do
love peace. For being the son of me an earthly King according to the flesh,
if thou obeyest my words, thou will be called also the son of the Heavenly
King; thereby procuring unto thy self the kindred of God according to the
spirit, being a disciple of Christ, that was gentle and peaceable. For blessed
(says he) are the Peacemakers. For they shall be called the Children of God.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of Praise.
TOUCHING them that are conversant with thee, approve not those that do
praise all thy actions, but rather those that do find fault with thy errors.
For I know that those do bear more affection toward thee, and are wiser
then the others. For truth is to be preferred before falsehood. But grant
freedom of speech unto them that are wise, and wish thee well; that thou may
have some, with whom thou may take good advice of those things, whereof thou
art ignorant. And being thus affected, thou shall see, that thou ought not
always to give ear to them, which do with art flatter thee, but to those
that do serve thee with good will and affection. For having had good
experience of the good which is done thee by the one, and of the hurt which is
done thee by the other, thou will avoid the one, and obtain the other.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of the Care to be had of thy self.
ADORN thy youthful age, not so much with bodily, as with virtuous exercises;
neither suffer thy whole self ( body, soul and name) quite to perish. For
although thou have a mortal body, yet thou have obtained an immortal soul.
Therefore endeavor to get immortality by leaving a good name and remembrance
of thee. But thou shall gain a good name, if thou do imitate those that have
left a good name behind them. See therefore, that thou do endeavor to speak
good things, and that thou do accustom thy self to do the like. And
whatsoever thou shall profess in thy words, thou shall have a care to practice
the same in thy deeds.

CHAP. L.
Of Compassion.
AS there is not a body, which has not a shadow accompanying it; so there is
not a man without sin. For our nature is apt to slip and prone to do
amiss. Therefore be gentle toward those that offend, and mix clemency with
justice. For although thou do call to an account, others that offend, yet
thou thy self have God to call thee to an account for thy offenses. And every
day promise this to thy self: as thou shall forgive, so hope, that thou also
shall be forgiven of God. Seeing therefore ( in the Lords prayer) thou do
pronounce judgment of thy self, forgive thy debtors their trespasses, and thy
offenses shall be forgiven thee. For what thou shall do to thy
fellow-seruants, the same thou shall receive again of him, that is the Lord of
all. For with what judgment thou shall judge, with the same also thou shall be
judged.

CHAP. LI.
Of Gentleness or mildness.
INCLINE thine ear to him that needs, and answer him peaceably. For
although by reason, of thy earthly power, thou art not a person to whom men may
have easy access, yet be easy of access, by reason of that power that is
above thee. Comfort those that are greiued, if not with gifts, yet at least
with good words. For I have known by experience, that one word may be better
the many gifts; and that one good word from the mouth of a King, does more
prevail for consolation, then many other things. For abundance of wealth is
not of so much force to comfort a greiuing soul, as one gentle word of a King.
So thou shall be most beloved of thy subjects, and without cost thou shall
gain the good will of all men, and they will proclaim thee to be rather a
father to them then a Lord.

CHAP. LII.
Of Returning thanks to God.
KNOW that so much the more good, as thou have received of God, so much the
greater thanks thou ought to return unto him, that does not receive that
which is due unto him, as a duty and debt that is paid to him, but as if he
had received a courtesy or favor, does for it repay double. Return therefore
unto God, who has done thee so much good, a thankful requital for the good
things which he has given thee. And as for that power, which thou have
received of him, use it in doing good to others: And think, that they are
richer then thee in good works, which are less then thee in their power (
that is, if they do more good then thee.) For thou have not received good
things, that thou might keep them to they self, but thou have received
them, that as a steward thou might dispose of them to the good of others,
and so receive of him that gave them unto thee, a reward for well disposing of
them, and an incorruptible Crown for a corruptible.

CHAP. LIII.
Of Bodily Beawty.
BOdily beawty makes him worthy that has it, to stand before a King. But the
beawty of the soul does make a man beloved of the King of Heaven. And the one
procures the enjoying of dignityes but for a time, whereas the other does
cause everlasting neerenesse to our heavenly Lord. But thou have not any one
above thee, whose favor thou need'st to seek by the beawty of thy body; but
thou have God above thee, who does not seek the beawty of the Body, but the
nobility of the Soul. Wherefore labor by all means to please him, preserving
his image in thy self, pure and undefiled, by temperance and purity.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of the curing of the Soul.
THE labor of the Physician is in vain, By philosopher he means the divine
or Christian Philosopher.
if the medicine which he gives, does not cure the Body; And in vain is the
discourse of the Philosopher, if it cannot heal the affections and passions of
the soul. For as it is necessary for Physicians to show their skill in the
body, so it is necessary, that Philosophers should cure the soul. Think them
therefore to be true Physicians, which by their art do expel diseases from
the body: and judge them to be true Philosophers, which by their discourses do
expel the diseases of the soul, if so be they have patients, that will
absolutely be ruled by them.

CHAP. LV.
Of Backbiters and Slanderers.
BE not apt to receive idle tales or tale-tellers, neither make much of
slanderers, neither lightly give creditt to naughty men. For the first have
oftentimes ruined good men, out of a suspicion, that they were naught: And the
second, vomiting out the anger, which proceeds from their own malice, will
make thee guilty of innocent blood: And the third, will make thee suspected to
be one that delights in evil men. For thou may justly be thought to be of
the disposition of them, with whom thou delightest to be conversant, and to
whom thou do passionately give creditt.

CHAP. LVI.
Of reading good Books, and Histories.
DO not think much to run over ancient histories. For in them thou shall
find without pains, that which others have gathered together with pains. And
thou may learn from thence the virtues of good men, and the vices of
naughty men, and the diverse vicissitudes of our life, and the changes of
things therein, and the instability of the world, and how prone Empires are to
fall, and in a word, the punishments of evil actions, and the rewards of good;
where of thou shall do well to avoid the one, that thou may never come to
feel the punishments of Hell; and thou shall do well to endeavor to compass
the other, that thou may deserve and obtain the rewards to come.

CHAP. LVII.
Of Bounty or doing good.
I Will teach thee a point of wisdom; a point, perhaps not practiced of those
that use to give advice, but not vnbesitting the affection of me, that am both
a Father and a King. Approve rather, my son, those that ask favors of thee,
them those that do strive to bring thee the greatest presents. For thou shall
make the one thy debtours, that will pray to God for thy prosperity; and by
that means thou shall also make God himself to be thy debtour, who, as for a
thing lent unto him, does requite them that do such things: but thou shall be
a debtour to the others, and shall be forced to give them an unseemly
reverence, as to thy benefactors. Therefore be willing to oblige all men, but
to be obliged by none, but God alone. For this truly is befitting one, that is
an absolute King indeed. And give to those that ask thee, and make much of
them: but approve less of them that present gifts unto thee. For the whole
aim of these, is to receive a recompense from thee: But all the care of the
other, is to show themselves thankful, for the favors they have received,
if they can, here in this life, if not, by praying to God to render unto thee
manifold in the world to come.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Nobility.
HE does extremely dishonor the Nobility of the body, which has not also the
Nobility of the soul. Therefore do thou together with the princely Nobility
of the body, which thou have, get also the most high and perfect Nobility of
the soul. For that of the body, is by nature, and deserves no thanks; but
this of the soul, depends of our own will, and is thankeworthy. And do not
approve of those that are noble, only in respect of the body, but those that
are gracious in their souls. For a man ought not like other creatures, to have
only the bare nobility of the body. For the nobleness of a Horse is
stateliness and surenesse of pace, and the nobleness of a Hound is to have a
good mouth, and to hunt well, and so likewise of other creatures? But the
nobility of a man, is to have his soul adorned with all manner of virtues. For
the ornament of the body is beawty and strength, and a strong and healthful
constitution; but the ornament of the soul is reason and good conditions, and
the perfection of virtues.

CHAP. LIX.
Of Patience.
NEVER be angry with God, (my son) upon any occasion. For this uses
oftentimes to proceed from pusillanimity: but receive with a thankful mind
all things that befall thee, and stick not to submitt thy self to all things,
which God would have to happen unto thee. If he would have thee to reioyee, be
merry; and if he would have thee to mourn, be thou sad; and if he would have
thee to be in prosperity; enjoy thy prosperity; and if he whould have thee to
be in adversity, be willing to bear adversity; Submitt to all things, and be
pleased and contented with all things, that God would have: only keep thy
self far from sin; For that only thou ought never to admit, as being a
thing, which proceeds not from God, but from negligence. Therefore, neither
when thou art in prosperity, be lifted up; nor when thou art in adversity, be
thou over much cast down. For if bearing thy felfe patiently in all things,
thou shall give thanks to God for thy afflictions; thou shall doubt less
receive the reward of patience: But if vexing thy self, thou shall resist Gods
disposing hand; thou shall even against thy will, suffer no less, being
forcibly carried, and made to yield to his providence, and so thou shall no
whit benefit thy self, nay thou shall loose the reward, which thou might
have gained by Patience.

CHAP. LX.
Of Instruction and Education of children.
IT is a thing most becoming a King, not only to care for that which concerns
himself, but also to look to that, which concerns the good of his subjects.
For it is not sufficient to be himself good to his subjects, but he ought also
to leave his children, images and patterns of his virtue. For as that King
which brings up good children, does good to all the Kingdom: so he which
letts them be debauched for want of good breeding, does wrong to the whole
Realm. Therefore, my son, obey thy Fathers instructions, that thou may
both do good to thy self, and prosperously rule thy Kingdom, and may
require me for bringing thee up, by leaving a good memory and name after thee.

CHAP. LXI.
Of the hurt that comes from the tongue.
Hear all things and learn of all men; but approve of some things, and
abhor other things. Approve of those things, which will bring profitt and
honor to thee, and will do no hurt to thy subjects: but abhor those things,
which will hurt thy subjects, and do thee no good. For a deceitful tongue, if
it meet with a powerful hand, will be a cause of many evils both to it self,
and to them that are led by it: But a faire-spoken mouth, that observes truth
in all that it speaks, does much good to them that hear it, and to him that
has it. Therefore do not delight in naughty men, but approve of good men, and
preserve peace amongst thy subjects, and suffer them not, to be set on, or
enraged one against another. For God is far of from that place, where strifes
and contentions are: but where peace and love and concord is, they make God
very near and favorable to those that live in peace, and make peacemakers to
be called the children of God.

CHAP. LXII.
Of Goodness.
ACCOUNT a good conscience to be the Crown of Royalty, by which thou shall
more adorn thy self, then with a thousand other ornaments. For wealth is a
deceitful and slippery thing, and glory is transitory, and victory passes
away, and pleasures are fading. But thy goodness only will endure for ever,
and procure unto thee an immortal memory, and will make, as it were, a
wholesome antidote of thy example for thy posterity, making all men both
praysers and imitators of thy life and Government.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of Restraining and governing Pleasures.
KNOW my son, that men will then account thee a King indeed, when thou do
not only rule and keep in awe thy subjects, but also when thou do restrain
and govern all thy pleasures. For let thy Crown indeed be a sign of Royalty;
but let Justice accompany it: And thy purple will then adorn and become thee,
if thy temperance also shall equally shine with it; This is a kind of shoe,
which the Emperors wore; I have seen one of them in Paris.
And thy red shoe will then be an honor unto thee, if with it, thou shall
tread under foot the glittering of pride. For these things are but the marks
of temporal Royalty; but those other will deliver thee from everlasting
punishment, and will procure unto thee an immortal Kingdom.

CHAP. LXIV.
Of Perfect Reason.
BE very diligent in perfecting thy reason, which is the perfection of a man.
For by it earthly Royalty or an earthly Kingdom, does ressemble the order and
harmony of heaven. For reason does govern all humane things, without which all
things in this life are out of order. Get therefore unto thy self the
possession of reason, not in an imperfect manner, but in perfection. For
neither is the safety of a ship to be entrusted to the guiding of one, that
has not skill to guide it; neither is Kingly power to be committed to a King,
unless he has the experimental reason of affairs. For that which makes a
Lion (as they say) to bear rule among other beasts, is his strength, or
courage; and that which does give the Eagle command over other birds, is her
high and swift flying and actiuity: But reason is the only thing upon earth,
that does give a man power over other men.

CHAP. LXV.
Of being not lifted up in mind.
BE never lifted up in mind with thy victories over thy adversaries, neither
insult over the calamities of thy enemies, neither rejoice at the fall of any
that oppose thee, neither mock at the adversity of another; neither show signs
of joy at the destruction of any man. For we have all the same nature, and no
man knows that which is to come. Therefore consider those Kings, or Emperors
that have been before thee; and then shall thou learn, what things hereafter
may fall upon thee. For the course of man's life works many changes, and that
which those that have been before us, have suffered, may serve for an
instruction to those that are now living. Therefore be not, I say, lifted up too
high, that thou may not have the greater fall. And do not think any of the
Trophies, which thou have atcheiued, That is, ascribe them unto God.
to be the work of thy self alone; and thou shall never know by thy own
experience the extremity of adversity. But bewail other men's calamityes, and
have compassion on those men that do suffer afflictions, seeing that thou thy
self also art a man. And the solemnities, which thou do celebrate for thy
victoryes thankefully dedicate unto God only, that remembering adversity, in the
midst of thy prosperity; and in adversity, encouraging thy self with hope of
prosperity, thou may never forgett, that thou art a man.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of Reading Good books.
AND that thou may every way adorn thy mind: think not much to read over
the sayings of the Ancients; For thou shall find many things profitable in
them: And above all, read the sayings of Solomon, and the precepts of
Isocrates, and if thou will, meditate also on the counsels of Jesus the son
of Sirach, for so much as from thence, thou may learn and gather Politic
and Kingly virtues. As for all other the saving oracles of holy Scipture
written by divine inspiration, it is altogether necessary, that they should be
infused into thee, together with the rest. And when thou shall be perfected in
understanding, thou shall both make me thy King and Father, and Teacher glad;
and then thou thy self shall be thought worthy to exhort others, and thou
shall more perfectly know the proper end of thy Creation, and being man, and
that no man is without sin, and that no man shall escape the trial of those
things which he has done, and that no man knows the uncertain end of his
own life.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF the matter, which is contained in this book.
A
Alms. p. 10. 60. 65.
B
BAckbiters and slanderers. p. 98. Beavvty, that is bodily Beavvty. p. 95.
Books. i. Of reading good books and Histories. p. 99. 120. Bounty. p. 40.
101.
C
CAre. p. 69. 88. Chastity. p. 34. Compassion. p. 89. Conversation. p. 14.
Counsel. p. 31. 55.
D
Drunkenness. p. 45.
E
EDucation. i. Instruction and education Of children. p. 108.
F
FAith. p. 4. Friends. p. 21. 42. Friends. i. Of the Love Of friends. p. 61.
Freindship. i. Of making friends. p. 46.
G
Gentleness or mildness. p. 91. Gifts, viz. Of receiving Gifts. p. 76. God,
viz. Of remembering God. p. 74. Goodness. p. 112. Government. p. 53. Guard. p.
71.
H
Heaven, viz. Of the Kingdom. of Heaven. p. 72. Humility. p. 24.
I
Injustice. p. 78. Instruction. p. 2. Judgment to come. p. 8. Justice. p. 38.
L
Laws. i. of making Good Laws. p. 56. Lust. p. 16.
M
MAgistrates. p. 82. Manners. p. 18. Men. i. Of naughty Men. p. 58. Mind. i. Of
being not lifted up in Mind. p. 117. Mortality and immortality. p. 80.
N
Nobility. p. 103.
O
ORacles. i. divine Oracles. p. 30.
P
PArents. i. Of the honor which is to be given to parents. p. 36. Patience.
p. 50. 105. Peace. p. 84. Pleasures. i. Of restraining and governing pleasures.
p. 113. Praise. p. 86. Priests. p. 6. Prudence. p. 26.
R
REason, viz. Of perfect Reason. p. 15. Riches. i. contempt of Riches. p. 43.
Riches and Covetousness. p. 48.
S
Soul. i. Of curing the Soul. p. 96. Speech and Silence. p. 63.
T
TEmperance. p. 20. Thankfulness, that is, Of returning thanks to God. p. 93.
Tongue. i. Of the hurt that comes of The tongue. p. 110. Truth. p. 28. Truth
and Lying. p. 51.
V
Valor. p. 23. Virtue. p. 15. Vigilance. p. 12. Unstableness, viz. that all
things here are unstable. p. 67.

