

HEre begins the volume entitled and named the recuyell of the historyes of
Troy / composed and drawn out of dyuerce books of latin in to frensshe by
the right venerable person and worshipful man. Raoul le ffeure. priest and
chapelayn unto the right noble glorious and mighty prince in his time Phelip
duc of Bourgoyne of Braband etc In the year of the Incarnacion of our lord god
a thousand four honderd sixty and four / And translated and drawn out of
frenshe in to englisshe by Willyam Caxton mercer of the cite of London / at the
coman^deme^t of the right hye mighty and virtuous Pryncesse his redoubtyd
lady. Margarete by the grace of god. Duchess of Bourgoyne of Lotryk of Braband
etc / Which said translacion and work was begone in Brugis in the Countee of
Flaundres the first day of march the year of the Incarnacion of our said lord
god a thousand four honderd sixty and eyghte / And ended and fynysshid in the
holy cite of Colen the.xix. day of septembre the year of our said lord god a
thousand four honderd sixty and enleuen etc.

And on that other side of this leef follows the prologe

When I remember that every man is bounden by the commandment and counceyll of
the wise man to eschew slouthe and ydlenes which is mother and nourysshar of
vices and ought to put my self unto virtuous ocupacion and business / Than I
having no great charge of ocupacion following the said counceyll / took a
frenshe book and read therein many strange and meruayllous historyes where in
I had great pleasyr and delight / as well for the nouelte of the same as for the
fair langage of frenshe. / which was in prose so well and compendiously set
and wreton / which me thought I understood the sentence and substance of every
matter / And for so much as this book was new and late maad and drawn in to
frenshe / and never had seen hit in our englissh tongue / I thought in my self
hit should be a good besynes to translate hit in to our englissh / to the end
that hit might be had as well in the royame of England as in other lands / and
also for to pass therwyth the time. and thus concluded in my self to begin
this said wrke / And forthwith took pen and ynke and began boldly to run
forth as blind bayard in this present work which is named the recuyell of
the trojan historyes And afterward when I remembryd my self of my symplenes and
vnperfightnes that I had in both langages / that is to wete in frenshe and in
englissh for in france was I never / and was born and learned mine englissh in
kente in the weeld where I doubt not is spoken as broad and rude englissh as
is in any place of england and have continued by the space of / xxx. year for
the most part in the contres of Braband. flandres holand and zeland and thus
when all these things came to fore me aftyr that y had made and wretyn a fyve
or six quayers y fill in dispayr of this work and purposid no more to have
contynuyd therein and tho quayers leyd a part and in two year aftyr labored no
more in this work And was fully / in will to have left hit. till on a time
hit fortuned that the right high excellent and right virtuous princes my right
redoughted lady mylady Margarete by the grace of god suster unto the king of
england and of france. my souerayn lord Duchess of Bourgoine of lotryk. of
brabant. of lymburgh. and of luxenburgh Countes of ffla^dres of artoys and of
bourgoine Palatynee of heynawd of holand of zela^d and of namur Mar^uesse of
the holy empire. lady of ffryse of salius and of mechlyn sent for me to speak
with her good grace of dyuerce matters among the which y let her hyenes have
knowleche of the foresaid beginning of this work which anon commanded me to
show the said.v. or.vi. quayers to her said grace and when she had seen hem.
anon she fond a defaute in mine englissh which sche coma^ded me to amend and
more over commanded me straytli to continue and make an end of the resydue than
not translated. whose dredefull coma^dement y durst in no wise disobey because
y am a servant unto her said grace and resseiue of her yerly ffee and other
many good and great benefetes. and also hope many moo to resseyne of her
hyenes but forthwyth went and labouryde in the said translacion aftyr my
simple and pour connyng also nigh as y can folouyng mine auctour mekeli
beseching the bounteuous hyenes of my said lady that of her benyuolence lift
to accept and take in gree this simple and rude work here following. and if
there be any thing wreton or said to her playsir. y shall think my labor well
enployed and where as there is defawte. tht she arette hit to the symplenes of
my connyng which is full small in this behalue and require and pray all them
that shall read this said work to correct hit and to hold me excusid of the
rude and simple translacion And thus y end my prologe...

HEre follows the prologue of that worshipful man Raoul le feure which was
Auctor of this present book in the ffrensh tongue:

When y behold and know the oppynyone of the men nourisshyd in any synguler
hystoryes of Troy and see and behold also that of then to make a recuyel or
gadryng to geder. y indigne have resseyued the commandment of the right noble
and right virtuous prince. Philippe by the grace of the maker of all graces.
Duc of borgoyne of lothryk of Braband and of Lymbourgh. Earl of fflaunders of
Artoys and of Bourgoyne. Palatyne of heynawd of Holland of Ieland and of namur.
Marquys of the holy Empire Lord of fryse of salyns and of mechlyn. Certes y
find ynowh for to thenke on for of the historyes whereof y wyl^ make the
recuyel^. All the world speaks of them by books translated out of latin in
to ffresh a great dele less than y ne shall trete And some there be tht replye
a gayn their particular books wherefore y fere me to write more than her books
make mention. But when y consydere poyse and weye the dreadful commandment of
the forsayde redoubtyd prince which is cause of this work not for to correct
the bookys late solempnly translated. but only for to augmente y yield me
obeissau^t. and for theschuyng of the less evil that y may. y shall make three
books. which put in one. schall take for name the Recuyell of the troia^n
historyes. In the first book y schall trete of Saturn and of Jupiter. and of
the beginning and coming up of Troy. and of the ffeetes of. perseus. In the
second book I schall trete of the labors of hercules. rehersyng by two times
how he destroyed Troy and in the third book I schall trete of the last and
general destruction of troy by the greeks. by cause of the rauysshyng of dame
helayne wife of menelaus. and y schall putto the ffeetes and great prowesses of
worthy hector and of his bredere^n. wyche ben worthi and digne of great memory
and also y schall trete of the merueilous auentures and paryls of the Sea tht
came unto the greeks in their retornyng. And of the death of the noble king
agamenon that was duc of the Ooste And of the great fortunes of king vlixes and
of his meruaillus death So y require and supplye him that is cause of this werk
And all them that shall read hit for teschewe ydlenes. that so rudely have put
my pen unto the histories before named. that hit plese them not only have
regard unto my pour consayte. but also to the obscure and derke abisme or
sualowe where y have gadryd them to gyder. by obeyssau^ce And under all right
humble correccions..

The beginning of this book shows the Genelagye of Saturn and of the paccion
and promys that he maad to his brother Tytan. and how he took war mortel again
Iubyter his owen sone..
WHat time all the Children of Noe were sprad by the Climates. regnes and
strange habitacions of the world By the general dyuysyon of tongues maad at the
fondacion of the tour of babylon in tho days that the world was of gold And
tht the men in thoo days were steadfast and poysyng as montaygnes and Rude as
stones and bestes. enhaunsyng their great corages foulyng and showing their
great consaytes And that the Enemy of man Induced maliciously to practique
towns Cytees and Castles to make ceptres and diademes and to forge and make
the cursid sect of goddis Among the possessours of the isle of crete there was a
rich man enhaunsed full of couetise happy of auentureuse enterprise and right
rich of the grace of ffortune some men callid this ma^n Celion and some men
vranus he was laweful sone of Either sone of demorgorgon the old dweller of the
Caves of archade and first begynner of the false paynems gods This vra^us had
to his wife his own suster called vesca He liuyd gloriously with her and had
possession of the most part of the isle of crete and habonded prospersly in
worldly goods en encresyng his naturel appetites ffirst in encresyng and
ampliacion of worldli lordship and seignorye and secondlye in lignage and was
merueillous rich he had two sons that is to wete Tytan and Satorn and two
daughters that oon was called Cibelle and that other Ceres of whom schall be
maad mention here after and he had many other sons and daughters of whom y
make no mention for as much as they be out of my pourpos what shall y reherce
more of the glory of this vranus he had all thing as he would and was fortunat
and nothing went against him his goods multyplied his children grew and
encresid but Tytan the eldest sone was ffoul. evil fauourid. and counterfeit And
saturn was merueylleusly fair and amyable for which cause vesca the mother
louyd much better saturn than tytan And that by nature ffor naturelly the
moders love better her fair chyldern than her foul wherefore saturn was
norisshyd most in the lap of his mother And tytan was put out and in manner
bannysshid And when saturn was great what for his beauty and for his cunnyng
and scyens and other virtues he gate the hooll love of all the people..

In this time hit was so that whatsomeuer man practyqued or fond any things
prouffytable for the common w^lehe was recomanded solempnly and called and named
a god after their folyssh and derke custom Saturn was named a god ffor in his
yougth by his cunnyng he was the first ffyndar to give instruccion of ecryng
and labouryng the earth and of sowyng and repyng the corns And this inuencion
was applied to saturn with dyuyn reverence. with love upon love not only
anenst vesca and vranus and his kynnesmen but above mesure against all the people
of crete and of the marches and contrees lyyng by and there abowte And thus his
name aroos and was renomed that from all places men and children nobles and
vyllaynes came to his scole for to learn.

In these days tht Saturn began thus to flower and was xx. year of age and
his brother.xl. Vranus their fader by a sekenes that he had dyed and depertid
out of this world leuyng his wife Vesca endowed largely of possessions. his death
was noyous and soroufull to Vesca his wife. which causid her to weep out of
mesur and his sons and doughtirs also they did his obsequye reverently in
habondyng of great and bittir sorrow. the obsequye done there weeping and sorrow
yet during vesca saw that Tytan her eldest sone pretended to have and enjoy
the succession of his ffader she on a day callid her der sone Saturn with
Tytan and other of the Contre and there reherced and said unto them that her
young sone Saturn should succeed and have the herytages of her husbond Tytan
heryng the will of his mother redoublid his sorrow and causid him to weep great
plente of teeris and knelyd to fore his mother humbly and said in this wise
Mother y am right unfortunate when ye will that my right patrymonye be put from
me And that naturelli me ought to have by right should be given fro me and yat
because tht y am not so well formed of members as my brother satorne is which
sorrow is to me passing noyous ye will put from me my ffortune and burthe
which ye may not do by lawful reason y am your first sone ye have norysshid me
with the substance of your blood as your child born in your belly.ix. months
Also y am he that first dwellid and enhabited your femynyn chambres None to
fore me took there any seasyng when y took that tho ye gaf me your due love and
sortyd to me the succession of your herytages Than whens comes this that ye
now subuerte and destroy that nature has ones joined and given me. every
mother is bounden to hold the conseruacion of the right of her child Alas mother
ye will make me bastard fro my right Am y a bastard was not vranus my fader. am
not y he that ye were so glad fore what time ye felt first that y was
conceived in the lawful bid of my fader your husbond. am y not he that ye bare
and gaf me souke of your breasts and often times kyst me that is to say in my
tender days what time my members were soft and tender. ha mother acquyte you
against me as ye beholden and bounden by right and knowleche ye tht y am tytan
and for as much as y am less and not so well adressyd as my brother saturn
for so much ye ought the more desire my promocion and furdering

When dame vesca herd her sone tytan speak so sadly and perfou^dely she had
pity on him yet the pity was not of so hye virtue that might surmouut the great
love that was roted between her and saturn. and than she said to tytan her
sone Tytan my sone y forsake not tht thou tokest thy substance between my
sides. and by me were brought in to this world and know verily that y love the
entierly and that y desire thy well but hit is so clear and euydent in every
man's sight that for the deffault. lothlynes. and abhomynacion of thy members
thou art not a man sufficyent for to deffende thy fadres herytages with great
labor and pain ffor if hit happend that any man would make war thou were not
able to resist him what would thou that I should do thy brother has the love
of all the people for his beauty and his vertucuse manicres And every man
holds him in reverence and the in derision and skorne. be thou content thou
shall lakke no thing And if thou lakke. speak to me and y shall remedy hit but
speak never no more to me for the heritage ffor Saturn shall obtain by the
favor of his wysedom mekenes and benyngnyte and also be cause the common wys
Iuggeth him and sees tht he shall ones by the man of whom his life shall shine
gloriousli..

Tytan was sore troublid of the words of his mother and he began to change
colors and wex reed having suspecion to saturn that he had contryued this
matter against him whereupon he drew him apart to him and said Saturn thenuye
that thou have to regne above me has now engendryd in my heart thy mortal
myschief whereof the hate shall endure unto the mortal separacion of thy life and
of mine and of my children Thou know well tht y am the eldest sone of our
fader vranus hou art thou so hardy and p^sumptuous tenhause thy self above me
by conspyred ymaginacion y will that thou know verily that like as thou have
conspired in my temporel damage semblably y shall conspire to thy eternal damage
and hurt and name me from hens forth thy mortal enemy When saturn herd these
brennyng and enflamed menasses of his brother tytan he excusid him self and
answered that he never thought in his life to come to the succession of there
fader ner never had ymagyned ner conspyred hit Than vesca there mother Cybelle
and ceres took the words fro saturn and said to Tytan that his thretenyng to
saturn was for naught ffor he should regne and be lord and maistre. Tytan full
of ffelony and more angry than he was to fore said plainly tht he should not
suffer hit Saturn had a great part of the people that assysted him and gaf him
favor And tytan also had other on his side which began to murmr that oon
party against that other All the company was sore troubled and began to
threste in and enployed them to sece the noise and to acorde tytan
notwythstandyng if hit was hard to do for alwey he would have run upon
saturn if he had not be hold and ^etted Allewey in the end the wise men
showed tytan by great reason that he was the more feeble and that saturn was
more in the favor of the people and that he would modere him self a lytill and
said that he should agree and grant the regne to saturn by condycion That if
he married. he should be bounden to put to death all his Children males that
should be begoten of his s^ed if he any had ffor the well of both parties Vesca
with her daughters and the Ancient wise people accorded to Tytan this condycion
And labored so to Saturn that they brought them to the temple of their god
Mars that was in the Cite of Oson whereof was lord a mighty man called Mellyseus
and that a fore the image of god mars Saturn swore tht if him happid to marye
And that he had any chyldern males he should slay hem all and thus was Tytan
content that his brother should enjoy the land of Crete and the pees was maad
between hem boothe..

How saturn was crowned first king of Crete and how he fond first diuerce
science where fore the people held him in great honor as a god.
AFter the trayttye maad of the pees of Tytan and Saturn Tytan syhe in him
self tht he might not worshipfully abide and dwell being under his younger
brother had lever goo and search his auentures in other places than to be thral
to his younger brother. he took his wif his children and friends. and departid
at alauenture in dyuerce places / where he fond ffortune so good and happy. tht
by arms and strenght he made him self king of many diverse royalmes. which
he departid unto his children And commysed and ordained certain espies to espy
and wait if his brother Saturn married him self and if his wife brought forth
men children and whether he put hem to death. During these said thingis. saturn
dwellid with his mother and his susters Cibelle and Ceres. And began to regne
with so great magnificence that they of the contre seeing their neighbors by
them did do make and ordeygne kings to regne on them. of such as were noble
and virtuous. assemb^id to gider on a day and maad saturn king upon them and
upon their synes And crowned him with great glory with a Crown of lawrer with
great joy / saturn anon took and acceptid this rial honor and worship and
took the ceptre in his hand and bare the crown on his heed and reigned meurely
indusyng his people to live honestly and to love virtue. and (...) a naked swerd
to be born before him in sign of justice. he did justice on malfacteurs and
enhaunsed them that were good. he did do bylde a cite which he named Crete
because the isle bare the said name and was the first enhabiteur and dwellar.
and when he had founded the cite he ordained his palais and dwelling place in
the myddel their of in example as the heart is in the mids of the body to
mynystre to the members so he would ensign and mynystre his people. and after
this he chose an honderd and four wise men which he institued and ordained
counceillours and governors of his royame and than they of Crete seeing the
right great wysedom of their king. assemblid to gyder dyuerce times and named
him a god and yet more they founded unto him a temple. an awter and an ydole
beryng in that oon hand a ziekle in signyfiance that he destroyed the vices in
such wise as the ziekle cuttyth herbs and destroieth the wedes. And in that
other hand he held a serpent tht bote his tayll for as much as saturn said
that every man should byte the tail of the serpent that is to say that every
man should ffere and flee the evil end. ffor the end oftymes is venymous as
the tail of a serpent And that apperyth yet daily by the end of many evil
dysposed and enuenymed men.

By the moyen of these things the renomee of king saturn grew And the world
was that time of gold. that is for to say hit was much better and more
haboundant in the days of man's life and in plente of fruits of the earth than
in any other time after The poets by this color compared the world at that
time to gold which is most precious of all metals / how well dyuerce men
say that saturn was the first man that fond the manner to melte metal and to
affine gold and made his vessel and vtensilles of his hows of dyuerce metal.
And under this color they figured at that time the worlds to ben of gold /
Than began the men by the doctrine of saturn to use and were gold to mine the
roches / to persshe the montaignes perilous / to haunt the thorny deserts /
to fight and adaunte the orguyllous serpents / the fires dragons / the dedely
griffons the monstrowous bestes / and to sprede a brood their wordly engyns. By
these excersites was than saturn the fourbesshour and begynner of the style /
to learn men to take all these bestes / And first fond the manner of shotyng
and drawyng of the bow / Of this gold maad saturn his hows. his chambres and
halles to shine by meruayllous werkynge / He was strong and hardy / / and he
had no feer ne doubt of no serpent of the montaigne ner of no monstre of
desert ner of best dwelling in caves. He knew the veins of gold in the earth
and could decerne them from veins of silver He edefyed rich things of gold
joyous unto the eye sight / and hoot and courageous to the heart / ffor at that
time the courages by pardurable fire chauffing the affeccions of man in manner
of a contagious heet so syngulerly that after alleway that they coueyted / they
desired to accomplissh. In this time of the golden world the creatures lyuyd
and endured greatly and long. And all the world labored in edyficacyon of
science and connyng of virtue / And that time were the men more virtuous in
bodyly edyfyeng than ever they were syn / Among all other Saturn was never
idle after that he had ones labored the corns In erynge and sawyng / He malte
and fined gold and metalles and enduced and taught his men to draw the bow
and shote / He him self fond first the bow and the manyer to goo and saylle
by the sea and to row with little boots by the ryuage and took his owen
playsir for to endoctryne and teache his people in all these things and he had
great abondance of wordly goods / reseruyd only he dorste not marye: and that
he had sworn to put to death all the men children that should come of his
seed / whereof he was oftyme anoyed and hadd great displaysir etc.

How Saturn went to Delphos and hadd answer how he should have a sone that
should chase him out of his royame / And how he married him to his suster Cybell
etc.
When Saturn saw his palace flo^ysshe and shine of gold and saw his people
obey him / saw his goldsmythes and werkers break the montaignes with her
pikois and Instruments. saw his maryners cut the wawes of the sea with their
Oores. saw his dyscyples learn and labor the earth. saw his Archers shote
with her arowes and smote and took the birds dwelling in the hye trees and
fleyng by the air / He might enbrace great glory and enhaunse in hye his
Trone and his felicyte / but on that other side when he remembryd the trayte
made between him and his brother Tytan he was like unto the pecok that is proud
of the fair feathers diversely fair colored wiche he spreded roound as a whele
and with all only look of his feet he leseth all his joy Saturn in like wise
by this traittye lost all his joy his glory and his plaisance. he was long
time ledyng this life now joyous now sorrowful growyng alwey and encresyng his
Roya^me and daily thought and poysed in him self if he might marye or not ffor
no thing in the world he would false his oath / he was just and true in deed and
in word Nevertheless. nature meuyd him and cyted him to have generation and to
come to compaignye of woman And this meuyng was at all times refresshid and
renewed by a contynuel sight that he had daily in a passing fair maid. tht is
to wete his suster Cibelle which he saw continuelly in whom was no deffaulte
of all the goods of nature apperteyning to woman She was out of mesure right
humble in spekyng wise in her works honest in conversation and flowryng in
all vertuys. and for this cause Saturn beheld her oftymes. And so happend on
a time as he beheld her affairs and works / he cast his eyes on her virtues
that plesid him so gretli. that in the end he was desirous of her love whereof
his mother vesca had great joy and pleasir. and she perceyuyng of the desyr of
Saturn. gaf him courage and will to marye him and so labored and solicyted
the marriage so effectuelli tht with great worship and triumph Saturn spousid
and wedded Cibelle his suster after their usage and she was the first Queen of
Crete. he liyng with her payeng-in this wise the dew debt of marriage that at
the end of.ix. months Cybell had a sone which saturn did do put to death
acquytyng him self of the oath that he had maad unto his brother tytan And of
this sone bochace makes no mencyon. but they lay to gyder again and cybell
conceived than of the seed of saturn another sone with a daughter that by
space of time apperyd great in the moders belly..

IN this time when the law of nature was in his vygour and strength the men
married with her susters. and in especyal the paynems if they were not content
and had souffisance of oon wife they might take moo with out reproach When
saturn knew that his wife was with child the second time. the death of his
first sone came to fore him and said in him self that he would that his wife had been barayne Tho he began to be full of dyuerce fantasies and of sorrowful
thoghtes and desired to know what should befalle of the fruit of the womb of
Cybell He went him self forth in to the isle of delphos unto the Oracle of the
god Appollo that gaf answer to the people that they demanded of things that
should after fall and happene And than when he had don his sacrefyce and maad
his prayer The priest of the temple put him in to a percloos under the awter of
the foresaid ydole And there he herd a great whirlyng wynd that troubled him and
all his wit and understanding that he was in manner of a spasme or a swowne by
which he fill to ground And after tht when he aros him thought that the god
appollo apperid unto him with a dreadful face and said thus to him. Saturn
what meueth the to will to know thyn evil destyne Thou have engendrid a sone
that shall take from the the diadem of Crete and shall banysshe the out of thy
royame And shall be with out pere above all people the most fortunat man that
ever was borne in Greece Aftir these words Saturn came again to himself and
remembrid him of this evil prophecye that touched the botom of his heart and
so sore anoyed and right pensyf he went out of the oracle with a troublid
heart and al bare of gladness and al oppressyd and environed with wanhope came to
his folk and departid thens and went to ship and when he was in his ship he
henge down his heed which he held not up till he came to Crete. and when he had
his heed so inclined he began to thynk and be pensif And after many right
sorrowful syghes engendrid in the root of malencolie said in this wise. helas
saturn pour king what avails me the dignyte to be the first king of Crete.
wat prouffyten me the dyuyne reuerences. ner what good do me my science when y
feel me in the puttyng a back of fortune O fortune sone torning frail and
varyable and ployng to every wynd like a rosier at least areste that the whele
tht torneth with out end may speak to me saturn the inuentor and ffynder of
the common well And if thu will not lene me thy clear and lawhyng visage at the least leave me thy large eeres Thou have give me triumph and glory of Corowne
and now thou suffrest me to fall fro this great was ship the gods wytnes hit
And what is this thou have consentyd my prosperyte and now conspyrest my
mendycite my fall and shameful end. and entendest that y shall be named the
unhappy saturn if all my life has been nouryshyd in happynes. and the end
unhappy and woeful y shall be callid and said unhappy And all^ my happy
fortunes and ewres shall torn more to reproach and shame than to preysyng or
to any worship O ffortune in what thing have y offended. have y foughten again
the. or have y done any folly again the magnyfycence of the gods Have y
rebellyd or offended the airs. the worlds. the heuenes the planets. the
son. the moon. the earth. the sees what have y don or trespast. tell me O my
god where art thou. have thou envy to me be cause that y have been in thoracle
of the foresaid god appollo He has showed unto me the ruin of my ceptre the
ffroussyng and brekyng of my dyademe the troublyng of the clernes of my regne.
the enhaunsyng of my child And the puttyng me out of my royame that shall
proceed of his insurreccion. alas what remede to this great sorrow tht y have. y
have slain oon of my soones where fore y have great and bitter sorrow and have
concluded in my self that never here after wole so cruelly spyll the life of my
children for to dye with hem After this conclusyon y must of verray force and
sore against my will return and continue in my first vnnaturell cruelte. ffor
if my sone that now is in the womb of my wife be suffryd to live he shall exyle
me and put me out of my royame and down of my trone which shall be to me right
hard and peysant to bear and suffer pacyently And therefore hit is better y sle
him Alas and if y sle him than hit seems me y should resist the will of the
gods which perauenture will reyse him again And that should be worse for than
y should not only be called an homycide and manslear but a vnnaturel murderer.
not of a geant nor of a strange man of a another land but of a right litil Child
issued of my propre veins bones and fflessh. that after the prenosticacion of
the gods is p^ elect and chossen to be the grettest lord of greece and
souerani of all the kings in his time.

Saturn thus felyng him in great sorrow and trowble and alwey wors and wors as
a fore is said began to change his colowr and wex pale full of malencoli and of
fantasies and cowde not appese his vnfortune his most preuy men and they that
were most famylier with him durst not approach unto him seeing his sorrowful
manner they were disconfort in his desolacion sorrowful with his sorrow. and angry
with his anger he was in short time so greth perturbed and so inpressed with so
eygre inpression of sorrow that his face was like unto asshen or as he had be
ded alwey after many thoughtis he opend his mouth and spoke all softly. y sle
my self by malencolye and am aman gretely abused y have mad an oath unto my
brother Tytan tht y shall put all my children male to death that shall come of my
fflessh Parauenture the gods wole not suffer that y shall be for sworn. and
have late me have knowleche by my god appollo tht my wife has conceived a sone
that shall put me out of my Royame to that end that y should slay him ffor as
much as y had concluded in my self to have broken mine oath and have spared the
lives of my children. ffor as much as hit is so y shall no longer spare them
if hit happen that my sone be borne a live. certain he shall be put to death.
ffor hit is better that he dye a child. than he should wexe a man and wex
rebelle against me. and enhaunse him self abone me by his malice insurreccion or
other wise..

IM this will this sorrowful saturn returned in to his house contynuyng in
this estate and sorrowful syghes and melancolyous fantasies in such wise that
Cybell durst not come in to his psence nor could not get of him a joyous sight
wherefore he gate him a surname of sorrow And was named Saturn the tryste or
sorrowful. and hit was so that when he had be in his house certain space. and
saw the day approach that his wife should be delivered of child ffor to execute
his sorrowful courage he called his wife and said / dame hit is so apparau^t
that shortly thou shall be delyueryd of the ffruyt of thy womb if thou be
delivered of a sone y comaunde the upon pain of death. that thou slay him. and
that thou send me his heart And when Cibell hard these words and this
rigorous and innaturell volente and will anon she ffill to the ground a swoune.
ffor her legs failed her And in the releuyng of the swoun she kneled to fore
the feet of saturn and said on this wise / sire haste thou no shame that will
be husbond of a woman murdryng her owen child I the require of mercy and grace.
besechyng the to have regard that y am thy wife and have the heart of a woman and
not of a tyrant or a murderar Dame answered saturn require me no more of thing
towchyng this matter hit is iuggid by a forseen and counterpeysed sentence tht
if thu have a sone he shall be ded. ffor y have promysid and sworn so to my
brother Tytan And above this y have answer of the god appollo that in thy womb
is a sone that shall cast me out of this royame And therefore s^e that at his
birth he be ded. as dear as thou love thy life and also as y have said send me
his heart meddled with wyn that y may drink hit And how sire Answered Cibelle
know not thou that y am a woman and by propre and synguler inclinacion y
have a verray love to small children and must give hem to ete and souke O
wenest thou that y have an heart so diuerce as for to foylle my hands with the
blood of my sone y pray and require the to reroque thy sentence and be pietous
to thy wife and generation Thou art wise after the judgment of thy people in
this party thou shewyst thy self not good ffor be thy oath thou art not
bounden ner holden to sle thy sone hou well hit is troth that all oaths maad
again good manners ought not to be holden ffor to slay thy sone hit is a. vilayn
caas and contrary to honor. reason. pity. equity and justice hit is sin
against nature. against virtue and against all good manners Than thy oath for to
sle thy sone is noght. and thou ought anulle hit thou that art king. and
that upon pain of death defendest thy people to make murdre or homycyde. by this
thou that art myrour and example to other ought to be content and appease
thy self And me seems on that other side that thou interpretest and
construest evil the sentence of god appollo sayng tht y have in my womb a
sone that shall put the out of thy kingdom ffor by this hit ought to be
understand that the sone that y bear shall ouerlyue the and put the so out of
thy kingdom. that is to say in thy sepulture the day that thou shall depart
out of this world And if this may not appese the. if hit so happen that y have
a sone. thou may do him to be kept in a strong towr And there to set such
ward upon him that he shall never be of power to enhaunse him self again the..

Saturn had tho the heart passing great. that for semblable compassion Vesca
the mother Cybell and Ceres wept and gaf out great plente of teres And in like
wise all the assistentes that were in the place wept out of mesure
habou^dantly. yet nevertheless hit might not soft nor attempre the hard
commandment of king saturn But in conclusion he said to Cibell that she should
no more procure the respyt of tthe life of his sone. but he should be ded and she
also with him if she did not his coma^ndement. With this sorrowful conclusion
Cibell depertid from thens all in a traunse half ded castyng abrood her arms
and hands with great excess of teres that ran like a river from her tender
eyes. entrid in to a tour. her mother that desolate lady followed her Sshe being
in her chamber forfrusshid and all distemperid of sorrow began to travail anon
and was delivered of a daughter and of a sone. the daughter was born to fore
the sone And was sent by Ceres and born to norysshe in to the Cite of
Perthemye and was named Juno And the sone began to laughe at coming out of his
moders womb and was named Iubyter...

When Cibell and vesca saw the child lawhe their teeres began to grow
double. and they had not taken great regard and head to the child what time
Cibell all angrye and corrupt with wanhope with a syghe and feeble speryt said
to her mother. ha my mother what pietous caas shall this be now give me a sharp
cuttyng knyf and y shall murder my sone by innaturel error again my will And
after this vyllayns deed for my absolucion of the great sin y shall murder my
self also. and this is mine oppynion ffor after so cruel a deed and werk
notwithstanding any excusacion y will never longer live The mother of Cibell was
tho all be wept and greth dismayed when she herd the air of the tender mouth
of her daughter redounde in her eres of so hard a cruelte. she being all
affrayed said to her. my daughter what thynkest thou to do. art thou enraged
out of thy wit or folyssh My mother answered Cibelle ye verily. y am verily as
ye say. enraged out of my wit and folissh. and yet more y am furious and
wood. make me no longer to languyssh. give me the cursid mortal knyf forgyd in
an evil hour ffor of force me must obey the king. saturn your right
welbelouyd sone my right redoubtid husbond tht has commandment over me. and
will schamely put me to death if y acomplyssh not and fulfille his commandment
in the death of his sone which he has chargid me to slay.

AMone as vesca consideryd that her daughter said and in the error tht she was
in. she took the child that was in her arms and pluckyd hit from her by force
And alwey the child laughed when Cibell sighe her sone in the arms of her
mother as a woman araged and out of her wit she began to cry that she should
slay the Child or give hit her again. or ellis she would arise out of her bed
and go plain to king Saturn After thise words Vesca delivered the child to a
damysell of the hows that only was there with hem. and bad her that she should
go slay the child in the presence of Saturn or in some other place out of their
sight The pour damysell excusid her. and Vesca gaf her in commandment and
charged her with great menasses that she should go forth and take the child and
the knyf and slay hy^ And so by the commandment of these two ladies she took
the knyf many times and put hit to the throat of the child for to cut hit a
sonder and always the noble child laughed at the knyf And when the damysell saw
this that hit was innocent she might not find in her heart to do hit any harm.
In this sorrow and in this pain and varyacion Vesca. Cibell and the damoysel^
were a long time Now they iugged him to death and put the knyf to his throat.
and suddenly the damoysell revoked hit and swear that she would never be
persecuteresse of oon so fair a child and thus than began all three to weep and
sobbe bewaylyng the child by so great affeccion that hit was pity to here After
this when they had long wept and sobbed and bewailed the tender weeping and
pain of Cibell they began a lityl to attempre their heart And began to return
to moderly pity Cibell called her that held the child and required her petously
tht she would give her. her sone to kiss and hold in her arms. promyttyng that
she would do him none harm The damoysel that wist not what should fall delyuerd
her. her tender child And than when Cybelle beheld her child with her face all
bewept and all distemprid with teris she kyssed his laughyng mouth more than
an.c. times and came again to her nature knowlechyng her syn and began to say
My child y had been well infortunat if y had taken thy life from thee y have
contended thy death. my right sweet sone Alas shall y persecute the after the
will of thy fader king saturn. hit is his commandment. and y owe him
obeyssance if y obey the culpe and sin is due to him. if y obey not y make
my self culpable of death. a what is this shall thou dye by my hands. by the
hands of thy propre mother ha shall thy mother be thy marterar. shall thy mother
be thyn enemy bitter and mortal aduersarye for doubt of death. y wot not what
to say but woley or woley not thou art my sone. every mother loves her child.
how may y hate the hit is much better that y dye than thou. y have liuyd long
ynowh. and thou art now first borne verily thu shall not dye at this time. y
shall save thy life or y shall dye for thy health. requyryng the gods m^^^y of
the evil will that y had against the.

How saturn had commanded to sle Jupiter tht was new born and how his mother
cybelle sent him to king mellisens where he was norisshid.
The right sorrowful lady after this came better to her self and took heart to her
and kyssed her child tht alwey laughed. and vesca beheld her contenance all
new. and satte down on the bed side where her daughter lay. there they two
began to speak to geder of saturn and of the ffortune of this child and that
he had been in great adventure And promysid that oon unto that other that they
would save the child unto her power After this promysse in the end of diverse
pourposes they concluded to send this child secretly unto the two doughtres of
king Melliseus. the which vesca had norisshid in her young age Of these two
daughters that oon was named Almachee and that other Mellisee This conclusion
fully fynysshid and taken. Vesca lappid and wond the child as hit ought to be
And delivered hit unto a damoysell being there psent with all things and gave
her charge to bear hit secretly unto almachee and Mellisee The good damoysell
enterprisid the said charge and depertid out of Crete with the child at all
aventure And so worshypfully guyded her that she brought the child leuyng in
sauete to the cite of Oson which she psentyd to Almache and Mellisee.
rehersyng how vesca had sent him to hem for the great love and trust that she
had in hem And how saturn had commanded that his mother should slay hit.

Anon as these two damoyselles saw the child and understood how Saturn had
iuggid hit to death. they resseyued hit with pity and in favor of vesca. And
promysid to nouryssh hit in the secretest and best wise that they mochte And
forthwyth the same our they bare the child unto a montaygne that was nyghe to
the Cite where in dwelled their nouryce in a deep hole of a Cave which was
rychely entaylled and coruen with Chysell and other dyuerce instrumentis And
than they sent again the damoysell that brought the child in to Crete In this
manner was the life of the child saved Almache and mellisee norisshid the child
with the melk of a goot ffortune was to him more propice and helpyng than
nature. what shall y say in the beginning when he was put in the cave as his
nouryces on a day saw him weep and cry by his propre inclinacion of c^y^dhood
be cause he should not be herd. they took tr^^pes tympane and cymbales and maad
them to sown so greatly that a great multitude of bees ffleyng about the
montaygne herd their soun. and with this sown entrid in to the cave and took an
hooll by the child ffleyng about him with out any greef or harm doing to the
child. and yet more they maad there honey where of the child ete and was
norisshed from thens forth which was a merueylous thing Allewey for tachieue
the matter beginning of the damoysel tht had born this child theder when she came
again she reherced to dame cybell and vesca all her besoyne and werk. and gaf
hem a right great confort towchyng the child Than the two ladies by meur
deliberacion took and abbeste which is a precious stone and brayded hit in to
pouldre and after that they medlid hit with wyn in a cup of gold. and dame
vesca bare hit to her sone saturn and she habowndyng in bitter teres all
bewept said to him My sone thy wife has sent to the this drink know thou
verily that she this day has rendered. and yelden the fruit of her womb a sone
and a daughter she has sent the daughter to nourysshe in to the cite of
parthemye but in the obeyng of thy strayt commandment we have defetyd the sone
and put him to death / of whom the body the fflessh and the lityl tender bones
been now turned in to asshis And she has sent here to the. the right noble
heart temprid in wyn which y present to the. to the end that thou do thy plesir
And be no more in doubt by thy sone to be put out of thy Royame.

ANon as Saturn herd the petous words of his mother understanding the new
tydyngis that she said and showed him. he began to frown and s^yd in this manner
O pity with out pity Ne ought not my heart be terryble angry. and restraynd
with pressurs of sorrow when hit is force that to mine heart this present heart
issued of his blood and roots be given in mete and pasture for to estaunche
the descouenable honger of mine inhonest desire Thise words accomplisshid
Saturn was greatly displesid and full of renewyng of sorrow. drank the drink.
wenyng that hit had been as his mother had done him to understand And after went
in to his chamber. and there began to be greatly in melancoly And after that
fo^thon he purposid and trowed to abstain him self to pay his wife the deu
debt of marriage but as there is no sorrow that ne over passes. by space of time
he forgate this sorrow And lyyng with his wife engendrid an other sone. Which
she sauyd like as Jupiter was sauyd. how well that Saturn charged her to put
him to death And this child was born to Atthenes. where he was kept and
norysshyd and named Neptune yet after this he lay with his wife and engendryd
an other sone and a daughter. which at time couenable were born and deperted
from their mother but at this time she told not of her sone but hid hit from
saturn which sone was named Pluto and she did hit to keep in the parties of
Thesaylle that afterward was named hell. and for to content her husbonde
saturn when she was delyuerd of these two childern she sent to him her
daughter which was callid glanta and she dyed in her tender years And thus of
all these generacions saturn supposid tht non had be reseruyd but Juno his
daughter to whom he went oftymes to visit in Parthemye where he did hit to
be nourysshid with many noble virgyns of her eage. and also many ancient
gentylwymen to enduce and teache hem gentilnes and virtue but of all them y will a
while tarry now and also of Jupiter. neptune and pluto and now y will show how
dardanus put his brother Iasius to death for couetyse to rengne in the cite of
corynthe. and how he depertid out of corynthe and how he set the first ston
in the cite of dardane which afterward was named troy

How after the death of king corynthus of corynthe his two sons dardanus and
Iasius strof who of them should have the kingdom and how dardanus slew his
brother iasius by trayson wherefore he most deperte out of the contre.
IN this time when crete began to be aroyame and a kyngdame and was in
possession of their first king the same wise in the cite of corynthe which
stant in naples reigned Corynthus there first king. and corinthus had to his wife
oon of the daughters of king Athlas of libye named Electra. they reigned to
geder and achieued prospersly their life / they left after hem two sons whereof
that oon was named dardanus and that other iasyus. some say that this dardanus
was sone of Jupiter but bochace trowed he was lawful sone of Corynthus as hit
apperith in the sixte book of the genelagye of gods Dardanus than and Iasius
after the death of their fader Corynthus and of her mother Electra would succeed
in the royame and in no wise they could accord Dardanus had an hihe and
hauntayn courage and Iasius in like wise. they argued and stroof to gyder that
oon against that other often times of this matter. and conspired and made
secretly menasses under covert in such wise that Dardanus on a day assemblid
all the people that he could get for to be spryng and destroy his brother
iasius and his fre^des which were tho assemblid in a secret place for to
treete the pees and to see how they might content and plese Dardanus

When Iasius saw his brother come all in arms. all his blood began to change.
and seeing that his brother was esmeuyd and full of evil will demyng that this
matter should torn to great myschief. he ascried and said Alas what avails
for to speak and counceyll and seek menes of pees between my brother and me. we
ben betrayed. lo here is my brother that comes upon us all in arms. each ma^n
save him self that may With these words Dardanus came in to the consistory
smote his brother unto the death and said Iasius thou may not abstain thy self
from thy machynacyons Thou have enhaunsed thy self against me. but now y shall
make an end of the Iasius fill down ded among the feet of his friends And there
Clothes were all be sprenct and be bled of his blood When the friends of Iasius
saw this tyranny they saved them self as well as they could to their power and
fledd from thens all araged Than Dardanus returned to the riall palace and the
friends of Iasius gaderd them and went to arms and made a noise and murmr
so great that in a lityl space all the cite was strongly troublid for the death
of Iasius. which was greatly in the grace and favor of all the people of
corynthe. ffor when they herd reherced the death of Iasius they took great sorrow
and manaced dardanus to death. and forthwyth in effect they assemblid by great
rowtes in the streets and said oon to that other Alas now is ded the love of
corynthyeus that had more amytye and love to the common well than dardanus. late
us goo and avenge his death Gowe and punysshe the malefacteur. late us no longer
tarry we shall do a meritorye werk who that ever does iniustyce and tyranny is
not worthy to be chyef and heed of clemence ner of justice. if we suffer a
murdrer to reygne upon us. never shall there good come there of. where the heed is
seek or evil the members may not be hoole ner good. dardanus has slain his
brother iasius wrongfully. hit is vray semblable that h^ shall slay us after his
will. late us take from him his puissance. and late us show that we be men
distroyers of vices and enemies unto all them that seken and engenderen
tyranny in her courages..

SVche were the clamours of the corynthyeus by such noise and semblable
clamours they chauffyd them self and in the end assemblid in oon place. and
were full of ardent appetyt to correct the malefactor dardanus. and his
accomplices In this tempest and swellyng ffurour they went to the pallais where
dardanus had put him self for reffuge but they fond the yates shytte and could
not enter in to hit wherefore they assieged the place making a great noise and
so great tempeste that dardanus was abasshid. and anon he assemblid his friends
and axed them their councel^ They answered and said that he and they were in
great adventure and paryll and that the people so meued might not lightly be
appesid. and for this they said him save thy self and us also with the. thou
have slain thy brother. Iasius whom the peuple louyd in crueyllously for his
benyugnyte. the trespaas is great. syn hit is so don the best wey ought to be
taken we council the that thou leave this palais. and ffynd manner to issue out
and we shall follow the and goo with the and search our auentures in other
lands ffor hit shall be great pain by possibilite ever to content and appese
this people. how well that it is so that the Corynthieus be terryble to all them
that they have in hate and in despyte.

DArdanus heryng these words began to sighe and conscidered that he most
depart from his Cite by his mysfait culpe and desert he smote him self on the
breast and said Ha ffortune unsteadfast what is me befalle My hands ben foul
and filthid with the blood of my laufull brother. the insurreccion and the
rebellyon of my people hangyng to fore mine eyes hit is force that y flee for to
save my life. and purpose to live of rauayn and theft. What meschunce what
evil hap is this. syn hit is so y yield me fugytyf and shall go my way at
alauenture be hit. When the ffrendes of dardanus had understand that he was
concluded and purposed to save his life. they joined to him and appointed to
gyder that the next morn in the first krekyng of the day they would depart from
the pallays. and take thauenture to pass by their enemies sayyng that if they
might ascape they should go to the ryuage of the sea and take the kings barge.
and all they swear to help and accompanye each other unto the death The night
passyd the day aperyd. and than dardanus that had not restyd that night to his
plesir but had wacchid with his armed men and were ready to take thauenture that
the goddys and fortune would give and send hem issued out of the pallays and
found the most part of his enemies a sleep he threstyd among the vyllayns and
passyd forth with lityl resistance. that notwythstandyng the wakyng of the
coryntheus he came to his ryal shipp and took the sea and sauvid them self.
whereof the corynthyeus had great sorrow

When dardanus saw that he was so quyt of the fureur of the corynthyeus he
went saylyng by the sea and descended first at the port of the cite of Samos
being in Trache. and there vytaylled him and went to see again. and arrived in
Asye in a quarter where the land was ioynyng to the sea of hellespond. and
fyndyng this land right good and fruytefull for to enhabite. he made there his
habitacion And there set the first stone of a right great cite that he began
and after achieued This cite was that time named dardane after the name of
dardanus but afterward hit was called Troy. dardanus peupled and fyld his cite
with men and women which he gate by swetenes and fair promesses. and that
other perte he conquerryd by force theft and pillerye. he made him self king
of dardane and dyched the cite about with great diches After long time he
passyd out of this world and dyed. and left a sone of his wif Candame that was
second king of dardane This king was named Erutonius and reigned seuyn and
forty year en augmentyng and encresyng his Cite and people And at last
consu^med the end of his years. and reigned after him Trops his sone This Troos
was the third king of dardane and was a strong man fires and hardy en arms.
and encresyd greatly his seygnourye and his Crown in so much as the dardanyens
said that there was no king but Troos. and named them trojans And thus was
Troyes enhaunced more than all the royames of Greece so hihlye that the king
Tantalus of ffrigie had great envy. and gaf his heart and courage how he might
anulle and put down the name of Tros that was his neighbor and began tessaie
to bring hit down as here after shall be said.

Of the great werre tht was meued between the pelagiens and the Epiriens and
how king lichaon of pelage was destroyed by Jupiter. by cause of a man put to
him to ostage. which king lichaon did do roast..
The wise and subtyl virgyne Menerue as saint austyn reherseth shewid her self
in this time by the stagne or river callid triton by the gretenes and subtilte
of her engyne. ffor she fond the manner to forge and make arms. and to this
purpos Ovide reherceth that she had foughten again a geant named Pallas and
slew him by the flood of triton In the same time that the arms were founden
And the sciences of Mynerue were practiqued by all the world a fires descension
engendrid between the Epyriens and the pelagiens tht after were named
archadyens And here of makes mention bochace in the fowrt book of the
genelagye of gods. among the pelagiens reigned that time a king named lichaon
eldest sone of Tytan the epiriens than enterprysed upon the pelagiens and so
maad that a right great noise aroos and sourded ffor which cause they
assaylled each other by fete of arms so felounous and aspre that booth parties
suffryd many foul mortal shoures than the wise men of Epire saw this war
so disolute. and that they of their party had iniustly and unrightfully
attamed and begone this war. they knowlechid their fault and went to the king
lychaon beryng branches of Olyue in signyfiance of pees and love. and him
required that he would condescende to acord and pees of both peuples Lichaon
considering that his people had as much lost as won by this discencion. and
that bataylles were perylous Accorded to thepiryens the pees by condition. that
they should delyuere him oon of thyr most noble men such as he would demand
for to be his servant a space of time in token that they had vnryghtfully
engendrid this discencion The epiryens consentid this condition and delyueryd
to king lychaon in servitude the most noble man a mong them and thus ended the
war.

The term and the time drew over the thepiryen served king lichaon his due
time. and than when the time was expired the epiryens assemblid them to geder
and by deliberacion of counceyl sent an Enbassade to lichaon for to trete the
delyuerance of thepiryen Thise enbassadeurs departed from Epire and came to
pellage and shewid to the king how their man had served as long as he was
bounden and required him that he would render and delyuere him and ratefie the
pees. to that end that ever after that they might be the more friends to gyder.
When lichaon that was hard of courage fires and evil unto all men and also
unto his owen people understood the words and requests of the epiriens he had
great sorrow and anger in him sylf and said to them with his mouth thynkyng
contrary with his heart. that on the morn he would feeste hem and have hem to
dinner and than he should do like as they had demanded with these words the
epiriens departid ioyously fro the presence of king lichaon. and on the morn
they came to the feste that was richely ordeynd and maad for them in great
plenteuousnes which was right fair at the beginning. and in the end right
foul and abhomynable. for when hit came to the performyng of the feste. the king
lichaon roos from the table and went unto the kechyne and there took the body
of thepirien his servant that he had murdrid the same night. and all rostid
and soden brought hit in a great plater to the feste and presentid hit to
thepiriens sayng. lo here is thepirien that has served me which was cause of
the escheweyng of the ruin and perdicion of epirye. y said yesterday that y
should delyuere him this day take him who so wole y discharge me and put my
hands from him and wole him no more.

All they that tho were psent as well his seruauntis as strangers As Well
epiriens as pellagiens had anon great horror when they herd and understood the
words of king Lychaon and had great shame and furcur to behold so hounteuse
and abhomynable werk and oultrageous sin. and were so troubled that the blood
went fro their faces and leyde their hands before their eyes. as they that
abhorred to behold the pour martyr Epiryen And there was no ma^n wyste what to
say of the infamye of the king lychaon uneath. when the king saw them so
troubled and that every ma^n began to frown and grugge a part. he left hem
and went from thens unto his chamber And than every ma^n rose fro the table
abhorryng and eschewyng the sent and savor of the deed ma^n And would have
departid and goon their way all confuse. ne had been Jupiter the sone of Saturn
which the Epiriens had brought with them in their legacion and enbassade for
as much as he was a fair child. able and gentill For than when he saw that
every ma^n drew a part his way. he put him self in the mids of
thepyriens and began his glorious enterprises and said to them in this wise. O
what is this. where is the blood of the Epyriens Are they bannyd out of
hardynes. be they exyled out of valoyr and of honneste. which be the epiryens
that by force wole expose them self to the vengea^nce of so foul and horrible
deed This caas is not to be born And the terryblete of the tyra^nt lichaon is
not to be redoubtyd when hit bleuyth vnpunysshid. ye see that^ the pelagyens
make semblant that they be evil paid with him he must be punysshid. y say as
for me y^ shall never have pleasir in my life till y se him refrayned of his
tyranny..

WHat time the Epiryens had conceived the great courage of Jupiter that was so
young of age. they thanked their gods of that / that they had brought him
with hem and said to him all with oon wys. Child blessid be the womb that
bare the. And blessid be the gods that forseyng this Iniure and wrong to us
and has so enspyred us for to bring the with us we had been now with out
courage hardines and will to do well and had not ben so hardy to have taken any
term of vengeance. Thy words have awaked and envertued our spirytes which
were ded and aslepe and passed by the countrepesed Infamye of the tirau^t
lichaon. Thy hardynes has maad us hardy. thy vayllyance has maad us vaylliant
and lovers of vaillyance and thy wisdom has enlumyned us in this cause thou
shall be conduitour and ledar of this work and comaunder and we shall obey
unto the etc:..

IVpiter answered and said Worshipful lords and sirs I am not wise ynowh for
to resseyue the honor that ye do me / ner my tender years shall not accept
hit. Allewey by form of counceyle humelyed under all correccion / I will well
say to you that. that me thinks erpedient for to be done / if ye find no
man say better than ye shall do be my counceill and aduyce ye shall take this
pour epiryen in the same estate that he is delyueryd to you and bear him unto
the common place of this Cite. ffor hit is this day sabate and haliday* the
pelagiens ben there in great nombre and multitude passing their time with
dyuerce plays and esbatementis / than ye shall show this pour ded man ffor
hit is said that the king is not well beloved with his own peuple for his
unmanly works / this mesfeet and trespaas is passing foull and pyetous Anon
as they shall know what he has done by this foul work. ye shall well secyf
they shall take in this sin pleasir or dysplaisir.. if pleasir. than hit were
abuse and folly for to speak thereof for this present time any more. but must
seek remedy and return to Epire. if they take displaisir. ye may plainly
disco^ure your courages and provoke and call them to purge this Crime that is
so cursid And y wene that they shall right lyggtly entende to us and for none
amytie that is between him and them he shall not domyne ner regne upon hem by
tyranny. ffor he is not their naturel lord but he is the sone of Tytan brother
of Saturn and is not king by eleccion but by force.

All they that herd Jupiter thus speak merueyled greatly of him And accorded
them to his counceyl in such wise that no man contraried hit ner again said
hit And so suddenly they took the murdered epiryen and bare him to the common
place And there they shewid him openly in every man's sight When the pelagyens
saw this deed man of whom the skyn was scorched the fflessh roasted the senewes
shronken. and that the bones aperyd by the ioynturs they assemblid al about
him in great nombre and castyng her eyes upon him they had so great orrour
abhomynacyon and abasshement that her hertes trembled playned each to other and
many went awey for compassyon wept and araged trembled for anger And other
took duste and pouldir and casted in to the air in sign of sorrow cuttyng
their clothis and sayng and liftyng her hands on high O gods almighty what
people ben these epiriens have they roasted a man's body And have brought hit to
fore us. what mean they Are we eters of man's flessh / or they bring hit to us
to show the cruelte of their courage. or they come for to ete this ded man
among us for to fere us with all:.

IVpiter there being awaityng and leyyng his eres and seeing with his eyes the
manner of the pelagiens and their contenances. Conceyuyng that they condescended
in the contempnaco^n and enemyte of him that wrought this pietous work. When
he had herd their reasons and had seen their wondringes. he adressid him self
among them and said in this wise. O ye men of pelage that ye esmerueylle you
of this unmanly and vnnaturell work / have ye not y now learned and know the
tira^nies of your king lichaon he has murdrid this man / and this man is the
epirien that was delivered to him at the traytte of the pees of you and of us
for to serve him. lo this is the guerdon and reward that he has don to him. he
has tirannysed right evil and has don him evil for good O what great
Infamy is to you. that the people and folk of every other cite / have regnyng
on them kings of noble men and virtuous and they be crowned by eleccions for
their virtuous deeds / ye be defferent fro them and all of a another nature / A
Tyrant is your king a murdrer an Unjust man A synnar worthy of Infamous death
/ and unworthy for to be left a live upon the earth Considere ye considere
under whose hand ye be and how nyghe ye find your self in maladye and parcyll
of death. When the heed aketh all the other members suffren pain. Than ye may
not be hooll and / sound / What shulle we now do. think ye and counceylle ye
us we come to you for reffuge. and demand you how we ought to do and behave
us against oon that is so fowl a king as is lichaon Tell us the verray troth
if ye confess the troth and that ye be lovers of rayson justice and of equity
ye shall judge and condemn him. ye shall leye your hands and puissances in
correccion of him and ye shall be depesshid of his malice.

AMon as the pelagyens understood of Jupiter that lichaon their king had
commysed this villayns Crime Also that he had presentyd to the eryepins the
body of their friend so ded they being at table. they condemned his sin and
murmured against him sayng that they would no more be governed and norysshyd
under the rodd of so peruers and vnfamous a tyrant And sayden to the epiryens
that they would abide by them and put them in their abandon. With these words
Jupiter put him sylf among the epiriens and by his hardynes amonesshid them
to conspire again their king. with which conspiracion acorded all they of the
cite And the words of Jupiter were so agreeable to hem and his manners that they
put in his hand the death and destruction of their king lichaon And to the end
that he should trust and have affyance in them they sent for their arms and
habillemens of war and armed them After they assemblid about Jupiter and
said to him that he should be their captain and her conduitur for tachyeue
this said work..

IVpiter being joyous of so great an honeur and worship excusid himself but his
excusacions had no place the epiriens and the pelagiens ordeynd and constytuted
him heed over them. And he constituted in this dignyte set his people in order
/ And after did hem to march toward the palace. They had not long goon on the
way when they sighe king lychaon issue out of his palais with great company
of his ffrendes all armed as they that had been aduertysed of the said
conspiracion maad against lychaon. ffelyng that his enemies came for tassaylle
him. ffor to show him self a man of fyers courage came a gaynst them wenyng
presumtuously for to have ouercomen them. And anon as they began taproche.
they escryed each other to the death with out other counceill. And strongly
esmeuyd they assamblid to battle that was right merueyllously sharp. Lychaon
setted and ladd his people / in order against Jupiter / They meddled hem hastily
to geder with lytill stryf of words and with great stryf of horyons and
strokes. The stryf cost much / but in especial to lychaon. ffor his peuple
were less in puyssance and might. than the men of Jupiter / which were
strong of great enterprise that they fought and smote upon the pelagiens and
cast hem down now here uow there so fiersly and so desmesurably that none
mochte abide that was before them. Among all other Jupiter did wonder and
meruaylles by his well doing he put lychaon in a passing great Error and
noyance. And in this great anoye he sued passing fast for to have come run
upon him. But when the false tyrau^t saw him come and he saw that Jupiter
set his strokes so myghteli. that all them that he araught were smeten down
to the earth and confounded. Than all his heart began to faylle him / And
went him that other side and he had not long abiden there when that Jupiter
had vaynquysshid and overthrown the pelagiens And made hem to fle from the
place to fore him. like as hit had been the thondre or tempeste..

IN this manner when lychaon saw his accomplices and felawship in such extremyte
he fled him self not as a king. but as a pour man out of comfort and hope so
desolate that he durst take non of his accomplices with him to help him away
nor to comfort him. he doubtyd Jupiter as the death. he so fleyng a way as said
is durst not enter his palais. but issued out of the Cite and went unto a
great forest that was nyghe by. and from thens forth he was a brygant and a
thief And for this cause the poets faynen that he was turned in to a wolf That
is to say he lived as a wolf of proies and robberyes Allewey to purpos of this
mutacyon Leoncius reherceth that Lichaon so fleyng as said is supposyd to be
sued after of Jupiter and be put to death put him self in a river or a great
lake and there saved him self. ffelyng that the water of that river had a
synguler proprete. that is to wete that the men that puts them self in the
water should be turned in to wolves for the term of.ix. year And the ix. year
exspired if they would put them self in the water after that again they should
recouure again their first liknes And so hit might well be don. for lychaon
put him self in to the water and was transumed to a wolf by the space of
abouesaid. and lyuyd of theft and pillerye in the wodes and forests waytyng
oftetymes how the pellagiens governed them self And in the end when he had
accomplisshid his penance He returned in to the river and took again his
mannys form and knowlechyng that the Cite of pelage might never be recouerd.
and than he returned pour and myschant unto his fader Tytan / of whom I shall
tarry a lytill. And shall tell how Jupiter began to be Amerous on Calisto
daughter of the said Lichaon etc::.

How Jupiter after the disconfiture of king Lichaon transformed him self in
guyse of a relygious woman of the goddess deane for the love of calisto
daughter of the said lichaon and did with her his will::.
AFter the descomfiture of king lichaon which was transformed in guyse of a
wolf and began to be a rauyssheur of the substance of men of the contre. Eter
of her children and murdrer of wild bestes that he often time assaylled by rage
of hunger which constrained him to cherissh and keep his miserable life / when
the Epiryens syghe that Jupiter had vanquysshid their enemies And that he abode
maistre in the place / they brought him with great Joy and glory to the
palais And sought long lichaon / ffyrst in the place where the bataile had
be. And after that in the chambres of the palais / but they fond him not
quykner ded ner could here no tydyngis of him / and hit happend that as Jupiter
sought him thus from chamber to chamber / he fond in the hiest tour the
daughter of the king lichaon named Calisto / which was passing fair young and
ffresshe of color / the damoysell bewepte right sorowffully the loss of her
fader which she had all newly understand / when Jupiter saw her so desolate
and discomforted. he set him down by her and said / damoysell comfort your
self and speak to me and sece your weeping Alas sire said the damoysell how
should y recomforte my self the Epiryens han slain the king my fader. ought y to
take consolacion in this ruin. ought y not be angry. ought mine heart be with
out sorrow. my stomach with out sihghes and mine eyes with out weeping an.C.
thousand infortunes trauerse my body and corrompe me And y se me so pour a
gentyl damoysel^ daughter of a king. that y desire more the death than life and
am more in wanhope than in hope..

When Jupiter knew by the words of this damoysel tht she was daughter of king
lychaon he had more great pite of her than he had be fore for as much as she
was daughter of the king and said to her Damoysel^ appese your heart. y wot
well that hit is fo^ce that nature acquyte him self. but ye ought to considere
the inordinate works of your fader which ye ar bounden to bewail. he was
less reasonable man than a king ought to be. he is not ded he has put him self
in some place secret to save him self his sins were to infamous. and who shall
beplayne and sorrow him The gods and fortune have suffrid the rabaisshement
and casting down of his pride and of his tiranies hit is a rightwys thing that
ye take and have patience in his rightwis aduersite. ffor his demerytes give
you cause to take patience where as nature enclyneth you to vnpacience And ye
ought not be inpacyent for his rephension and castyng down. ffor like wise hit
is so that the loss of a tyrau^t torneth all a country to joy O than
conforte your self* damoysell the oultragious synnys ner the unmanly furours of
your fader nor his shameful deeds shall no thing be dampnable unto you ner
torn to you prejudice. nor no man shall missaye ner do to you. ner attouche
you in any manner wise I you assure certainly etc::..

Sire answrd the maid I thank you of your courtoysies and of the fair words /
wyche ye profere and say unto me I wot well that my pouerte has maad me
indygne and unworthy / but when I see that the Infortune of my fader is
irrecouerable and that his Infelicyte has no recourance / I renonce the world
and pray you that hit plese you to trete for me unto the epiriens that I might
goo yield my self in to the relygion of dame Deane the noble virgyne / daughter
of the wise Jupiter sometime king of Actyque and born in this land / where
upon ought to be remembrid. that right auncyently issued out of pellage a wise
noble man. named Jupiter / of whom bochace makes mention in the first book of
the genelagie of gods / which Jupiter was king of actyque / for as much as
he Introduced the people to honest laws and did first do ordeyne and halowe
marriage. ffor to fore that time the acticyens married hem not / but used women
in common. And of this Jupiter came a daughter named Diane. the which willing
tabide in thestate of virginyte maad a Cloistre in the wood of Archade where
she assemblyd many virgyns that passed her time with huntyng and chacyng the
wild bestes. ffor to torn to purpos this noble virgyne deane lyuyd the same
time of the subversion of the regne of lychaon / when Jupiter understood of
calisto that she would yield her silf with the vyrgyne. he beheld her and said
unto her And how damoysell be ye so dispeyred for a litil tribulacion that
touches not your person ye be young and fair among none of you that so go in
to religyon may grow no fruit of children Advise you well hit were better that
ye abode among the worldly people that enplenyssh the world Many women and also
men enter in to religion in their yougth that repent them in their age Sire
said Calisto tempte me no more if there be any gentilnes in you resseyue the
prayer and request of oon so desolate and infortunat gentyl woman more desirous
of the health of my soul than of temporel plaisirs During these deuyses Jupiter
beheld with out cessyng this damoysell and could not y nough complain her
beaulte. for as much as she would in to religion with great pain when he had
herd her answers and had seen how swetly she had taken hit and would not be
turned fro her will he said to h^^ that her request should be accomplisshid
Than he called the epiriens and required them that they would be content to
suffer this virgyne enter in to religion What shall y say the Epiriens put the
request in the will of Jupiter And Jupiter did so much that she was conduyte
and led in to the religion of virgyns After he serchid all the palais of king
lichaon. and maad thepiriens to sease his richesses And there Jupiter abode a
certain time with so great worship that the pelagiens and the Epiryens would
have crowned him to ben theyr^ king but he would never consent there to as he
that considered over his young age / and the variacions of fortune. And said
that hit auaylleth more to a man / and is to him more sure to be maad king in
his old age than in his yougth for the dyuerce parylls that may fall. Alleway
he acorded that he would be Captain of the royame And was a man of great
Justice sweet and debonnayre unto all manyer people etc::.

THis was the first coming up of this right noble Child. when he had submysid
to his playsance the pelagiens / he beryed thepirien that lichaon had murdrid
as hit is said before. And did his obsequye solempnly And after he did do
brenne in to asshen the pelagiens that had been slain in the help of lichaon.
And after that he sent word and did all these things to be known and showed
to the Epyriens that were left at home in Epire as to the king Melliseus.
whereof all the epiryens. And the king melliseus gaf thankyngis unto their
gods. But for as much as I must tell all after this he gaf not his heart
and courage so much to accomplissh these things. but tht otherwhile he gaf
him self to remenbre and to think on the beaulte that he had seen in the
religyose Calisto whereof the sparkles of love enuyronned strongly his heart /
in such wise that day and night he wisshed hyre in his arms. And repentyd him
that he had consentyd that she went in to relygion. And so labored in this
manner that his rest in the night was taken from him and was bastard fro the
franchise of her courage. and so encresid he to love and desire this virgin.
and for to see her he made his pass time to haunte the woddes and continuelli
to hunte the wild bestes in the forest with dame deane. whereof fortune and
anenture suffrid otherwhile that he recountrid and met the maid Calisto. And
when he had ones seen her that day he was all enjoyed And if he saw her not.
he had abundance of many thoughts that ran redely in his intendement. y may
not alday tarry on this matter. he thought ynowh how he might come to the grace
of this religieuse Calisto And all thoughts reduced and brought in to on he
concluded on a day in him self that he would put him in the habit of a
relygiouse woman and would go in to the cloystre of dame diane. faynyng to be a
woman and requyryng to be resseyued with the virgynes.

THis conclusion taken and ratefied in Jupiter by many deliberacions in dyuerce
days he did do make his woman's clothyng by a secret werkman. which promised
him to keep his secrets when his clothyng was maad. / he assemblid thepiryens
in an euenyng and took his leave of them for a certain time sayng that he would
goo allone for to do certain secret things. Thepiriens were all dismayed and
desolate when they herd thentencion of Jupiter And prayed to the gods that
they would conduyte and speed him in his journey. requyryng him instantly tht he
would return shortly again to them. And he promised hem that he so would And
than he with drew him in to his chamber and took the keys of the great gate.
and on the morn betymes when he was arrayed and adoubyd in the vesture and
clothyng of a maid. he departed from thens alone and entrid in to the wood
and so exploytid that he came to the habitacion of the relygiouse maidens

IVpiter had yet no berde and was white and fair colourid in the visage / when
he came in to the relygion he knokked at the yate. And than came to him a passing
fair maid named Athalanta that after was wife unto the king Melleager of
Achaye. And she demanded him what he would. Jupiter answered Noble virgin Alas
I am a pour woman of a noble house I have auowed to the gods my virgynyte. I
pray you that ye wole present me unto the lady of this place. to the end that I
might serve the gods and be of the nombre of the other virgyns. and if hit
plese the gods I shall deserve hit anenste you. Athalanta meuyd of compassion
in the maid. accorded him his request. And presentyd him to dame Deane.
Jupiter spoke also swetly and demeurly. and made so humble and femenyn manyers.
that he seemed proprely to be a maid. Diane beheld him well and long. And
said that she had never seen so fair a maid ner so great and than welcomed him
and resseyued him Than Jupiter thanked dame diane of her grace and athalanta of
her courtoisie. and had good hoope in his enterprise when he saw him self so
sone resseyued without knowing. Than Jupiter began to learn spynne and to work
in the silk and to done the excersitees of maidens And hit becam him as well
as he had been a maid / he was humble and of solitary conversation. he labored
with his hands. with his eyes and his heart. with his hands he mad corporell
works. with his eyes he beheld oftetyme secretly the beaulte of Calisto. And
with his heart ymagynyng and edifyyng how and by what mean he might begyle and
deceive Calisto And often times conuersid and felawshipt with her etc

His heart was alwey in right great pain otherwhile he was meuyd with great
heaviness. and otherwhile in conforte and hope to speed well and wiste not what
to say ner do. for as much as shame and dread were more in him than
hardynesse. what shall y say more. he was long in this pain. more douteuous
and shamefast than hardy. but in the end he auentured him self And ffyndyng on
a day Calisto beside a well where she refresshid her as she that was weary that
had run long with dame deane chassyng than and huntyng a wild best ^he sat
him down by her and said My suster Calisto y me yield to the and to thy grace.
y am a man and nothing woman thy beauty has ouercomen my courage for to come to
the point where we be now. y have clothid me like a woman and a maid. Alas y
require the that thou resseyue me unto thy love so shall we live to gyder in the
religion And we shall take our deduytes and plesances. a man has nothing in
this world but his life. They that have more than that. they be so much more
eureus and happy. Thou have withdrawn the hither for displaysir. and losest
thy flourisshyng yougth. Calisto y can not ynowh complain ner bewail this
damage. y may not preyse the ynowh / y have been so desi^rous to find the in
secret place / that the force of my will has been mescried. and tht y have
enterprised this adventure hopyng in fortune tht she shall give me grace and
suffer our yougthes to be used to gyder secretly ffor we may comune to geder
tht oon with that other with out knowing of any parsone not only in the
chambres but also in the busshes of this wood O my suster take heed what I
say. And as I resseyued and exhaunced late thy prayer / I pray the resseyue
and exhaunce my request with out desdayn of him that thou may see. is verray
lover of the etc:.

When Calisto had herd Jupiter and knew that he was a man. she was all
affrayed / and roose up wenyng to have fledd. but she might not. ffor Jupiter
held her fast by her clothyng and maad her to sytte down by him. Clippyng her
about the nekke and kyssyng her by force. so much that Calisto ascryed and
said. O Jupiter what folly is this. wenest thou that I am so to be overcome of
thy flateryng words. I had much lever that the earth would opene and swalwe me
in to his womb. My suster Answered Jupiter there is no remedy that may let
that my will be accomplisshid. ye shall do my will and pleasir be hit be force
or be hit by love. with this word Calisto began to cry with all her might And
Jupiter began to accomplissh his pleasyr of her there was neither man ner woman
there aboutes that herd hit. how well the Cry of Calisto was great.
Notwythstondyng Jupiter did his will of his body and knew her flesshly and
engendrid on her a sone. After he conforted her and promised to help her in
all things. And to take her to his wife if she would return to the world with
him. But his fair speech ne his promesses might not conforte her Ner for no
thing that he could do or say. he could not come in to the grace of Calysto.
And allewey she swear great oaths that she would complain unto her maystres
dyane. And maad so much that Jupiter departed from her all desplesid for her
displaisir. and so went by the woods thynkyng what was him befalle and also
what he had to do..

How Calisto for as much as she was with child the goddess dian^ put her
out of the order and of her compaygnye..
AT this time began to rise in thentendement of Jupiter many thoughts. and for
the better he concluded in him self to return again in to pellage fro whens he
came fro. And than how well that he was displesid for the enforsyng of his lady
dame Calisto by love. He departid fro the wood and so exployted that he was on
the morn among thepiriens in his first habit. When thepiryens saw Jupiter
comen again. they made him right great chier and great honor And the same day
Jupiter feigned him that he would go on huntyng. and so went and fond the
manner to speak with Calisto and required her that she would be his love. but she
in no wise would assente to him. He returned from the chasse so anoyed that for
to pass his melancolye he departed out of the contre the fourth day following
after that he had ordained there folk that governed the people. And returned in
to the house of king Melliseus who him resseyued as his sone. and there dwellid
a long time with out auentures whereof any mention is maad. And also Calisto
dwellid in pees a while. when she herd tell and understood that Jupiter was
goon she was passing ioious ffor she had him lever far than nyhe Allewey the
time passid the fruit of her womb grew And the days came that diane and
athalantha with other virgyns apperceyued that she was with child wherefore
they assamblyd all in her Chapitre and callid Calisto And than spack deane to
her and said. Calisto my daughter thou have done fornycaco^n with some man this
fornycacion is not excusable / The virgyns of this place be sorry of thy sin.
and have abhomynacion of thy shame. ffor this cause hit is force that thou
depart out of this house / thou shall be no longer their felawe. thou have maad
thy self worthy to depart by the brekyng and losyng of thy virgynyte. take
thyn a ray and gere and go thy wey in to some place where thou may be
delivered of the fruit that restith in the / ffor thou shall no longer be here
with in etc::.

When Calisto herd the goddess Deane. And knew that she said troth. great
teeres fylle from her eyes. and weeping by great habondance excused her upon
Jupiter rehersyng of the myschief and adventure that she had. Deane and the
maidens had great meruaylle of Jupiter that had them so deceived. Calisto cried
her mercy right humbly. And many times offrid her self to the punycion of the
maidens. this not withstondyng how well that she was hold excused. they
resseyued her not to mercy / She was condemned to go out of the Cloister / And
so much went the matter forth. that the pour religious woman departed fro
thens all bewepte and so shamed that she would not go to no town. Cite. ner house
/ but in to a deep cave that she had seen before time in the wood And first she
made her prouysion of herbs and rotes for as much as the winter was coming.
after she entrid in to the cave. And there she held her also long time as the
bear holds him in his den. wherefore the Archadiens faynen that she was
turned in to a bear. And it is not to be forgoten that during this time she was
delivered of a sone which she named Archas. This child was great and huge of
members. Calisto nourisshid him among the wild bestes with rotes with fruytes
and herbs. and of the propre metes and proyes that the cruel^ and terrible
bestes lyueden with. And there was no best that did him any herme. ner none
was so hardy to do him any greua^ns. And he was so cruel and fires that at the
eage of seuyn year as his mother angrid or troublid him on a day. he lift up him
silf against here and would have slain her. in so much that Calisto was
constraynd to flee to fore him by the busshes and yet more to issue out of the
wood and to goo to Jupiter which at that time was in the cite of Pellage..

ARchas poursued Calisto his mother unto he came with in the cite. and so forth
entrid after her in to the palais and held in his two hands great round
stones. When Calisto entrid in to the palais by adventure she encountrid and met
with Jupiter whom she knew And she kneled down on the earth to fore him and
required him with affraied spirit. that he would do her justice of her sone
that would sle her Jupiter that nothing knew calisto for as much as she was
evil clothid and half wild and savage. beheld the Child and made him to be
taken. And after he demanded calisto what she was Sire said she y am Calisto
tht for thy sin y was long syn bannysshid out of my religion. I have had this
child of thy seed. such as thou see is thy sone / I have nourisshid him
seuyn year in the forest among wild bestes. he now would sle me for as much
as I have angrid him. I pray the save my life / when Jupiter heed these words
of calisto he was right glad and Joyous for it was said that she was ded. And
conforted her the best wise he could / after that he callid Archas and maad the
peace between him and his mother / and did do clothe him and retained him in his
palace And forthon the same Archas governed him so well and so wisely that at
the prayer and request of the pelagyens Archas was maad king of the contre
etc::.

How Titan assailed by war his brother saturn for as much as he had not put
to death all his Children males etc::.
IN this time that the young Archas was Crowned king of Pellage and that he
named the Cite Archade after his name. the king saturn was so great and so
puysaunt. that for to ample and encrece the splendure of his natyuyte. he named
him self saturn sone of heaven and of earth. but than as he began to study how
and by what manner he might enhaunce the resplendour of his felicite by dyuyue
mysteryes ffortune turned her back to him ward. And as there ne is nothing in
earth that may abide and endure So hit happend that Titan was all acertayned
that the queen Cibell had dyuerce men children that she did do keep secretly
and so had sauyd their life / bochace the recounteth this history in the.iiij.
book of the genelagie of gods says not by what mean Titan knew this thing
allewey or by suspecion or by envy that he had of the glory of saturn his
brother or by secret aduertisment. under this color he determined in his
courage that he would assaylle saturn by arms And for this cause he did
assemble on a day all his sons. and them required tht they would aid and help
him to get the land of Crete Sayng that he would make war again Saturn his
brother and that by right and just title he had good cause. for he had not put
to death dyuerce men children that his wif Cybell had conceived of his seed like
as he had promised and sworn.

THe children of Tytan tht oon was Lychaon that at this time was no longer wolf
ner king of archade. another had to name Typhon and was king of Secile and of
Cipres. the third was callid Bryarius and was king of nericos. the fourte was
named Ceon and was king of the isle of Cea. the fifth was named Egeon king of
the sea Egee and of the isle deserte. and the sixte was named Eperion king of
plipheros. When they had herd the will of their fader that had pourueyed for
them all these royames that he had conquerid after his departing out of crete.
they desiryng to please him and coueytyng the recouurance of there ancient
heritages that was tho of great renome said to him as by oon wys that they
were ready to accomplissh his good pleasir and to goo in to Crete with armed
hand and sworen that they should constrayne saturn to seek and feche his sons
and them persecute with his hand unto the death..

The old Tytan had in his heart great joy when he beheld the free and great
courages of his sons. And there they promised and swear to geder that they all
should employe them to the recouerance of their herytages. After which
comuracion / they ordained in such wise that they gaderd hem to geder at the
port of Secyle. And sent unto their lordshippis to assembele men of arms and
of war. They went and made such diligence. and so exployted that there were
assemblyd great Armor and harneys and much people at said port. And when the
day was comen / they so desired to labor this matter that they departed from
Secyle with a great Oost and took the sea and so made their Iournees with out
adventure that in few days they sailed unto Crete And there at the port
arrived and took land. And than entryng fiersly in to land they destroyed and
wasted all before them so cruelly and continued in their war so mortally that
they came unto the Cite of Crete where king Saturn dwelled and was resident /
and than Saturn was aduertysed of their coming and descent. And than Tytan
that might no ferther pass with out bataylle or assault / sent to saturn a
lettre whereof the tenor follows. Saturn englottid of wordly honneur and
couetyse of glory. for as much as thou art ocupier of the seygnourie that by
right langeth to me titan thy lord and elder brother / furthermore be cause
that thou art falsely perjured. ffor thy wif has dyuerce men children that
thou have not put to death in like wise as thou were bounden / know that I am
come to take possession of thy kingdom not apperteynyng to the but to me /
wherefore come to mercy and meke thy self to grace. Or else make the sure of
thy parsone. ffor if hit be possible for me y shall come and have reason of the.

When saturn had read this lettre as a man all esbayed sent for his wife
Cibell and took her a part. and coniured and charged her to say the troth and
tell him what she had don with his children. With this charge the pour lady
changid color and seeing that she was constrained to say the truth she
said. Sir thou know that y am a woman. the heart of a woman naturelly does
works of pite had not y have been in nature an abhomynable monstre if y should
have deuourred with my hand the children of my womb. where is that mother that
shall murdre her children. Certes my hand was never man slear ner never shall
be. y have erred again thy commandment in the favor of nature. And syn hit
must needs be said y had lever to be murdrid than a murdrere. and to be named
pietous than cruel. ffor murdre is cruelte apperteynyng to unreasonable bestes
and to tyrants And pite is naturelly apperteynyng to women. And therefore y
confess to have born three sons conceived of thy seed. which y have do be
nourisshid secretly but demand me no ferther or where they be. they shall live
as long as hit plesith fortune. will Tytan or not. and there is no death whereof
any woman may be turmentid with. that shall make the places to be dyscoueryd
where they be..

Saturn herynge these words of his wife was so esbayed that he wist not what
to answer. Not withstondyng for the better he assemblid all the wise men of
his cite. And to them said My brethern and friends what is best to be done.
Tytan my brother has begone war in this royame / my wife has confessid that
she has resseyued of me three sons which she has nourisshyd in strange land
under the color that I should not slay them. Tytan assaileth me / what shall we
don. Sire answered the wise men / where force is enhaunsed by over great
presumpcion. there must be craft to conduyte wiseli to put the hand to
withstand hit / Thou have a strong Cite and fulfillid with great people. thou
art wise for to govern hem. put thy self in arms. and take no regard to the
quarele of titan. a man is not worthy to be a king / but if hit be by his
virtue and gentil^ manners Crete was never royame but now tytan has been all his
live enclyned to vices and is enuoluped in sin. in which purpos he
maynteneth to come to thy Crown / if he enhaunce him self. thou must rebasshe
and put him down this is the Remedy Help thy self and we shall help the / he
that flees causes his enemy to chasse him. thus now hit may not be fled. but
hit must be wythstande and to give arrest to our enemy. And that right
coragiously. ffor that a man may do this day. late him not put hit over till to
morrow. Arm the than well and sewerly / And assail from thy Cite thyn
Enemies. if thou so do / thou show thy courage to be enhaunced greatly and
not lightly to be ouercomen by them. And so thou may attempre somewhat their
pride and presumpco^n if thou mayntene otherwise thy self / and late them take
their rest / that shall be matter and cause for to encorage them. upon which
they shall inflame them self hoping to come to their above. which shall be to
the more harmyng than vayllable. ffor courage and hope often times men say make
men to attain to great and hye victoyres. notwithstondyng thou art king thy
will be accomplisshid and fulfilled..

Saturn Answered and said. Brethern and friends hit were great shame to us and
to our (...) we suffered hit to be dissypate and destroyed. Hit is force that
the war be begone and open. every man dispose him to save his worship Titan
assaileth mine honor. and requires my dishonor. Syn hit is force that of this
matter the arms and war be iugges we shall arm us this hour and poursiewe
thentertenement of the right good adventure tht of fortune is come to us. And my
heart tells me that also suddenly as our enemies ben entrid in to this land.
also suddenly we shall make them to goo and issue out again. with this answer
all the wise and noble men of Crete took great plesir Than Saturn gaf the
answer to the messanger of tytan And said to him. if tytan return not with in
two hours that he would come and take the battle against him. With this answer
the massanger returned to tytan and said to him thentencion of saturn. Tytan
swore than that he would never return backward till he had attended and abiden
the battle Saturn was a man of great valor and hye will When the messangier
of tytan was departid. he made sown to arms. at which sown the young and
old adowbed them and made hem ready. What shall y make long process in short
time they were redi at the point And when saturn saw that his enemies made
no^ semblant to meue. he went and ascended in to his Chare ffor in this time
the kings went to bataill in Chares After he yssuyd out of his Cite and rengid
his people about him / and anon after he did do march them against Tytan
etc:::::.

FRom as far as the Tytanoys saw the Saturnyens come. they were right glade
and made them self the grettest chiere of the world. And m^uyd them silf
Ioi^usly against them and with a great cry / they had great sheldes of tree /
maces and pollaxes and guysarmes of strange facions. and they were all on foot.
reseruyd Tytan and his sons. which as Rings had their Curres and Chares in
which they were brought and carried not by the force of horse but by the
puyssance of men / they approached so nyghe that they came to fightyng and began
to work / than the archers of king saturn began to draw and shote And maad
the tytannoys to arest and stand also long as their shot dured and slow
and hurt many of them when the shot failed. the tytanuoys that had great
sorrow for to be so seruid of the saturnyens / esmeuyd hem self again And swore
that oon to that other that they would be auengid And came for to fight hand oon
hand in which they enployed them so aygrely that of the noise and den^e that
their axes and guisarmes smote upon their sheldes hit seemed as hit had been
thonder / At then counteryng than the battle was right ffell / Lychaon. Egeon.
Creon. typhon. and encheladus were in the first front / there was many a shield
broken for the weight of the clubbes and polaxes and many heedes broken Ceon
and tiphon at the beginning maintend hem self right vailliantly and conduyte
her folk all with in the battle by the rigor of their strokes in so much
that whom they met of the saturniens they beat hem down. by their well doing
they were known and doubtyd of their enemies in so much that saturn maad his
Chare to be lad out of the wey for the great bruyt and noise that they made
about hem. there was great effusion of blood. ffor the tytanuoys enforced them
to have endured in their bruyt and cry. And the saturnyens with saturn put
them in pain for to abate hit and break hit And so the coming of saturn was
cause of prouesse upon prouesse and of many oon deed. and intended oon and
other so acertaynly to the work that the most part of that day they maad great
stryf with out that none might enjoy him for victory ne trouble for
disconfiture. but in the end when the titanuoys saw the son declyne as
covetous of glory and of worship At oon cry that Tytan made upon saturn.
Lychaon and Egeon with many other enclosed about hem. he being disperkled. his
chare broken by force of polhaxes and gaf him many wounds and finably they
took him And brought many of the saturnyens to death and ouerthrewe them in
disconfeture. and that werse is they were so discoragid when they understood
that saturn was taken that they lost the viguers and strength of their hertes
and the myghtis of their arms. And turned their backis and fledd all desroyed.
that the tytanuoys entered with hem in to the cite and took hit and wanne hit
with out any resistance betyng down the people and with great murdre of men
women and of small Children..

AT this time men might se the ladies and matrones of Crete take the duste and
cast hit in to the air and run by the streets now here and now there all
dessheuellyd with her here hangyng about her hedes castyng a far their atyre
/ and their lityll Children crying after hem the wise men of the town seemed out
of their wit. the Cite was so trowblyd that they might no more / Among all
other Cybell vesca and Seres maad great sorrow semblably with out cessyng / ffor
tytan that never louyd them. came tho in to the palace. and put in prison
Saturn and his wife / And swore they should never depart thens till they had
put to death all her sons that were come of them And furthermore Tytan did him
do Crown king of Crete / so ne auayled not the Infinite prayers and orisons
that dame vesca made to tytan in the compassion of her sone saturn and of
Cybell for their delyuerance / Ner the fair spekyng of Ceres ne the teeres
meuyd of charity. were of no valu the moo prayers that they made unto Tytan /
the more fond they him vncourtoys felon and malgracyous / He did do execute
and put to death all them that held or were apparteynyg to the party of
Saturn / And by the space of four days vexid and troublid Crete in robbyng
and shedyng the blood of the Cytezeyns / And he ne persecuted only the men.
but also women and children and took their goods and departed among them that
held on his party / Than when vessca saw all these things happene in the
Cite And that her sone tytan governed him so malicyously and allewey worse and
worse with out any compassion on the people / She came to the prison where
Saturn and Cybell were and said to hem with a mouth widyng dolorous sighs.
Alas my children what shall ye do. what shall come of you. how shall ye be sauyd
the land of crete is not only drowned by the teeris and weeping of your best
friends. but with their blood and with the blood of their wives and children.
And the heart of tytan is so terrible harded and endured that ye shall dye here
in miserable pain. or ye must put your sons to death. syn it is so hit is
better that they be put to death and that ye send to seek hem. when for your
life is none other remedy

The anger of Cibell was right aspre and sharp to here the sorrowful tidings
in so much that her heart faylled Saturn and her mother thought on her when
she was come again to her self she escryed and said. Ha my mother what say ye
to us. have we so great pain for to keep our Children and that we should this
our abandoune them to the death Shall y do trayson to my children that begin to
floryssh in right clear fame. that shall never beyf hit plese the gooddes y
have well lever have regard to my semblant Jupiter my sone has a great name
and has won the love of the pelagiens. and of thepiriens. all the world
preyseth him and holds him oon of the vailliants men of the world. he is my
sone y shall send to him and late him have knowleche of the myserye that y am
in. by the damoysell that bare him unto the montaigne of oson and shall require
him of socours. and y hope that he is a man of so hye courage and so ewreus
coming up that he shall socoure her. that has don him that merit that is
worthy to have his socours And tht saved him in his tender days. and my heart
tells me that he shall the trowblyng of Crete. And thankyd the damoysell And
after that he turned him unto the king. and said to him. Sire ye may now know
and understand what I am and of what hows As this damoisell witnesses my fader
and my mother ben in the hands of their enemies / I pray you in their faueur
that ye will help me to socoure them / And that we goo hastily oppressyng him
that has oppressid them / and I have a singular hope and trust in fortune
that she shall help us Fair sone Answered Melliseus know that I have more of
affeccion in the recourance of thy lignage than I can show or make semblaunt /
And in sign of this I promise to help the as much as in me is possible / And
than Jupiter assured the damoysell and swore unto her that he would put him in
arms against titan and bad her return unto saturn and Cybell and to comfort
them in hope of right short socour / The damoisell departed from thens with the
words of Jupiter and returned in to Crete / And told unto saturn and cibell
all that she had done / Anon after the damoysell was departid / Jupiter sent
for Archas his sone hastly with the archadiens / And also sent for the Epiriens
and the parthemyens with them of the Cite of Anlacre All thise people louyd
Jupiter with great love and came at his commandment in great nombre of men of
war Jupiter welcomed them as well as he couthe / and told them the cause why
he had sent for them. And told them that he was Sone unto king Saturn After
thise things he did do be maad ready all thing that was necessary unto his
Oost / And so they departed fro the Cite of Oson with right a fair compaygnye
same ignorance and will that thou know that thou art the first sone and heyr
of the king saturn and of dame cybell. The king saturn thy fader as every
man knows had long syn maad an Oath unto his brother Tytan that he should slay
all his children males that should come of his seed for which cause the day of
thy natyuyte he comandyd that thou sholdest be put to death. but thy mother had
pity of the. And for to save thy life she sent the secretly unto this hows.
geuyng thy fader saturn to understand that she had do persecucion on the. And
so for to eschew the fureur of thy fader. thou have ben here norysshyd all thy
days And know not thy self what thou were. and now thou art in certain what
joy is this to the Certainly great And thou ought to go ioyously unto thy
fader and mother presentyng thy self unto her grace if hit were not that after
these tydyngis of joy which y must needs show unto the Jupiter other
tidyngis. and that is this Thy mother that has sauyd the. thy oncle Titan
holds her in prison with saturn. for that. that she has do norissh the /
and he has overcome and venquysshid thy fader in bataile all newly and take
from him his royame. and yet more he will do hem dye / wherefore they pray and
require the that thou have pity of them and that thou will employe the to go
and delyuere them of the danger that they be in at this day.

THe king melliseus and Jupiter heering thise tydyngis of the damoysell
meruayled them right gretely. And Jupiter was right joyous when he had
understand that he was sone of king saturn / and on that otherside he was
sore vexid of resseyue by this tydyng a right great Joy in knowlechynge the
place of his natyuyte / ffor more gretter Joy he may not have ner come to him
/ than to know that he is the first sone of the ancient house of Crete / And
this shall torn to him a souerayn gladness when he shall see that he is
required to come and make the recouerance of his fader and mother and of his
contre:.

How Jupiter with Aid of king Melliseus of epire deliuerid saturn his fader
and Cibell his mother out of the prison of tytan / and how he slew tytan in
bataill:.
When Saturn and vesca herd Cibell so speak Vesca said that her advise was
right good / And saturn was all esbaied. ffor he thought that Jupiter that he
had seen at dyuerce times with king melliseus should in no wise be his sone /
uneath he could believe hit and give faith unto the words of cybell And said
if Jupiter would socoure him he were the man to do hit / and that he was content
that Cibell should send to seche him as she had said. Than Cybell sent for the
damoysell that knew all the guydyng of Jupiter and gaf her the charge to go
unto him and to fornysshe the werkis. The damoisel^ Ioyeus of this enbassade
departid secretly. and tarried not til^ she came unto the hows of Melliseus / And
fyndyng there Jupiter with the king. After the reverence made she adressid her
Orison to Jupiter and said to him / Jupiter esioye the and be glad I bring to
the tidyngis of gladness / Neuerthelasse among other sorrows. ffortune that
has hold the long time Ignorant and not knowing the place of thy right noble
natyuyte / has now certainly suffered the discouerture and knowleche of tha^ of
men of arme^ unto the nombre of six thousand fightyng men And so well spedde
that in short time he brought hem upon a mile nyghe the cite of Crete:.

And there jupiter would tarry upon the top of a montaigne / and callid to him
his sone Archas that that time ne had but.xiij. year of age but he was right
wise and well bespoken / And gaf him in charge that he should go in to Crete to
give sommance unto the king tytan that he go out of the cite / And de^^u^re to
him his fader Saturn with his mother Cibell / the young Archas that was hardy
and had his heart hye enhaunsid with the word of his fader went unto crete to
the king tytan to whom he did him to be presentid and said unto him thise
words that follow Tytan j come unto the in thobeissance of my fader jupiter
first sone of king saturn that thou hold in captyuyte / he has been
advertised of thoppression that thou have don in the person of his fader and
of his mother and the death of her sons / he signyfieth the by me that he is
sone of saturn / and that he is as much thyn enemy as thou to his sons art
enemy upon which j the somone as legate ones. twyes. thries / that thou yield
this cite unto his fader king saturn / And that as hastily as thou have entrid
therein in like wise that thou depart Child answered tytan thou tellest me
tidings that been full of plasirs and of exultacion by the which j know by
thy words that saturn has a sone yet living ffor by this moyen j see clereli
/ and also sees all the world that by good and just quarele j am maad king of
this cite / Late jupiter thy fader know that j doubt him not / Nor set
nothing at all of his coming / And also that I will no thing do after his
commandment / Tytan said Archas for as much as thou abidest in this will / I
will no more at this time ocupie the. Make good wacche Jupiter is here by that
tarieth for none other cause but Answer fro the for to do his deuoyr to recoure
his Cite etc::.

WIth this word departid Archas fro the presence of Tytan and returned again
unto his fader when Jupiter herd the answer of tytan / he was full of gladness /
ffor he desired no thing but for to be in arms / And concluded with his people.
that on the morn he should assault the Cite / in caas that Tytan ffurnysshed
not hem of battle / Anon were their tents made of bows and leeues and her
tabernaclis / the Osonyens. the Archadiens and the Epiryens lay upon the grene
verdure. and maad her Oost to wache / Tytan was than in crete. And hit is to
wete when Archas was departid fro his presence / he assemblid all his sons.
and told hem thise tydyngis which were to them pleasant and agreeable. ffor they
desired nothing but stryf and debate. And assured hem self to have victory of
Jupiter as well as they had of saturn. In the same hour they sent four spies
to epsy the nombre of their enemies. And made ready their harneis. these spies
went so far that they saw the oost of Jupiter / and made their report to
tytan of the place where his enemies were and of what nombre of people they be
/ after the report of the said spies. titan concluded for as much as his
enmies were but a mile from the Cite. that they should make hem ready and go to
battle against hem on the morn Eerly. the night passed fast / the day came on
And than about the son rysyng Tytan mountyd upon his Chare that was right
rich and made his titanoys to renge in battle And left an honderd with in
the cite for to keep hit from rebellion or fro trayson / and took all the other
with him under his conduyte and of his sons and his espyes etc::.

IVpiter that was not ydell had the same hour set all his men in ordenaunce
/ And had than brought all his folk in a fair plain hopyng of bataile And thus
tytan had not far ryden that he ne saw the Ooste of jupiter / ffor this
plain was all disconuerte on all sides / and from as far as each might see
other / each of them full of joye enforced them to make showtes and cries And
by great desire they marched tht oon against that other unto the coming and
smytyng of strokes Than jupiter put him self in the front of the battle and
having his bow in his hand and his arowes by him by his shotyng began a
medlyng that was right fires ffor on that oon side and the other there were
right good archers / and many casters of polisshid stones that failled never
and that was cause of death of many / when the shot and castyng of stones
faylyd they began to go to geder with speres and tho began a mortal fyghtyng
hand of hand that was so sharp that of the brekyng of the speres and of the
sheldes hit resouned unto the walls of Crete / and came to the eeres of Saturn
and of Cybell the noise whereof they began to reioye ffor they had a verr^y hope
that Jupiter should obtain the victory against tytan / This hour vesca went up
upon a hye tour that she might see unto the feld and there she saw the fightyng
of the battle / Tho held Jupiter his glayue in his hand and his sheld in that
other and with his glayue he smote in to the thykkest of his enemies / and with
his sheld he sauyd him self from their strookes. And with oon struck of his
glayue he departed the body of encheladus oon of the sons of tytan and cast
him on the ground at the feet of the tytannoys that were right sorry for the
death of her felaw Jupiter assayllid them right sharply. And oon cried slay slay
/ but he that so cried was slain a non by the hands of Jupiter that destroyed
the blood of his aduersaires he was strong. fires / young and boystous and of
aspre entrepryse. He defended him vigourously as a lion. myghtely as an
Olephant and eigrely as a Tygre And ne entendid only unto the deffence of body.
but to save and rescowe all them that were in parell under his warant / he did
merueilleus on all sides. The noise and bruyt doublid and redoublid about
him. The Tytannoys began to overthrow by great routes that oon fill on his
sholders that other on his sheld / and he charged so sore upon them that his
strokes might not be sustained of men. they were so strong and puyssant etc::

This bataile was felonous and hard at beginning for both the two perties /
and there were many of titannoys of tharchadiens and of thepiryens hurt deed
and cast under foot. Archas was there accompaignied of fifti archadiens
commysid unto the guard of his body for as much as he was young / and yet he
made and put him self m right good deuoir to emploie him self to the arms /
melliseus failled not / ner Titan lichaon egeon and the other side also / Each
man did his best tht he might / I can not say how many men were ded on the
ground / ne how often times that oon gate upon that other but ye shall
understand that there was none comparable unto Jupiter en strength in conduyte
ner in prowess / there was no thing to him inpossible. he overcame the
ouercomers / he slow the slears / he' smote down the smytars. he put him self
so forth and in so many places in the battle of the tytanoys that in a
destrayt he came and fond tytan in his chare. that confounded the epiryens by
stones and round plomettes that he cast on them And cried tytan tytan for as
much as he thought that he faught well when Jupiter knew that tytan was
there he drew toward him. and as titan auauncyd his arm for to smite upon one
epiryen. Jupiter haunsyd his swerd. and dishargyd so sore upon his arm that he
smote hit of and departid hit fro his body / whereof he had great joy and cried
Jupiter jupiter And tytan so hurt had great sorrow that he fill a down with in
his Chare::

AT this point the epiriens began to courage them self / and the tytannoys were
discoraged Lychaon and Egeon were there fast by where they saw her faders arm
fle in to the feld they began tassaile jupiter as men dispayred / and so began
a new meddling where much blood was spild but notwithstondyng the fierste of
lichaon that had Jupiter long time in hate. for as much as he had taken from
him his lordship Jupiter entendyd so eygrely to put tytan at vttrau^ce that he
brak his chare in to pieces by the help of the Epiriens. And that with the
swerd that he smote of his arm / he departed the life from the body of the
unhappy tytan by a mortal struck that he gaf unto ^ his heart. and than gaf he
his entente and prowess to persecute Lychaon and egeon that had given to him
many strokes and horions. and adressyng his swerd upon the head of lychaon that
the swerd went to his heart. whereof Egeon had so great sorrow and dread. that
he fled and sauyd him from the tempest which tempeste ran so upon the
titannoys so vnmesurabli that all were put to death and to flight in to the
feldes. some here and some there Reseruyd oon of the sons of titan named typhon.
that seeing the discomfiture came unto Jupiter and said. Jupiter see here thyn
enemy. fflee not after them that flee. hit shall be unto the more honorable
to fight against me. that deffieth the. than to run after the fugytifs.
Never yet was I founden ffleyng to fore mine enemies ner yet I shall not: thou
have slain tytan my fader. and my brother is slain and venquysshyd by fforce and
strength And so behooves than this Royame must be thyn or mine. and now late us
see who shall do best / if I may I shall vaynquysshe the: and if I overcome
the certaynli thou shall not dye by glayue ne sword / but by the water of the
fflood that renneth all reed and died by the blood of my kyn. to the end that
thou drink of the blood that thou have maad run out of her bodies / whereof I
have a great Anoyance to endure hit. ffor by the course of nature me ought to
take displaysir and anoye. And also to torn to great dispyt the dysplaisyr
that thou have done to me etc::.

How Jupiter vaynquysshyd in the field Thyphon and cast him in the River
etc::.::.
THis typhon was great and full of orguyell and pride / when he had said all
that lay on his heart / Jupiter that had than behold and understand Answered
to him / vaissale have thou no knowleche what rayson and right the gods and
fortune don for me / thou art strong of members and proceeds fro the heart
more ou^trageous than wise Alleway for as much as thou demaundest battle.
thou art welcome / make the ready shortly / and do the best that thou can. and
haste the for the caas requires hit with this word thyphon smote. Jupiter so
rudely upon the head of his shield that he bare away a great quarter And made
Jupiter to stoop with the right leg / there were there by many epiryens / that
seeing Jupiter so smeten ran and came for to rescowe him / but Jupiter would not
suffer hem that they should help him in any manner / but bad Melliseus and
Archas that they should follow the chaas of them that fled And than he began to
assail typhon by great virtue and force in such wise that he gaf him many
wounds in his body And thus began the battle of typhon and Jupiter they were
both strong and able in the craft of arms they charged one upon that other
dolorously and eygrely / hit is no need that y declare how many strokes that
oon gaf unto that other / but y must tell how Jupiter so fought and smote his
enemy that he took from him his swerd and his shield And when he was in that
point / he chargid him upon his sholdres by force of his arms / And bare him
to the river that was all dyed with the blood of deed me^n:. And there he did
him dye miserably castyng him in to the flood: the head under for as much as
he had menaced Jupiter of such death. what shall I say more of this battle
After the death of typhon Jupiter went again to the pursuyt of his enemies unto
the son began tenclyne in to the weste and sued on by great slaughter / but
in process of time when he saw that Tytan and the more part of his sons were
ded. And that the rest of their people were so feeble and so dispersid by the
feldes / that they might never arise again. he sowned the retrayt and
reassemblid his folk the best wise he might / and after he took the right way
to the Cite having great Joy and exultacion of his victory. And he ne had
tarried long that four Cytezyns of Crete came unto him and told him that all
they of the party of tytan were fled and that they had taken out of prison his
fader /.

How Jupiter and Saturn reconsiled them to gyder / and how Jupiter by
commandment of his fader went for to destroy the king Apollo of paphes. and
of the medecyn of Esculapius etc:.
IVpiter ressayued these Cytezyns and their tidyngis in right great gladness /
and desiryng with all his heart to be with his fader and mother did so much
that he entrid in to crete / saturn and Cibell with vesca were at the gate /
which ressayued him honorably and broughthym unto the palace. where he was
fested with the king melleseus and archas in such faco^n that hit might be no
better / At the coming of Jupiter many teres were wept for Joy by dame Cibell
and vesca. Cibell kyste and beclypt often times her sone. And all they of the
Country came theder in to the palais for to feste and worshipe Jupiter and also
they gaaf him many great yeftes / And hit is not to be forgoten how Saturn
rereconcyled him self unto him and gaf him astate as to his sone. During these
things the body of titan was serched among the deed bodies by commandment of
saturn. and there was maad for him his obsequie solemn as hit apperteyneth to
a king / semblably and unto his sons that were found deed in the battle All
the sons of tytan were not perisshid and ded in the battle ffor among all
other Iopetus and bryareus were left a live and flede That is to wete bryareus
in to an isle of greece named Nericos And Iapetus fled in to a party of libye /
where he enhabited him self And brought with him three sons that he had by his
wife. whereof the eldest was named Athlas the second had his name Hesperus And
the third named him self Prometheus. Athlas dwellid in Libye. and hesperus
reigned in spaigne. And were both vaynquysshid by hercules as hit shall be said
in the second book

FOR to hold on our purpose. when Saturn and Jupiter had done the obsequyes
of the titanoys. Tidings came to Jupiter that Appollo king of Paphes had
resseyued party of them that fled fro the bataill of tytannoys / This said
appollo had maad allyances unto saturn and was sone of Jupiter of Actique.
When Jupiter and saturn herd these tidings. Anon saturn required Jupiter
that he would help to take vengeance of Appollo that was his allye. and that he
should destroy his enemies: At the request of saturn Jupiter entreprisid the
war: and in all haste he went and beseged the Cite of Paphes and took hit
with assault. and put to vttrance and destruction all the fugytyfe that he
could find / and yet above that he despoylled Appollo of all his rychesses
and of his lordshyps so nakedly that he departed fro Paphes not as king. but
as a pour beggar / and fortune was to him so contrary. that he was
constrained to keep the sheep of king Ametus of thessayle In this Paas some
men say that in the time that Jupiter began to mount in his Regne and to
enbrace honor / Esculapyus sone of appollo which was right expert in
medycyne. and serchyng on a day his adventures as he went by a wood side he
saw from far where an herdeman with his lityll horn fought against a
basilique. that of his nature slew the people only with his sight / when
esculapyus saw this. he was greatly esmeruayllyd and tarried / and he had not
long abyden. but that the herdeman had overcome the basylique / and constraynd
him to wythdrawe him upon a Rock that was there nyghe by. Esculapius was all
esbayed with this thing that he wis^^ not what to say. ffor him thought hit
was Impossible for a man to overcome oon so mortal a best / Than when time
that the basylyque was wythdrawen upon the said Rock / Esculapyus went him
hastily unto the herdeman. And fyndyng that he had upon his head a Chapellet or
garlond made of many diuerce herbs and of flowers. He Iuged incontinent that
in this foresaid Chapellet was an herb of such virtue that kept him from the
death and also from the subtle venym of the basylique. than he did so much
that the herdeman or shepard gaf him his chappelet or garlond as innocent: And
than the said herdeman went again for tassaile the basilicque / and than
suddenly of oon propre sight of his eyes the pour shepharde fill ded unto the
earth etc.::.

Esculapius was than well assured that he had well thought that in the chappelet
was an herb that suffisid to withstonde again the malicyous entoxicacion of
thenuenymous eyes of the best / and with the said chappelet he went to the
rock. And fought so against the basilicque that he slew him whereof he had so
great joy / that a heart entendyng to worship myhht have no more / when he had
thus done he went unto the herdman and having pite on him / he took all the
herbs oon after an other whereof the chappelet was maad. And put hem diuysably
each by him self in his mouth. And fynablely he touched only the leaves of the
vertueuse herb / and so brusid hit upon his mouth. that suddenly he roos from
death to life / O merueyllous virtue of herb / men read that by this same herb
Ipolitus which came unto his death. by the mean of his styfemoder that accusid
him falsely. afterward was raised to life again / and after that he had be long
ded and drawn by busshes egghes montaygnes and thorns / when his body was
found that they that fond him leyd him in a medowe upon a plant of herbs
like unto the herb / whereof is spoken to fore by virtue of the which his
wounds were heled and his life was given and yield unto him again.:.

For to hold on the matier when esculapius had raised the herdman or shepherd
/ he took the herb and the basilicque and bare hem unto the Cite of paphes
tellyng his adventure. and from than forth he raised men fro death to life by
virtue of the herb and fought and overcame basyliques / And for this cause he
gate him so hye a name / that Jupiter was a glottyd of his glory / and took
war against him and slew him. whereof his fader appollo took so great sorrow
in him self / that he enterprysid the war against Jupiter / but Jupiter
overcame him and constrained him to such an extremyte / that for to hyde his
name / he went and served the king ametus of thessayll as is said to fore.
And thus when Jupiter had vaynquysshid appollo by that oon manyer or by that
other he returned in to Crete with great glory / And fond there Neptune and
Pluto his brethern and Juno his suster that maad him great chyere. This Juno
was the most beauteuous woman and fairest maid that was in all the contre /
after the return of Jupiter she conuersid with him certain space of time /
allwey they discoueryd not their couraiges at this time. and by process of time
returned Juno in to parthemye with the other vyrgyns with which she had be
nouryed and there abode in many thoughts and desires / And ne maad never other
prayers unto the gods. but that only they would give her grace for to be wife
unto her brother / And it is not to be forgoten that if she was strongly set
in the love of her brother Jupiter / as much or more was Jupiter fermly set
in the love of her / for for to see her only after that he had sent home all
his men of war in her owen Contreys / And that he had establysshyd his fader
Saturn in his seygnourye and lordshyp. Under the Color of devotion he went
often times in to the cite of Parthemye. and took pleasir to be with her etc::.

How Jupiter with great Joy spousid his suster Juno. And how the king saturn
began a war again Jupiter his sone etc::
ALlewey as Jupiter was besy to solicyte thus the virgyne Juno in the cite of
parthemye for to have the better occasion to abide there he edefyed a temple.
And did hit to be dedyfied unto his mother Cybell. And at last did do make an
image or statue of a woman in ryall attire that gaf mete unto many small images
of lytil^ children in remembrance that she had saved the life to her children /
And when this temple was parfayt and maad unto the dedicacyon. Saturn and
Cibell to gyder came theder with all the nobles of the contre. and there maad a
great solempnyte that duryd fiftene days in plain gladness. And at this great
feste and gladness faylled not Jupiter ner Juno. ffor about the end of this
solempnite the nobles of the contre traytted their marriage. And the priest of
the temple of Cybell assured and trouthed them to gyder. and anon after in the
same temple their espousaylles were made and celebrered with so great glory
Joy and Tryumphe that hit is not possible to be rehearsed And Jupiter and Juno
lay to gyder / and engendrid a daughter that they named hebe. The parthemyens
for memoyre of this marriage founded there a temple where in they set the
simylacre of Juno in habyte of a maid that married her And alleway after that
same day that Jupiter wedded Juno. / they maad in that temple an annyuersarye
and a great feste which was hold in manner of a wedding / After all these
things than Saturn returned in to Crete / Pluto returned in to a party of
Thessaylle where he founded the cite of Hell whereof shall be spoken in the
second book / and Neptune returned unto Atthenes / where the atthenyens maad
him king as well for his virtues as for that he was sone of saturn / at that
time the most renomed king of the world::.

IN these days when saturn saw him quyte of tytan and of his generacions /
And that he saw his children mount from low places into regnes and hye
chayres / Certain all his sorrows vanysshid a way / and than began the clerenes
of his regne to be paysible / All dowtes all dredes all suspecions were put a
way / he had of the goods of fortune as much as he would / None was than so
hardy that durst conspyre against his domynacyon / he fond him self in peace
generale / and hit is to be supposed and leuyd considered the regnes of his
time and that he was in so great peace and tranquyllyte. that he might have
fynysshid and ended his days in the same / if he himself had not put him to
the war / ffor he had Jupiter his sone unto his help / at that time the most
abill in arms that was in all the world / And long time when Saturn saw
him thus in pease / hit happend on a day when hit came unto his mind. that his
god appollo had prenostyqued that this Jupiter should put him out of his royame
/ Sodeynli there began to engendre in him a mortal hate against Jupiter that
had don unto him so many good deeds / And also seeing that every man held him
in love. and was besy to please him. he adioustyd faith and gaf credence unto
his cursid prenosticacyon. And so suffryd him self to be enuolupped with so
great a folly that he could never draw hit out after: And than he returned
unto his ancient sorrows and fantasies in such wise that they appeared outward
etc:.

When they of Crete saw saturn so troublyde the most pryue of his secret
counceyll enployed them to comfort him. but hit helped nowht Ner they cowde
not get from his mouth the cause of such melancolye. unto the time that he
had determined in his heart that he should persecute unto the death his sone
Jupiter And than he did do assemble his princes and his councillors. and said
to them / I Charge and adjure you all by the names of all our glorious gods
that ye say to me the troth and auys / what thing shall or ought a king to
do with a man that he doubtyth by a dyuyne answer that has be said to him /
that this man shall put him out of his regne and kingdom / When they of Crete
had understand the charge and adiuracion of the king. they assemblyd hem self
at a counceyll And there they ordained and took oon that for all that other
should have charge to give this answer / Sire the counceyll know that long
synye had an answer of your god conteynyng that ye had engendrid a sone that
should put you out of your regne. And that dame cibell at that time was
desyuerid of Jupiter / The counceyll prays you. that ye will take heed. how
what time ye were depryued of your Crown and had lost hit / he delyueryd you
and made you quyt of all your enemies / if the cause of your Charge and
adiuracion touch not this matter The counceyll is of oppynyon / that if the
king have puyssance and might over him that he doubtyth / and that he have
cause euydent / A king than ought to keep him seur from that man for the
daungiers::.

CErtes said saturn thauys of the counceyll is reasonable ynowh / and for as
much as I must declare you and say you what I mean / I am the king that I
speak of / And the man that I doubt / is Jupiter my sone / that I fere and
dread much more than the death In so much that I may not endure ner take rest
for him. ffor slepyng I dreme that he ryseth against me / and assailleth me in
arms with great multitude of Archadyens and of epiryens. and rests vain
qucur and victorious over me / And waking I have all weie mine eeres opene for
to herkene and epsy / if he be about to come on me with men of arms / and
thus I can have no Soulas. Playr ner Rest / and am a man lost / This
consyderyd I will that he be ded. and I take the culpe and sin upon me / and
I will that ye know that I am your king and that ye to me owe obeissance /
and for that I comande you upon pain of death / that there be not oon man that
is so hardy to withsaye any thing contrary to my will / And that each of you
be to morn found ready in arms to fore this pallais for to socour and serve me
in this work which is the grettest thing that ever shall come to me:.

Ow they of Crete when they had herd the commandment of Saturn were sore
troublid and sorry / and how they meuyd hem self against Jupiter his sone:.
When they of Crete had herd the resolucion of saturn they were greatly
abashed. ffor they knew well that saturn took this matter greatly to his
heart. and that he was a terryble man to offend. And so they knew that
wrongfully he wyllyd the death of his sone Jupiter that had restored him to his
lordship by his prowess and vailliance / Many there were that went in to an
other kyngedom because they would not be with the fader against the sone ner with
the sone against the fader / but there was noman that durst be so hardy to
reply again saturn ner say that he did evil / for they dredde more his ire
than to offend Justice. what shall I say after the commandment of saturn /
each man withdrewe him unto his house full of great and bitter sorrow in heart.
And there was not oon man but he had his face charged with great greef and
pesaunt anoyau^ce etc::.

The day than drew over / And on the morn Saturn armed him self and sowned
Trompettis unto arms. They of crete aroos this morning And many there were of
them that knew thentenco^n of saturn. And also there were many that
meruailled of that / that the king would do and could find no reason wherefore
he maad this armee. ffor all Crete was in pees And all the tytannoys were
disparklid and put in to destruction perdurable / Among all other Cybell wist
not what to think Seeing that saturn sent not after Jupiter She demanded him
oftentimes whether he would goo. and for what reason that he took not Jupiter
with him in his compaygne. Jupiter was at that time in parthemye with his wife
Juno / When saturn had herd the demand of his wife Cybell / all his blood
began to change. and said to her that all in time she should know the place
where he would go to Cybell was wise and subtylle. when she herd the answer of
the king / and saw Incontinent the faco^n her heart gaf her that he had some
evil will. and had suspecion that he would do harm to Jupiter / wherefore she
went in to her chamber right pensyf. and at all adventure she sent hastily in
to parthemye and sygnefyed to Jupiter that he should depart hastily thens and
that she ymagyned that saturn his fader would do him displaysir / ffor he maad
right great assemble of men of arms. and there was no man that would tell the
cause wherefore::.

How king saturn with all his great oost came to fore the Cite of archade
against Jupiter his sone:.
Hit is to suppose that Jupiter had the heart right dysplaysant when he had
resseyuyd these tidings fro his mother cybell. and how well that she warned him
by supposyng / as she that wist not verily the will of the king / Allewey when
he consyderyd that he was not sent fore unto this armee he doubtyd him and
departed thens / and said to his wife Juno that he would goo unto archade
concludyng in him self that by this meue he should see the conduyte of his fader
and to what place he enployed his armee / but he was not far on his way /
when he restyd upon a montaygne and looked behynd / him that he saw the Cite of
parthemye / that anon was enuyroned and full of men of arms of king saturn
/ that gaf to him a great preef of thaduertysement of his mother / And for to
see what way he intended. he tarried still on the montaygne having his eyes
alwey unto the cite. And anon he saw his fader saturn mount in to his Chare
And all his arm issue out at the same gate where he came fro and took the same
way that he had taken. And that gaf him verily to understand and know that
his fader sought him. and so departed from this motaigne and went him to
Archade and told unto his sone and to the archadiens the cause wherefore he was
come and prayed hem that they would garnysshe hem of good armures to the end to
deffende their Cite if hit be need etc:..

THe archadyens at the request of Jupiter maad ready their arms and their cite
/ and sent out espies upon the way And anon after they were come from the
palais / the espies affermed to Jupiter and Archas that they had seen the
champaynes and the weyes of Archade all fulle of men of arms Anon was cried
in the Cite in the name of their souuerayn lord Jupiter that every man should
make good wache and keep his ward / with this cry the Archadiens armed hem
with helmes and arms of leder And went upon the walls and towers having in
their hands axes. / swerdes. guysarnes. glayues and maces And they had not
long tarried there. when they saw come from far two men of Crete which came
to the gate and axed of the portiers if Iupiteer were with June The porter when
he understood what they axed answered them that Jupiter was in the Cite / and if
they had to do with him they should find him in the pallays. where he passid
the time with his sone Archas / and that he was newly come in to the town to
visyte him. when they of Crete herd this they were sore troublid. ffor they
sought him that they would not find / Notwythstandyng they went in and passid
forth up to the pallays / And there fyndyng Jupiter with the nobles of archade
after the reuerens made that oon of them spoke and said. Sire we seek the / and
we have no will to find the / ffor we come aienst our will to execute a
commission by the which may sonner come ruin and trouble than peace Saturn thy
fader comandeth the that thou allone come speak with him he has sought them
all the places of parthemye / his daughter Juno thy wife not thynkyng evil.
has acertayned him that thou art come hither / he is comen after the in arms
/ And we know not what he thinks to do / he was never so angry ne tri^te ne
so fires as he is now we ben his servants / fforce has constrained us in his
obeyssance. and after this we give the day to appear in person to fore him
this same hour all excusacions cessyng etc:..

When Jupiter had retained and well put in his mind the adiournement with
his eyes full of teeris maad his answer and said thus I meruayll me of the
right strange conduyte of my fader / and parauenture hit is not with out great
cause his royame is in peace / And I have put and set him again in his
royame. And now he has put him self in arms with out my knowleche. And syn
sends for me that I should allone come speak with him / And that is to strange
a thing unto me. And he governs him not as he ought to do / ffor me ought to
preyse them that have deseruyd hit and be of valu. I have auayled him as much
as his royame is worth he has othertyme sent for me to make war / I wot
never now what evil will he has or may have to me. but here he is come with
his armee where he has no thing to do Notwithstanding he is come and demands
no thing but me aloonly All thing countyd and debatyd I have not Intencion
for to obey his comandeme^t how well that he is my fader for as much as the
suspecion is to much apparau^t / but I am content if he have to do with me to
serve him and to come to him by condition that I shall be accompanied of all
my friends that I can get and none otherwise::.

The two comyssaires with this word returned unto saturn and told him
thentencion of Jupiter / Saturn took right inpaciently the Answer of Jupiter
and approached unto Archade and besegyd hit with great oaths making his auowe
unto his gods. that if he may have Jupiter he with his hands would make
sacrefice of him. And than he sent of his most wise men and said to hem. that
in fell menaces they should go somone the king Archas / / and the archadiens
to yield and delyuere him Jupiter / Declaring openli that he were more his
enemy than his sone The wise men departed from the Oost at the commandment of
saturn / and did so her deuoir to somone the archadiens and said to the king
and people of Archade we be come unto you for as much as ye sustene Jupiter
whom the king saturn holds for his enemy. ^ if ye delyuere him unto saturn
ye shall be his friends And if not / he does you to wete that ye do keep you
with good wacche and ward / ffor he has not in the world gretter enemies than
you etc::.

By this mandement knew Jupiter that he was him self for whom satorne maad his
armee. The Archadiens assemblyd to council with out Jupiter and spoke of this
matter / and maad answer to the wise men of Crete / conteynyng how they were
bounden to serve Jupiter / and how they would keep him and live and dye with him
against all men above all other / when the wise men had their answer returned
unto saturn and told him the answer of tharchadiens / Anon hastily sore
achauffed be enflamyng of great ire. he commanded that the Cite should be
assaylled / And anon went to arms they of Crete in such wise / and
approached the wallys and muraill / that tharchadiens saw their enemies
approach anon they sowned to arms and came to the affraie and put hem to
defend their walls by great courage / tho was drawn and shot many an arowe
/ and many a stone cast and many beten and hurt as well with in as with out
gennes bombardes ne great artillery was none in this time in the royames /
allwey they of the cite had well the craft to cast upon their enemies brennyng
brondes and oilles and watres boillyng with ashes / and for to do thus
Jupiter had enduced and taught tharchadiens people men and women tht when they
of crete came most strong to thassault and supposid to have entryd the Cite
they were chargid with fire. oylles and skaldyng watres / that force
constrained them to go a back with great loss of peuple / And they souned the
retrayte / Saturn than taking the most sorwe of the world what for that he
might not furnysshe his pleasyr as for that by the walls lay more than
four.C. of his men ded And so returned in to his tente after thassault passing
sorrowful and desolate. And had so great anoye at his heart that he mochte
neither ete ner drink. but this notwithstanding he thought right well on his
hurt people and went to their tents. and did do mynystre medycynes unto them
that were hurt etc::.

How Jupiter sent his enbassadours to his fader saturn for peace. And how
saturn would here ner entende to peace etc::.
The Archadyens were passing Joyous when they saw and took heed how they of
Crete cessyd with shame their assault / after thassault and the retrayt of
both sides Allewey that Saturn intended to hele and give medecynes unto his
hurt men. Tthrchadyens assemblid a council And by great deliberaco^n they
sent seuyn of their honorable counceyllours in ambassade unto saturn / of
whom that oon spack and said / Saturn thou know and ought to know that
every king ought tentende to live in peace / ffor the most fair thing of the
world is peace Peace norysshyth prouffit by peace ar norysshid men and children /
towns and cytees ar united and knet to geder by charity. and anexed by amerous
co^mynycacion. by peace the royames prouffyten en decoracion and bildyng fair
houses In labor and ereyng the earth and in length of life / By peace the man's
bodies ben hole and quy^te. And hit is that thing that causes a man to
demand souerainte. O saturn hit seems that thou rekkest not of this good
virtue / for regnyng in peace and tranquyllite their is no king ner prince that
dar show him against thee / Thou have not only troublid thy royalme / thou art
abuser of war for to have peace a man ought to put him and dispose him to
the war / thou do all otherwise. Ne see not that thy sone Jupiter has
delyueryd the from the bonds of thyn other enemies. And has set thy dyademe
in a seuerte of peace where thou might not do with out him / Ne see thou not
for to make him war / thou ne may have peace / And that thou destroyest and
brekest this peace / Ne see thou not that this is thy sone / Ne see thou not
that thou art a monstre in nature / The fadres naturelly love their children /
the same wise rude and brute bestes keep and hold this condycion of nature /
Thou sekest and would destroy the blood of thy sone / And from whens comes
this dysnaturell appetyte / Might hit not satysfye to thyn appetyt and o^de
error the goodness and well that thou have received late in reysyng / been thyn
Interyor rancours permanent shall thy fantasyes never cesse / shall thou be in
Age less and sympler than a child / the more that men grow in age / the more
be they wise / Thou have less knowleche now / than thou had in thy
paryllous yougth and fro whens comes this deffaulte / is this by the heavenly
Influence / if hit be thus / where is rayson where is equity / where is the love
of the fader to the sone / know thou not that ne had Jupiter thy sone ben /
thou had ben yet in great derkenes languysshyng / I sygnefye the as aduocat
of Jupiter that he loves the as his owen fader / And furthermore I pray the /
that thou will be in peace. And if thou will him no good yet at the least will
him no harm ner encombrau^ce::.

I Should be sone vaynquysshyd Answered Saturn if thexperience of the life of
Jupiter came not to my sight See I not how he enhaunceth him self the most he
can see I not how the people by his fair and blandisshyng words owe him more
favor than me / see I not that he flees from me. if he be not culpable
werfore flees he / he shall say to the people that he is Innocent Say ye that
he has no thing don against me / I wot never how tharchadiens understand. but
if I may ones set my hand on them. there was never so great myschef as shall
come unto Archade. And y have not thentencion to depart from this place tyl^ I
have put in pardurable r^yne this cite rebel against me and my comandemens Sire
Answered the Archadiens syn that fair speech may not refreyne thy passing great
Ire^^nto thy war be war / keep the well from us and us from the / syn the
matter shall take his course in this party god speed the right and fortune / we
shall not long draw the festue hit is concluded that tharchadiens and Jupiter
shall issue to morn out of the cite. And if they find any that assaylle them.
they will defend their lives This word accomplisshid Saturn turned his back
to tharchadiens shaking his head / And tharchadiens returned in to their Cite
and reherred and told from the beginning to the ending all that they had
founden And by there report hit was confermed that the day following they should
issue out of the cite in such wise as they had purposyd among hem etc::.

IVpiter had great displaisir in him self of that he saw that his fader was so
grieved and would not be content / yet notwythstandyng he doubtyd not so much
that he ne took courage to him. and said he was more holden to keep his life
than to obey the evil will of his fader / that hated him at his burthe. This
night passid over / anon after that the son clered and light the air /
about the third hour of the day Archas Jupiter and the men of war of the
Cite went hem in to the field in good ordenance. and than they were not so
sone issued of the gates / that they ne were seen of the saturnyens that waited
after hem by the commandment of saturn. and so began each again other a great
bruyt and noise that it resouned unto the Montaignes and walls. And than they
began tassayle tharchadyens by shot and stones so certainly that when Jupiter
saw that there was none other remedy but to fight / he put him forth formest
in the front to fore / and so began to smite on them that sought him cryyng
with an hye wis. lo here is Jupiter / each man do to him what he may

And thus began the dolourous bataill of saturn and Jupiter / there was the
fader against the sone and the sone against the fader / There lost nature her
fair and recomaunded propertes. The fader sought the blood that he had
engendryd. And promysid great yeftes unto them that might take him / The
battle was rygourous and hard. And than wrought and fought well Jupiter and
Archas. and soueraynly the noble Jupiter enploied so hardly his swerd temprid
with stele that he smote down sheldes and helmes and cut of heedes and arms
/ and there was no man might resist his prowes Inuyncible. he made to tremble
the most hardiest that were there / he made resort and to go abacke them that
had auaunced them self more than they had power and virtue. he brak the wings
of the battle And in their most strength he entrid and encountryd many times
saturn his fader / and was well in his power and puyssance to grieve him. but
how wel^ that saturn cast on him and gaf him great strokes and grievous
horions. yet he would never smite again but said to him often times. Alas my
fader wherefore sekest thou theffusion of my blood. I am thy sone and thy
servant. Thou have no cause to persecute me / I shall not enploye mine hand
upon the. but beware and take no fyance in the archadiens. ffor if they may
have and get the in her power thou shall find in them little pity ne mercy
etc::.

Saturn notwythstandyng these fair words would never refrain his Ire but
smote ever up on Jupiter also fiersly as he mocht / Jupiter of all his strokes
took non head and set lityll there by And how wel^ that he had concyence to
fight and smite his fader / yet allewey he turned his strokes and had no
co^cience to occupy his trenchant swerd upon them of Crete. so fermly that
every struck with out fault was dyed with new blood. And for to do so he
enforced him self to show hit to saturn that he faught against him in vayn.
and that to him was no thing Inpossible. In all these things saturn took no
regard ner ensample. The Cry was great about Jupiter / the arms were
gretely exercysid. the ground was all coueryd with theffusion of blood. And the
deed bodies lay oon upon an other beheded and smyten in pecys / O right hard
and sore battle / Saturn was so enuolupped in his obstynacion that the blood
of his men wetyng his arms by the course of the large wounds that Jupiter maad
unto them might not modere his ire ner heart / And his eyes were so blind in
his Ire that he saw naught his right euydent domayge. where he sought the
propre Moyen by which he was put out of his Royame that he dowbtyd and against
which he entendid to resist and eschew with his might:.

How Jupiter vaynquysshid the battle against saturn his fader / and saturn
fledd by the sea::.
IN this battle Jupiter sauved often times Saturn among the glaiues of
tharchadiens / and did good against evil / many of them of crete fought
against heart knowing that saturn had meuid and was cause of the war And
how well they put their hands to work / yet alleway the variaco^n that they
had among them was cause of the loss of right great nombre of people / and
they doubtyd Jupiter and they had no power to withstand and fight / in such
wise as they would have don if they had had or felt her querele good / And by
this manner was the bataill demenyd to the great preiudyce of the saturnyens /
Jupiter put him self in deuoyr unto his fader / And often times Cried in his ere
that he should wythdrawe him er the battle went worse or be lost* And wythstood
his strokes a great while / Awaytyng that he would conform and convert him
self fro his evil oppynyon. But than at last when Jupiter took head and saw
that he would in no wise here him / He opende and desployed his virtue and the
great might of his arms and of his swerd. and maad such affray unto his
adversaries. brekyng their helmes and hewyng their harnoys. not in manner of a
man having alday sustained the feet And great strokes and peysant of the
saturnyens / but in the manner of a Champion ffresshe and new of whom the
strookes redowblid:..

THus than hit seemed unto the saturnyens that in multiplieng of horions and
strokes the strength and puissance of Jupiter began to norissh and grow. His
well doing and vayllyance gaf unto tharchadyens strength upon strength. And
unto his enemies great loss of blood and also of life. there was the ground
bedewed with new blood. there were the ded bodies coueryd with new ded men.
there was the Chare of saturn smyten in to pieces. Saturn held a long while
the bataile. also long as his might would endure and in no wise would flee / but
in conclusion when his men saw that the thing went for them allewey from
evil in to worse. they began to flee And turned the back and fled / And than
Saturn turned and fled also in like wise. Tho they were followed in the
chasse so asperly and dedly. that some were slain in the way And some sauyd hem
self now here and now there / And among all other Saturn was so nyhe
poursiewyd by Archas and some of tharchadyens that he had no leyser to return
in to Crete. but was driven by force till he came unto a port of the sea that
was there by. where he sauyd him self by moyen of a ship that he there fond /
And there he went unto the sea with some of them that fled so sore greuyd and
anoyed that he moght not speak etc::.

THus this battle ended of the fader and the sone / when Archs saw that
saturn was sauyd in the sea / he returned to Jupiter his fader that assemblid
again his people and told him these tidings / And also more over he assemblid
his counceil^ for to wete what Jupiter should do / and they of the counceyll
were all of the oppynyon that Jupiter should goo in to Crete. and that they would
make him king Sayyng that the gods had showed clerly that they would that he
should succeed as king in the royame / whereof his fader was fled fro and also
for so much as they had than no heed To this counceill accorded Jupiter / and
went to Crete / by space of time where he was resseyuyd for king / ffor the
cytezeyns durst not agaynsaye hit for as much as they wiste never where saturn
was become / And how well that Cibel^ and vesca maad great sorrow for the
Infortune of saturn Allewey they turned their sorrow in to gladness at the
coronacion of Jupiter. and sent after Juno / And than began Jupiter to regne
in desirybuyng and departing unto the Archadyens the tresours of his fader /
whereof they had great Joy and gladness / and for this cause sayen the poettes.
that Jupiter geldyd his fader and cast his genytoyrs in to the sea. of whom
was engendryd venus / That is to say that he castyd the tresours of his fader
in to the belyes of his men / whereof engendryd all delectacion which is
comparyd and lykenyd unto venus etc

Hw Acrisius had a daughter named danes / the which he did do shette in a tour
for as much as he had an Answer that she should have a sone the which should
torn him in to a stone etc::.
IN these days when Jupiter of Crete flourysshid in honor strength prowess
and vaylliance. In the Cite of Arges reigned the right mighty king Acrisius /
that his daughter Danes did do beshitte and kept in a tour / ffor to know the
genealogye of this king acrysius in this party hit is to be noted that of
Jupiter born of archade and of a damoysell named ysis came a sone named Epaphus.
This epaphus engendryd a sone and a daughter the sone was named belus and
reigned in a party of Egypt: And the daughter had to name Libye. and dwelled
in Affryque where she conceyuyd a sone named Busiers that was an vnhumayn
tyrant. as shall be said here after in the deeds of hercules / Belus than
engendrid two sons. Danaus and Egistus. danaus had fifty daughters. and
Egistus had as many sons. And thise sons and doughtres were conjoined to
geder by marriage wenyng Egistus right well to have married his sons but he was
deceived of his wenyg. ffor danaus for envy and couetyse to have the
succession. maad that by his daughters traitorously should be murdryd all fyfty
sons of the said egistus the first night of their esponsailles as they slepte.
and all they concentid in this foul horrible crime and sin / exept oon
allone named ypermestra. which had a steadfast heart of pity. ffor when she
should have persecutid her husbond linceus she saved him his life mercifully. And
also conceived of his seed a sone that was named Abas. that after was king of
Arges / And he engendryd the king Acrysyus whereof is maad mention in the
beginning of this Chappitre / These were the parents and progenytours of king
Acrysius. he was right puyssant in richesse / But he named him self pour. ffor
he had no Children but oon daughter only which was named Danes / but for to
have a sone / he went day by day in to temples and oracles of the gods / And
there made many prayers and sacrefices ynowhe fastings almesses and other
suffrages / All these things might not help ner bring to exaudycion the
accompllysshement of his desire / His wife came unto her bareyn years And than he
was out of all hope to have any child maale / and than he confortyd him in
danes his daughter / And set his love so greatly in her / that he had no
pleasance but only to behold her / and that he purposyd that never noman shod
have her ner wedde her but if he were the most noble and vayllyant man of the
world / but for as much as in this world is no thing pardurable / This love
was of lityll enduryng. and that by the purchase of the king Acrysius / ffor as
the love that he had in danes grew in ampliacion of naturell Ielowsie / / he
went him in to thoracle of god Belus his old grauntfader / And serchyng what
should be the destynee of his daughter / he did him to be answered that of her
should come a Sone that should torn him in to stone etc:::::.

By this answer Acrysius began to fall from the great love that he had in his
daughter / he retornyd sorofull and pensyf in to his hows and becam all
melancolik with out taking Joy ne plaisir in any thing that he saw. his
daughter was than young. he saw her often times. otherwhile in cruelte and
some time in pite / the remors of that that he trowed to be transformed in to
stoon by him that by destine should be born of his daughter / meuyd him to a
cruelte in such wise that often times he determined that he would put her to
death And so to spille his blood to the end for to remedy his Infortune / but
when he had take in his hand the glayue wherwyth he wened to slay her / Nature
began to meddle and put him between both. And of this cruelte he maad him to
condescende to pity. and to put a way his glayue. and to late the shedyng of
her blood. that was come of his own blood the which should come to the
succession of his crown which his ancient progenytours had ordained to fore
etc::.

For to say the verite this king Acrisyus from thens forth took his rest
trauerse of many syghis. he could not be assured. his daughter grew and becam
a woman she was passing fair and right well adressid / many kings and great
ertheli lords desired to have her in marriage and would endowe her with noble
Crowns. but the king Acrisius refused all them that required her And ymagyned
that his daughter for her great beawte might be taken away and rauysshed. by
which she might by adventure have a sone that should torn him in to stone. And
to the end to eschew this parcill and danger / he thought that he would make
a tour the strengest of the world And that in the same tour should his daughter
(...) closed and shette during her life with out coming of any man to her / ffor
he was so Ielous of her that he be leuyd her not well when he saw her / In the
end he sent for werkemen and forgiers of stele and of copper from all
parties. And brought hem unto a strong place all enuyronned with waters where
was no enter but in oon place etc:::::..

When he had brought theder all his werkemen he said to them that he would have
a tour made all of copper with a gate departed from the tour for to put In
four and twenty men of arms for to keep the tour if hit were need / the
werkemen bargayned with the king Acrisyus to make the tour and the gate / they
set on hand to the work / the towr was maad by process of time And than
when all was achieued. Acrisyus brought / theder his daughter with out latyng
her know his entencion. And also sone as she was in the tour he said to her /
My only daughter hit is comen unto my knowleche / that in serchyng thy
prosperyte to my god belus / I have been advertised that of the shall come a
sone which shall convert and torn me in to stone ^ Thou know that every
man naturelly coueytyth and desires thenduryng to live in his life / I love the
passing well / and no thing in the world so much sauf my life / But certain my
life touches more ner to my heart / than thy love / wherefore I sekyng and
requyryng the remedies against mine predestynat Infortune / I would neur give the
in marriage to any man that has required or desired the. Also to the end that
generation descend not of thy body / And that thou sholdest have no knowleche
of man during my life / I have do forgid this tour of copper / and will that
thou be closed and shytte therein. And that no man see the / I pray the my
daughter accord the unto my will and desire. And take pacyence in this place
for to pass thy time. I shall do accompanye the with many noble virgynes. And
shall give unto the all that / that thou can or may thenke etc:.

When the noble damoysell Danes understood the will of her fader she beheld
the tour of copper for to keep her shitte fast therein. And further she
conciderid that she should never marye during the life of her fader the king.
she was sore troubled in these things. And by great bitterness and sorrowful
heart began to weep and said / Alas my fader am I born under so unhappy
constellacion for to be a marteresse and prisonner / not in the end of mine
years. but in my young time Not in a prison of stone or of syme^t but in a tour
of copper and laton in such wise as I should dwell therein perpetuelly My fader
what have thou thought. thou enterpretest evil the sentence of the god belus
sayng that of me shall be born a sone that shall torn them to stone. ffor by
this sentence. ought none other thing be understand. but that I shall have a
sone that shall regne after the. And shall torn them to stone. That is to say
that he shall put the in to thy sepuliure.. behold than what symplesse shall
hit be to the to hold me thus enfermed and shitte in this tour My daughter
answered Acrisius thou interpretest the prenosticacion of our god belus after
that the likes to thy Joy and prouffyt hit lies me sore on my heart if thou
have a sone / he shall put me to death and that is my Judgment / ne wythsaye
no more against me I am thy fader / lord and master over the / thou shall
abide here either by love or otherwise / At this conclucion when danes saw
that she might not content her ferfull fader / as wise and sage as she was she
agreed and accorded to do his playsyr / Sayng hit with the mouth and not with
the heart / And than the king sent for virgynes and also old matrones in
all the royame about / And delivered his daughter unto them for to accompanye
serve and keep / and maad hem all to be shette and closed / After he took leave
of them comandyng upon pain of death / that they ne souffryd any man to come
and speak with his daughter with out his wytyng and knowleche / when he had
thus done he returned in to the cite of arges. and assemblid forty strong
women / which he gaf wages and sowldye and sent hem to keep the gate and the
enter of the tour And than aroos the renomee of these things in so great a
sou^n and noise that all greece was full of the meruaylles and there was no king
ne prince / that ne complained the loss of the youth of fair danes than holden
and named the most fair of all the grekesses / daughter of the king etc::::

How Jupiter in gyse of a messanger brought unto the tour of darrayn to the
damoyselles and to danes many Jewels faynyng that he came from Jupiter::.
By this tour and by this moyen Acrisyus thought to overcome his pdestynat
Infortune / and was well cased that his daughter was in so seur a place / All
the world spacke of her and of her tour by compassion they co^playned her / hit
was so much spoken of this caas that Jupiter had his eeres full thereof. And
not only his eeres but also and his heart. ffor in heryng the recomendacion of
thexcessiue perfeccion of this virgyne Danes. he was amourous of her so gretli
and desirously like as the marriage of him and Juno had be consumed. And than he
began with all his heart to thenke how and when and in what manner he might
come to see this damoysell danes. And so much he thought and studied in this
matter / that there was none other thing that he would here of ner no deuyses of
his men. save only of them that spoke of the prison of danes And he spak gladly
and devised with good will coueytyng Instantly to be with her / And that as
well in the psence of Juno as other wise. which said many times. that he would
that the gods would give him grace and power to bring this damoysell danes
out of the tour etc::

By this mean and these deuyses Juno was in doubt and began to feel the first
sparklis of Jealousy castyng Infynyte curses and malediccions upon danes / and
upon all them that had sown these tidings to fore her husbond not only in
covert and in her stomach / but more openly in the presence of her husbond
showing euydently that she had thataynte of Ielowsie. This notwithstondyng
Jupiter ne was the less desirous for to see danes than he was to fore / the
malediccions ne curses might not let ne withdraw his affeccions / which
grew more and more. In the end he fond him self so surmounted that there was
no more contynence founden. And that in the diffinyco^n to devise entencions
and conclusions he concluded to go unto the gardyens and kepars of the
damoysell danes and that he would bear unto them so largely and so many owches
of gold and Jewels with monye of gold that he would torn hem with his yeftes to
acorde to him and late him enter in to the tour of danes / Than he sent for
the Iewellers tht were wont to serve his fader saturn And maad hem make the
most rich bagues and owches that were ever seen or thought when the werkmen
me had made apartye / / Jupiter took hem and charged him with all / And evil
clothed like as he had been a servant allone departed from crete and drew him
to Arges the most secretli that he might / and so went and came sechyng the
tour of darayn. which he fond in an euenyng and saw the walls shynyng and
came unto the gate where he fond many of the matrones syttyng at the door for
recreacion etc::.

When Jupiter was comen he salewed the Matrones and said unto them. Noble dames
the good night come to you / / what tour is this that is so noble and of so
strong facion. ffayr sone said the eldest of them. ye be not of this contre
for as much as ye know not the name of this tour / know ye certainly that
hit is named the tour of darayn / and this is the propre place that the king
Acrisius has do make for to keep his daughter the virgyne danes / which is
accomplisshed of all virtues and honorable manyers that her like is not in all
this world / But the pour maid is so much Infortunat / that her fader
acrisius holds her in this tour shitte for that he had an answer of his
gods that of his doughteer danes should be born a child that should torn him
in to stone This is the cause wherefore we ben and keep her that no man ne
converse with her in no faco^n And her fader is the king Acrisius which is so
sore smeton to the heart with Ielowsye that if he knew of your being here. he
would send to destroy you. And therefore withdraw you and goth forth on your
way. Jupiter heryng the answer of the woman gaf no regard unto her words.
saving his eeres / ffor he enploied his eyes unto the regard of the tour / And
seeing that hit was Imprenable for any assault As well for the strength of the
place where hit was founded on. as for that hit was nyghe the Cite of Arges
which was right strong / he considered in him self that for to come and see
this maid he could not obtain but by the moyen of these women. And than thus
answered to the old woman. I thank you of your good advertisement I am much
beholden unto you / but I shall yet say more unto you. if hit plese you. I am
sent unto the damoyselles of this place fro the right mighty king Jupiter of
Crete for to delyuere to them certain presents on his behalue. wherefore I pray
you that hit please you to give me assistence anenst them / when the old
matrone understood of Jupiter and that he brought presents unto the
damoiselles she answered him that he was right welcome / And maad him to enter
in to a lityll chamber which was by the gate for to speak therein to her
friends when they came to visit them. And than she went in to the chamber of
danes. and there assemblid all the women of the place and said unto them. My
felawes the king Jupiter of Crete greteth you well by oon of his ser^auntes /
whom I have put in to the chambret of the yate / he has said to me that he
has brought certain presents. See ye now whether ye will resseyue hem or not
and what I shall answer to the messanger etc::.

THe damoyselles were right Joyous and glad when they herd these tidings and
took their counceyll to gyder / and concluded that they would take and resseyue
these presents of the king Jupiter / Than they descended in to the chambrete
and fested the mesager which did hem reverence. and said to them. Ladies and
damoyselles your renomee is so great that hit has meuyd the king Jupiter to
desire your love / In sign of which he has sent to you of his Jewels. and
prays you to resseyue them in thank And that he recomandyth him unto the
right noble grace of your maistres the kings daughter / with these words
Jupiter opend his sack of lether wherein were his Jewels and delivered them
unto the damoyselles when they had resseyued them and seen them what they were
/ they were all abashed for to see things so precious and said that they would
goo and show hem to their maistresse / And forthwith they went up in to the
tour and showed their present unto danes / Sygnefyyng her that the king
Jupiter recomandyd him unto her noble grace / Also sone as this noble virgyne
had seen these Jewels / She said that hit must needs be that Jupiter was rich
and large and that the yeft that he had yeuen was more of value than all the
royame of arges / and also that she would that the man that had brought these
Jewels were fested as hit apperteyneth and also thanked in her name. Than the
damoyselles by the commandment of danes went to feste the messanger of king
Jupiter the best wise that they might the most part of the night in mete and
drink / And than came the aged woman that had first spoken with him and said to
him. My sone the maiden danes thanketh the king Jupiter of the courtoysie that
hit has plesid him to do to her damoyselles. And she takes her self greatly
beholden to him and to you that have taken the pain to bring them / if there
may please you any thing here in. spare not this house::

DAme answered Jupiter ye do me to much honor that oon half / if there be any
thing in crete to your pleasir. Axe ye hit / and certainly ye shall be served
with good heart. And than they talked so long that hit was time to wythdrawe
him Jupiter took leave of the damoyselles and concluded that he would return in
to his contre on the morn erly. what shall I say more Jupiter took this night
as much rest as he might. and had the heart so surprised that he awoke more
than he neded for the hour was not come for that he attended for to speak to
danes / He returned secretli in to Crete And did do make new Jewels much more
rich and more precious than the other were for to go a gayn and present to
the damoyselles / and as soon as was to him possible. he gadrid to geder as
many as would charge an horse. After this on a morning erly he laded an horse with
these Jewels. and with out wetyng of any person / with the same he so
labored that with out adventure he came unto to the tour / And there assemblid
the damoyselles and did hem reverence and said to them / Ladies and
damoyselles the king Jupiter has you so in his grace that knowing by the
report of me what feste and Joy ye maad late of his Jewels / he has sent
unto you / and in his name I present to you these Jewels that I have now
brought / prayng that the present may be acceptable and agreeable / and that
hit plaise you to do so much unto your maistresse ^ that I might a litil^
speak with her for to advertise her if hit plaise her of certain secret
things that towche her / and whereof I am charged by Jupiter:.

How Jupiter in the guyse of a messanger with many Jewels came the second time
to see danes / and how he spacke and gaf her in knowleche what he was and how
he lay with her the same night::.
When Jupiter had achieuyd his purpoos / he desploied his merceryes / and when
the matrones had understand of Jupiter that he desired to have grace to speak
with danes / They went unto the maid by the counceil^ of the old woman for
to have her oppynyon / and coming with hem the old woman she had the words
for hem all / And said my daughter the king Jupiter has sent hither the
burden of a horse of the most fairest Jewels that ever ye saw / Certes hit is
a tryumphe to see them / notwithstanding we durst not resseyue them for as
much as the messanger requires to speak with you / which is us defended by
your fader / See what we shall do. we ben greatly beholden unto the king
Jupiter of his courtosies. but when we behold the strait commandment of your
fader. we wit never what to do. When the maiden danes had herd the words and
the tidings of the old woman She was right pensyf. but not for that she ne
spared not to say that. that her heart Iugged her And thus answered. My mother
ye know well and hit needs not to tell you. that he that does show love
and curtoisie. ought to be than kyd by semblable. The king Jupiter as ye have
to me said has often times done for us. the first good comes from him. me
thinks under all correccions. that we may well suffer him speak with me / Hit
is a lityll thing of his servant or varlet. the king my fader shall never
know hit / hit is no need that he know all that shall fall. but first show
to him. how hit is defendid you upon the life that no man speak with me. And
make him promise and swear that he shall keep this thing secret etc::.

THe damoisels and the old woman Ioious of thanswer of the maid went down
from the tour unto the gate. And fyndyng Jupiter besy to desploye and vnbynd
his Jewels / the old woman said unto him / ffair sone the king Jupiter has
founden more grace here in this place anenst the maid danes than all the men
in the world. Nevertheless ye ought to know that upon pain of death. hit is to
you defended and to other by us. And we ben also defended upon the same pain
by the king Acrisius. that we shall late no man living speak with her / The
comaundeme^t of the king is so great. And your request is not lityll Certes
we dar not bring you unto her all thing concyderid. ffor if hit were known
with out fault we should be all put in to the ffyre. And perauenture if ye were
founden here with in by the king that comes often times hither he would put
you to death / wherefore we pray you that hit please you to excuse us a yenst
your maystre / By the comprysyng of this answer Jupiter fond naught that he
sought / And than he held him more ner in dyspayre than he did in hope. but
he remembrid that a beggar should not go away for ones warnyng / And said unto
the old woman to the beginning of her answer / Dame ye do well if ye fere and
dread the king / which is to me no meruayll / All way his commandment is not
so strayt / but that ye may enlarge hit if ye will / he has deffended that
none shall speak with her / The king Jupiter requires that his servant may
say to her sertayn things secret towchyng her honor / ye shall do that
pleseth you but in troth if ye acorde him his request / the accord shall not
be preuidyciable to you in any thing. ffor the king Jupiter is no pletar and
knows so much of the world / that unto you he had not sent me if he had not
found me secret / And thus if ye would do to him any pleasyr ye have none
excusacion reasonable / None knows hereof but ye and I / if I speak unto the
Maid by your consent / who shall accuse us / hit shall not be ye for the
matter touches you / And hit shall not be.I. nor the king Jupiter / ffor
sartaynly we had lever dye in sorofull death and also abide indeffamable pain
etc::::::..

FAir sone answered the old woman / ye speak so swetly / tht we may not / ner
can give unto you the reffuse of your request we dare well affye and trust in
you. Alas dame answered Jupiter doubt ye / when I shall fawte against you or any
other / / I be smyten with the thonder and tempeste I would veritably that ye
had the prerogatyf to know the humayn thoughts to the end that in Iugyng of
my courage by your Judgment were the maid assured not to have by my cause any
Inconuenyence / with these words Jupiter drew to his will the old woman and
all the damoyselles as well by his subtle langage as by his richesses / ffor
short process the old woman accorded to Jupiter that he shall have the grace
to speak with the maid. And brought him to fore her with all his presents /
Jupiter had than more Joy than I can write And when he was thus above in the
tour of darayn in beholding the ample beaulte of danes his Joy dowblid / and
he knew her lightly by her beawte. And made unto her reverence sayng. Right
noble and right accomplisshid damoysell the king Jupiter saleweth you by me.
And sends unto the women of this house of such goods as fortune has given
to him. if hit be your pleasir they shall receive them. And after I shall say
unto you certain things secret which the king Jupiter your servant has
chargyd me to say unto you. My friend answered danes sauf your honor the king
Jupiter is not my servant / but I my self am beholden to him and am his
servant / And thank him of the largesses that seems as he had reyned gold in
this place. hit is right agreeable to me tht the women of this tour have your
present / And hit pleseth me well also to here your charge. to the end that
king Jupiter say not that I were unkind etc::.

THe Matrones and the damoiselles were present at this answer / Jupiter
deliuerid unto them his Jewels which they resseyued with great gladness / After
that. danes took the mesanger by the hand and lad him a part unto the beds
side where she maad him to lene by her / And than when Jupiter fond him so
allone with danes / he said unto her / Right noble damoyselle / I shall no more
call you damoyselle but lady. ffor ye ar my lady and my only maystresse which
have maistred mine heart / and also have overcome me under the sown and bruyt
of your glorious loos and name / ffor to aduertyse you verily I am Jupiter / of
whom now I have spoken to you at the presentacion of the Jewels / And hit is
troth that hit is not long sythen when I was in my royame / for to here
reported the manner how your fader held you shette in this tour with lityll
good that may acorde unto your honor / as well as for to get your thank and
grace. as for pity where with I was meuyd / I have delyberid in my heart to
employe my self unto your delyuerance and also for to get your grace / and for
to execute this deliberaco^n / I have taken party of my tresours and am come
hither to psent them unto your damoiselles / and so departid and of new am
comen again in hope to have your love / and whereof I am well content and
thank mercy and fortune Alas madame if I am so hardy as for to have put my
self in thauenture of my life for to show the great love tht I have in you /
excuse me. if I have entreprised thing so hye that I ne me hold worthy to
touch hit but in the affyance of fortune and in so much as she will me favor
in this pertye / madame than in the concideracion of my words. ye may see my
life as my death And ye only may ligtly make the Judgment if your humylite
condescende in the knowleche of pity that I have had of you / disposing my self
in to the dahger / where I might be sure. I am now nyhe the Ieoparde which ye
may save And if not I yield me your prysonner Certes the shynyng resplendissour
of your renomed beawte. whereof the deed passes the renome and the tryumphe of
your Incompared excellence has enrached mine heart And has brought me hither
in to the prison of your will. Alas madame behold ande see with your eyes full
of swetenes and of clemence me which sees not at this time / but languysshe
in f^ute of rest in contynuell trauayll in furies redowblyd and in sighs upon
sighs which may not be pourueied of remedy but by your benyngnite and
amorous purueyance.

AT the beginning of the first recomendacyon that was maad of you in my
presence. And at the point that I entreprised to delyuere you out of this tour
/ I held me self right ewrous and happy be cause of so hye an enterprise. but
seeing the parels where I find only my self syn / I wot never what I may say
of my self. ffor by month upon month. weke upon weke And day upon day your
name has had domynacion on me. And often times has constraynd me to be
rauysshed and yet more in a trance be desire to speak to you. and to ymagyne
how I should come to the point where I now am. And not only in this. but also to
find mercy in you. And I pray and require you right humbly that the amerous
yefte of mercy ye will to me acorde / and thus doing ye shall do mercy to your
self and have pity of your young days which ye have consentyd to lose / by
the folyssh fantasies of the king your fader / ye know well that his life
during he shall not suffer you to be married to any man. hit is possible that
your fader shall live as long as ye / ffor he is strong of members hard and
boistous / Also ye ought conceive if ye will believe me / that your life has no
welthe ne playsanse only / the playsances come unto the people by the sight and
by beholding of dyuerce things / the women syngulerly have their pryncypal^
plaisus in her husbondes and in her generaco^n and lignyes ye ne may come here
to / but if ye have mercy on your self / Is hit not in your consait and
knowleche that no man has but his life in this world / ffor as much as ye
obeie and complaise the folish commandment of your fader the king Acrisius /
ye shall be a woman lost being in this place / hit is not possible to take and
have patience / This is to hard a thing unto a young heart to be put in prison
with out demerite / I know the humayn affeccions and understand that
naturelly every creature loves his prouffit to fore the prouffit of an other /
This is against your prosperity and vtilite that ye be shitte here with Inn /
how may ye have love unto him which is cause of two euillis. the less evil
is to chese syn that ye feel you condemned here unto the end of the days of
your fader / dowte ye not but his end is often desired to his myschef for your
sake. and his meschief may not ye do be don with out great charge of
conscience / me thinks that better hit were for you in dyuerce facions to
find manner to issue and go out of this place / and to take to husbonde some
man noble and puyssant / that would entreprise to carye you awey secreth for to
be his wife in his country / by this moyen ye shall be delivered fro the pain /
where ye be in / ye should eschew the death of your fader / And less evil ye
should do in fleyng his folissh commandment than to abide in the point where he
has put you / Madame alas think ye hereon for your honor and health as I
have said you I am your servant / and if hit please you to depart from this
place / ye shall find no man redyer than I am for to keep you and conduyte I
give my self unto your noble comandementes for to furnissh your will to my
power / as he that bears allewey the remembrance of you in the most deppest
place of my mind In slepyng I see you and wakyng I think on you I have had
never rest in my self ner never shall have but if hit plese you that my
fortune my destynee my hap or unhappy come of you / if ye take me unto your
mercy / and that I find grace anenst you I shall be the most happyest of all
happy and if ye do otherwise / hit may be said that among all unhappy none
shall go to fore me / but when such fortune shall come to me by your rygour I
shall take hit in patience for the Noblesse that I see in you allewey I require
you that my heart be not pryued ne put from yowr heart. For as much as hit
touches me / All the tongues of. men can not say ner express the quantite of
the love that I have in you / no more than they can pronounce by propre names /
all the sterres of heuene / by this love I am allewey in thoughts laboureus.
en sighis anguysshous and often times in great fere and doubt And at this our
I wot never whether I live or not / how well me thinks I am here for to
resseyue absolucion or mortal^ sentence Thise things considered alas will not
ye have him in your grace That for to deserve your love and mercy has
abandouned and auentured his life as ye may see / leuyng his ryall astate for
the better to keep his caas secret / unto an heart well understanding few
words suffisen / For conclusion I pray you to give your heart unto him. that
has given his unto you. and that ye pourueye from hens forth for the loss
where ye now be Inn after the common Judgment

WIth this Jupiter held his pees and kept scilence and intended his eeres for
to here what should be thanswere of danes / The right noble damoysell when she
had herd his purpo^s. which she had sore noted And when she saw that he had
given her place to speak / how wel^ she was right assewred. she changed color
and said to him / Sire king alas know ye well what should be the renome that
should believe with me. if I should believe your counceyll / what should the people
say. madame answered Jupiter / the worste tht they may say shall be tht men
shall name you dysobeyssant unto the folissh commandment of your fader / which
as all the world knows that he ho^^eth you folily in his prison here fast
shitte in / And if ye wole thus help your self and stele your self away / men
should b^t lawhe for your yougthe should excuse your feet. and ye should be
renomed to have d^n this fette by great wisdom / A sire said danes ye wene to
desceyue me by your fair and sweet words / I know the spekinges of the
argiens and also I know tht I am bounden to obey my fader / and forthermore I
am not so ignorant but that I would well have some noble man to my husbond but
that mine honor were saved / and also that more is I knowleche tht I am greatly
beholden to him that has departed here with in so largely of his tresours and
Jewels / and in likewise unto you if hit be truth that ye be he that ye say
that ye ar / but when I have all known and understood And seen visibli that
thargiens should deffame me to perpetuite And that my fader should have sent me
where mine honor should strongly be defowled and put under foot. And also that I
have none other knowleche of you / but by your propre declaracion I will in no
wise abuse you. ner ye shall have no destourbance for my cause but I pray you
to think on other part and that ye late and suffer me only with my felawship
and friends etc.:.

MAdame answered Jupiter be ye in dowte of me that I am not Jupiter king of
crete if I be other all the gods confound me and the thonders fall on me /
the swalowe of the sea resseyue me. And that I be given to mete unto the most
venymous bestes of the world. O madame put no suspecion in my feet. as I have
said to you. I am comen to you not in ryall astate / but in simple array / for
to conduyte my things more secretly / yet at the least / at this first time
accord ye my request / take ye day of advise / and that to morn I may speak
ones to you. and ye shall counceylle you well this night.

THe noble maid danes had than the blood esmeuyd that with great pain she
wiste not what to do she durst not behold Jupiter. For shame smote her in the
eyes. This not withstandyng her heart commanded her to see what man he was / And
whether he had the chyere of a noble man or of a king At hardest she took day
of aduys / And accorded to him that she would speak again to him on the morn /
After this / she did the tables to be coueryd by the damoysells And said that
she would feste the messanger of king Jupiter / The damoyselles heeryng that
Answered that they all were much bounden to feste him and to make him great
chyere / and showed to her their richesses that they had / all arowe in the
chamber / whereof the walls shone and were bright / what shall I say more the
damoyselles arrayed with the Iewellis of Jupiter / Garnysshid the tables with
mete / Danes and Jupiter were set that oon against that other / the seruyse
was great and rich and had I nowh to ete / how well that Jupiter ne danes gaf
lityll fors of etyng / Jupiter ete less bodyly than spirituelly / he was in
traunces in doubtances and feeres he had an answer by which he could not gloss
no thing to his prouffyt saauf oonly that he hopid that danes should discouuere
hit unto the damoysselles in such wise as the young maidens ben of custom to
discouuere that on to that other / and that when any require them of love that
they should be in favor to him the more for his yeftes / In this estate was the
king Jupiter for his part / The damoyselles beheld him I nowh and said /
that he had not the maynteygne of a yoman or of a servant / / but of a man of
right noble and great facion / And above all other danes to whom Jupiter had
given cause to be pensyf / Cast her eyes upon Jupiter upon his contenance upon
his facion upon his beaulte / And than her seemed that he had said troth / as
well than as in the night following she began to feel the sparklis of love / and
seeing his richesses that he had given in the hows / she varyed to give to him
her heart and her love of this variacion to which her heart enclyned / she was
right acertayned and fermly / that her engyne her entendeme^t were entrelarded
of habondaunt thoughts Many noble men had required her love before time that
she was shette in the tour / and could never torn her heart ner cause to sighe
and thenke for her requests The only words of Jupiter were so ewrews and
happy that constraynd her to exaudicion and parfayt pensifnes / brekyng all
doutes and contrary oppynyons

How Jupiter came from his chamber by night and lay in the tour of darrain with
the damoysell danes on the which he engendryd / the noble persens.
SO long dured the ffeestoyng of Jupiter that hit was our and time to
wythdrawe Than danes took leave of Jupiter and did do conueye him in to a
secret chamber by her damoyselles when Jupiter was departed she entryd in to
her chamber accompanied only with the old woman that was her maistresse whishe
had charge on her above all other / and as soon as the old woman had her
pryuely in her chamber / as she that was malicious said to her / my daughter
tell me of your tidings / I must needs know what thing this messanger has
said to you / Dame answered danes. woll ye wete ye said the old woman / than
answered danes / he must come him self and make the raiport / For he has said
to me so many things that the tenthe part is not in my mind / My daughter
said the old woman I think well he is not comen hither with out cause what
has he said / if ye have not all in mind / tell me at least / that abides
and rests in your mind / Dame answered danes ye know well that never I
mystrusted you / And that the secretenes of mine heart to you has alwey ben
open / I will now make no new customs / For to short this matter / he that
names him servant of Jupiter / is Jupiter him self by his raport and has maad
great oaths that he has do maad these presents and yeftes for to speak to me
/ In deed he has showed to me how I lose here my time / / And has required me
to be his wife to which I have not yet consentyd / but I have taken day for to
gyf an answer to morn hopyng to take your counceyll / And therefore I pray you
that ye me counceylle in that I have to do and what answer he shall have of me
/ ye know how I have suffrid his yeftes to be resseyued he must be contentid
by some manner / by fair speech or other wise.

THis old woman had been other time in the house of king melliseus and there
had seen Jupiter in the time of his return of his conqueste of ar^hade / and
had in pertye knowleche of him syn the first day that he came theder / this
notwythstondyng she doutyd of his person for as much as men otherwhile ben
like oon to an other And she had always her eye on him when than she had
understand by danes that had told her that he was Jupiter / she was seure that
hit was he in his person / and had great Joy saying / my daughter certainly I
know him that we speak and deuyse of long time past / And for his person I
assure you / hit is he / that has don you to understand of / but unto the
regard for to counceylle you / if ye take him unto your husbonde I can say
none other wise to you / but that he is oon of the most vailliantest men of the
world and that his entrepryses ben right hye / / and if I had a daughter the
most best manerd of the world / there is no man leuyng that I would give her
sonner unto than to him / ^yf hit plesid him to take her / ye see that not
wythstandyng his simple array that he is a goodly man he is noble / he is rich
/ he is wise / he is a king / ye feel in your self your courage / if ye wole
use and observe the commandment of your fader / ye may not with him hold
consistory ne parliament / if ye will absente you from this place by good
moyens there is no man but Jupiter that may help you / / I counceylle you
neither that oon ne that other / chese ye and take the best way etc.

A My mother said danes how should I chese my self. there is in me neither wit
ne entendement to take that I should chese. ne for to discern the good from the
ywell. and as for me I shall put hit all in to your deliberacion. and wole that
ye know that out of this tour would I fayn be mine honor sauyd and the honor
sauyd of my felawshyp. with this came In to them all the damoyselles of the
house and said to her that they had made right good chere to their ghest. and
thus faylled the secret deuyses of danes and of the aged woman. the
damoyselles went and fette their Jewels. newly presented to hem and departed
them each after her portion saying that to king Jupiter was none like / but
that he was among all other the most large and the most honorable king of
kings.

THe maid danes took great playsir with all these things / / when the
damoyselles had partyd among hem her Jewels of gold with great Joy / they
brought danes to bed / And departed from her chamber which they left open
by forgetyng / as they that had set all her mind and entendementes on her
rychesses / And so went to their beds in to their chambers / Jupiter liyng
in his bed at this hour fond him self so surmountyd with couetyse of love.
That he was constraynd to arise And to look out at a wyndowe to behold if the
day approached liftyng his eyes again the sterres of the heuene / And was
rauysshed in his heart by the remembrance of fair danes and said / O noble
danes that has more beaulte than the sterre shynyng / And that ye shine by
souerayn clerenes / Alas where be ye this hour / the pain that I endure for
your cause / ye knew not the great Ieopardye and the paryllous paas that I
have put me in. to attain your love / vnkendenes. may she have place in you.
with desdayn rygour and fiersnes / which ben mine enemies enuenymed with
mortal venym / O danes remember your self of me / And thou fortune that haste
so couryd me in all mine affairs / so coure me in this present need.

WIth this word his complaynt cessed / and gaf his entendeme^t to many sharp
thoughts that percyd his heart right pensifly / This thought was great and
touching a right auenturous enterprise all acou^tyd and abatid he deterimned in
him self to assaye if he mocht come unto the end of his thought / and arayde
and clothid him self and went out of his chamber unto the tour / where he saw
the door opene to his semyng And findyng truth that hit was open he went up
as softely as he cowde that he should not be herd / ^ and came so far that he
came to the chamber of danes whereof the door was open In which chamber was a
lamp brennyng / Jupiter all full of gladness put his head in to the chamber to
behold if the damoysellys had been with danes / and when he had beholden that
there were none but that danes was allone in her bed / he auenturyd him to go
unto her where he fond her slepyng and awoke her by kissing etc.

DAnes was so sore abashed when she felt herself so kyste / that she crept
with in the bed. Jupiter nyghed near so fer that he descourid her face for to
speak to her / whereof she being a frayd opend her eyes and when she wiste that
hit was Jupiter / ^ and was allone by her bed side / she made a right great
shryche and cry / when Jupiter herd this cry he was not right well assured /
Nevertheless he poursued his adventure tornyng her to him ward and confortyng
her by his sweet spekyng / he declared to her in the end that hit was force
that she must be his wife promyttyng to come and to fecche her in short time /
and so long he held her in such deuyses / that he unclothed him self / and
that in spekyng to here he sprange in to the bed and lay by her side. how well
that she with said and wythstode hit with all her might Thanne said the maid
that she was betrayed And weeping tenderly she wend to have fled and did her
best to have gone away But Jupiter took good head / And at the lepe that she
supposid to make caught and held her by the Arm / And made her to lie down
again And beclypt her and kyste her again / And so appesed her in such facion
that she left her weeping And on the morning when he roos up from her he left
her with child with a young sone / what shall I say more Jupiter by this
hardyesse achyeuyd his feet and gate his will on fair danes And made the pees
of his offense The night passid over And the day came / that Jupiter must need
arise and depart from her / and than by necessite constraynyng him self for to
keep the honor of danes he aroos And took his abillements trussed to geder and
returned in to his chamber where he went to bed and slepte so fast and
sewrly that he awoke not till the hour and time to go to dinner.

AT this hour danes axid where was the messangier of king Jupiter and said
that she would ete with him / and that they should bring him up in to the tour
secretly / With the word of danes two damoyselles went down of the tour in to
the chamber of Jupiter / And findyng him a sleep awoke him / Whereof he was
hounteus and ashamed / For the son was that time mounted hye / And than he a
roos and arrayed him fastely when he wyste that danes had sent for him to come
speak with here / And so came to her / which began to wexe reed and to lose
her mayntyene and contenance when she saw him. After the reverence maad they
went and ete to gyder and made great chyere allewey danes was a shamed and was
strongly sousprysed for the caas that was was happende to her and she might
not abstain to set her eyes on the beawte of Jupiter / which also faylled
not on his side to behold her by so ardent desyr / that the eyes of that oon
and that other perced each other often times / / In this beholding they passid
part of the time of the dinner / / when they had taken their refeccion / ^
Jupiter and danes drew hem a part and helden a long parliament of their werk /
And was concluded between hem that Jupiter should go in to his contre and that
he should return theder with a certain nombre of people for to take a way the
fair danes / and with this conclusion Jupiter departed and returned in to
crete leuyng danes in the tour / of whom I will tarry for this present and
return to speak how Tantalus the king of ffrygye faughte against the troyans
/ and had battle against them which was the first that ever was in troy.

How the king Tantalus of ffrygye assaylled by bataylle the king Troos of
Troy / / and how ylyon and gammedes his sons desconfited him in bataylle /
When than the king troos had named his cite Troy and was mountid and
enhaunced in so hye renome / That the kings his neighbors as to his regard
were put in lityl reverence and less glory / Many thus leesing their honors
/ by his right great worship / began to murmere against him in feet and in
thought / and among all other the king tantalus of ffrigye sone of
tharchaden Jupiter king of actyque took in right great despyte thercellence of
troos and conspyred against him and made a great assemble of men of arms / and
so departed out of his royame in entencion to destroy and spille the king
Troos and his Cite of Troy / This tantalus had a sone in his compaygnye named
pelops / And also he left a sone at home named thiestes for as much as he was
young / And this thiestes had a sone sins named philistenes the fader of
menelaus that reigned in the time of the third destruction of Troy / For to
return to our purpoos / Than Tantalus exployted in such wise that he
conduytyd and brought his ooste upon the terrytorye of Troy / And did do
smite down and destroy all thing that was in their puyssance unto plain
destruction / Whereof the Cry and clamours of them that fled was so great /
that in short time the king Troos was aduertysid / whereof he was not affrayed
For he had the Cite well garnysshid of people / Also he made ready to resist his
adversaries / and that by such dyligence / that when he had herd the tidings
in the morenyng / In four ours after he issued out of Troy with.xxx.
thousand fyghtyng men and drew unto the place where the frygyens were entryd.

THis noble king Tros had in his compaygnye two sons of whom the eldest was
called ylion to whom came down from heaven the palladiu^ And the younger was
called Gammedes / These two sons vayllyant and hardy comen in to the feld and
required their fader Troos to depart his arm in two And that he would grant
to them his vawarde for to preue their might upon their enemies / Troos
considering that by separacion of his people / they that were fowled or put a
back might be socowryd when hit should come to strokes / acorded the request to
his ij. sons / and took unto them.xij. thousand of fyghtyng men / ylion and
gammedes thankyd the king / troos their fader / and took leave at him / and
went forth with her fyghtyng men in such wise that they were a mile to fore
the battle of the king. and so the king / troos sued the battle of his.ij.
sons ylion and gammedes / And he had rydars between both comysid for to
report to the king tros when his sons had founden. tantalus their enemy /
and also the.ij. noble sons had to fore hem their diverse espies and way tars
that were sent out in to diuerce places to see and to descouuere thestate the
puissance and thordenance of their enemies which fond them about the
euenyng. and anon after they returned unto ylion and gammedes and bad them to
make chiere / and that they had seen the enemies of troy in a certain place
that they named / and that there they had seen hem logged / And that they might
well be nowmbred by estymacion about.xxx. thousand fightyng men.

OF these tidings had the troyens great Joy / hit was that time about
mydnyght and they were logged in the end of a valeye / ylion and gammedes anon
the same hour assemblid all the noble men of there compaygnye / and told them
what the espies had raportyd / and they demanded of them council. all were of
oppynyon that they should suffer their oste rest yet a good hour. and after
that they should break their fast a lityll and lightly / to the end to have the
better and longer her breath / and also to be the more corageous and also to
cause hem to be the better awakyd. and this don they should depart for to goo
assaylle their enemies / This oppynyon seemed god unto the five sons of the
king / And they signyfied their entencion by the ryders unto their fader Troos
/ After this they wythdrewe hem to take a lityll their rest and gaf charge
unto them that kept the wacche ^ to awake them when they saw her time / And so
they had but lityll restyd when they were awakyd and called / And that each man
should take his Arms and follow on / This Trojans obeyed and know well hit was
time to make ready lightly. They were never so Joyous as there were when they
knew that they should go to battle / They ete and drunk attemperatly full of
oon good will. They garnysshid hem with their Arms / And shewid that oon to
that other how they would fight in the battle and confunde their enemies / and
menassid them of an evil recountre for them.

IT this hour the moon shone right clear / By which shynyng and light ylion
and gammedes put their people in array in fair ordenance When they had take
the short refection they began to march toward them and put hem self to fore
all other they came so nyghe by moan light and by her guydes that they were herd
of them that kept wacche of their enemies that they sought / the which fled
unto the tents of king Tantalus and awoke him and told him that the trojans
were come tassaylle him. And that they had seen hem in great noumbre / But
Tantalus believed not lightly his wacche and defferryd his arysing more than
need was / he had not long abyden but the troyans came upon his often and smote
down right upon the ffrygiens so desmesurably / that the redoundyng of her
strokes came and fill in to the eeres of tantalus / which aroos and sprange on
his feet terrybly affrayed / with this affraye were awaked all the frygiens in
general some by mortell wounds and some by their cries and some smyten
anguysshously unto the death. In coming on thus the trojans domaged greatly
their enemies / and the more be cause many of them were not garnysshid with
their arms. which were smyten down by the gleyues of the troyans / there were
beten down labouryng mortally aglowtyng in her blood This not wyhtstondyng how
well that the coming on of the troyans was sharp. and that ylion and gammedes
approuuyd hem self sharply in their work Tantalus and his sone pelops
recuyellyd her people that wythdrewe hem / about her tente and gaderd them to
geder / and than when they fond hem in nombre suffisant for to enter in to
bataylle / Tantalus cried ffrigye ffrygie / and after he did do march his
people against the trojans that all beat down to fore hem in the place where they
were arryuyd / and than began the noise great / For on all sides were cries
made and at the Ioynyng the tempeste was horrible that hit seemed that the world
should end in the same place.

GAmmedes and pelops encountryd to geder and full of great corages they fought
to geder so sore and hard that agrete while by the enseygnes that were seen
upon her heedes and upon her arms they were like that oon to slay that other /
and that oon had slain that othyr ne had tantalus and ylion have been by / For
tantalus smote upon gammedes / and ylion smote pelops and the trojans and
frygiens medlid that on with that other And there began the slaughter and
tuycion / And there was fightyng showed as champions / In showing each man his
virtue and his pro^wesse so strongly for as much as they saw the moon go down
and declyne / And yet was not the day comen when they fond on the morn the
place all couerd with blood. heedes Arms and of men deed / but the nombre of
the frigyens that there were put to oultrance was much gretter ten against oon
than of them of troy / What shall I say all so long as the moon gaf his
light / there was no fault on that on side ner on that other / each man did his
part The moon put him in a derk cloud And anon it wax derk and that the
meddle began to cesse / And the retrayte was cried the frigiens with drew hem
at the cry of tantalus / And the trojans at the cry of ylion and gammedes /
And there was none but had gladly abiden the end of this skarmuche and tempeste.

How the king Tros chacyd in bataylle the king tantalus and how the king
saturn came by see saylling to the port of troyes and how the king troos
receyuyd him worshipfully.
AFter this foresaid battle when Tantalus was withdrawn he began to cast his
eyes upon his people which were all on an hill for to wete how they were of
nombre and how they had born hem self / And how much people he had lost. he had
lost / and went all a boute hem with his sone pelops / and him seemed well that
his puissance was made less than he had hopyd whereof he had in his heart a
right great and sharp desplaysir / and visityng his oost in this facion the
day began to arise and in the dawnyng / two thnyges apperid and came to the
knowleche of the people of tantalus / oon was the great loss of his people. and
that other was the battle of king troos that they saw from far discouerid
and approach Certes when tantalus considerid his euydent domayge and saw that
his enemies be cause of the socours that came to them were more strong than he
was / he fond not in the resolucion of his empryse but despair and shameful
end / and all desconfortyd he called his sone and his pryncipall friends and
demanded them what was best to do / They counceyllyd him that he should entende
to save him self and said to him / if he abode and attended the troyans that
should be cause of his destruction and of all them that were left of his people
etc.

When tantalus understood this counceyll and knew that his prouffyt stood and
was in his shameful end and flighte / and above that / that he ne might
abaysshe and put down the name of troyes / he took him self by the berde that
was long by Inpacience and said smytyng him self with his fist / O cursid
envy / thou promettyst me late to put troy under my ffeet. and have made me
to rise presumptuesly against her. Now see I well the contrary / and that by me
troy shall flower and that more is by my cause her name shall grow and shall
be enhaunsid And that all kings shall tremble to fore her in my regard and
beholding O false trayteresse fortune acursid be thou that I ever believed on
the / These words fynysshid he said to his sone and to other his council and
maad his people to withdraw a litill and a litill finably he commanded that
each man should save him self / and than they put hem all to flight / Ilion and
gaminedes took head and ran after and chassid hem out of the terrytorie of
troy with great oc^sion and slaughter of people of the frigiens / And after
that they had chaced hem. they said that they had don hem shame ynowh And left
work and returned and came a non and met the king tros her fader that sued
them which had great Joy / when he saw that they had quytte hem so well upon
his enemies by the good conduyte of his two sons.

THe Joy than that Tros made to ylion and Gammedes after the battle was great
and of good love / Tros brought hem again unto troy with great worship / the
trojans men and women resseyuyd them worshipfully / And blessid the womb that
had born hem And the breasts that yaf hem souke / The two noble sons of the
king of whom the names were born in to all the marches there aboutes with so
great a bruyt and noise that not only the neighbors of troyes came to make
alliance with king tros and the trojans but there came also kings of many far
contrees of the est which could not magnyfye ynowh the puissance of the king
and of the cite of Troy etc.

IN these days when troyes showed the rays of her puyssance and noblesse by
the vnyuersell world / Saturn late king of crete saylid by the sees with
lityll company Not as king and possessour of the royame. but as bannysshid
and despourueyed of all land and country so clean that he had no place to
wythdrawe him to / ner wyste never wheder to go but only by deserts and by the
abysmes of the sea When he had be in this point a great while thynkyng with out
end how he might persecute his sone Jupiter / Fortune brought him in to the sea of hellespond and than beholding abowte him he espied and saw Troyes
which was a cite passing fair and rich and of meruaylleus gretenes / / And
than what for to take him a lityll rest as for to put away his melancoli and
for to reuytayll his shipp and people he sailed and rowed unto the cite and
descended at the port when the troyans had seen the shipp of saturn / that
was better and more of valu than all the ships that they had ever seen / the
maystre of the ships of troyes. went hastily unto the king troos and said
/ ^ire ^^ioye your self and make ready your house / / I assure you that there is
come right now unto your port the most rich shipp^ that ever was seen on the sea / and me seems this conciderid that in so noble a shipp must be some
noble or great erthely lord that comes unto you etc.

Anon as king troos herd these tidings of the master maronner he desired
to see so fair a shypp / and acompaygnyed with his two sons went for to see at
the port and to feste them of the strange shypp / This king troos was
courtoys and honorable / when he came unto the poort he fond that saturn made
ready his ship and disposid him for to go unto the cite / And seeing the shipp he
meruayllid much For the vtensilles that were with in were rychely made / And
furthermore saturn and his felawship were Armed and had no maronners he
beheld her conduyte at his coming and knew that they were men of war right
well in point / he thought in him self at beginning for to arm himself and to
send for the trojans But afterward when he had seen her lityll nombre and that
no shipp folowid ner sued these estragers fro no cost he changed his porpoos
and thought And approchid unto the shipp and callid saturn that most best was
arrayed above the other and axid him what he sought he and his felaws and from
what nation they were of and came fro / And saturn answered to him and said Sire
how well I know not at what port I am arriuyd / For as much as my heart
Iugeth me that ye be courtoys of your nature / I wole hele ner couere no thing
touching your enqueste / I was late king of Crete named saturn / now I ^e am
but saturn / for my sone has put me out sorowfully that of all my riches of
all my people and of all my goods temporels me is not left but this only
shipp that ye may see / wherefore I pray you and require that hit please you to
adresse me to some lord of this contre / to the end that I may require license
and congie to enter in to his lordship and to take that / That shall be
necessary competently to the life of me and of my Felawshypp etc.

THan king troos herd the caas of saturn comprised in breef words he said to
him by compassion / king saturn ye be well come in to the house of troyes / In
truth I have great anoyance in me self of your first anoyance for your
glorious renomee and for the goodenes that is in you. as often times I have herd
recountyd but with this anoyance two things gladeth and Ioyeth mine heart /
that oon descendyng of thacomplisshement of desyr / ffor I have desired many
days for to see you / and this desir is now accomplisshid in me / and that
other proceeds of hope. and in this party I say to you that I king of this
contre have entencion to comfort and to counceylle you to my power and also to
give you so good aid that ye shall correct your sone and shall punysshe his
person in such wise as hit shall apperteyne for his offense / Saturn began
to sighe and to take a lityll confort of the great prouffre and good chier that
the king troos maad to him / and he thanked him of so hye and ample offres /
and at the going out of his ship he beclippid him in his arms and kyste his
hand / What shall I say the king troos brought him in his pallays with all his
men and fested hem as hit apperteyned for the love of saturn / In like wise
the people being aduertysed of saturn that it was he that found the manner of
labouryng of the earth of meltyng of metals and of sailing and rowyng by the sea maad so great and plain feste at his coming that they could no more do at
that time / during this festoyeng when saturn felt him in the grace of the
trojans / On a day he called the king troos and his two sons / and adressid
his words sayng / Lords of Troy ye have don so much for me / that I may
never deserve hit / for as I have said to you. my sone is enhaunsid and lift up
above me / And has taken from me my Royame. I require you as much as I may
that ye will counceylle me what thing is most conuenyent to me / And how I
shall suffer and bear the Iniurye don to me etc.

MI brother answered the king troos / This is against nature to a sone / him
self to rebelle against his fader / the sin and crisme is fowll and worthy of
reprehension / For every sone is bounden by all laws to serve. worship.
dread and obey his fader / And it is no reason that any man should approve or
hold with a sone disobeyssant / your sone is of this condition cursid and right
evil / / And I am of thoppynyon that ye shall not acquytte you well / but if
ye to your power to maystrye and overcome his evil maneres / And to the end
that ye shall not excuse your euydent harms and losses / when ye will I shall
delyuere you my sone gammedes accompanied with.xx. thousand trojans that shall
socoure you. unto the death Or they shall set you again in your ryall
trybunall Saturn was all as recomforted when he knew the love that the king
Troos showed to him / And after many thankyngus took conclusion that he would
return in to crete with gammedes / And would begin again the pyetous war of
him and of his sone / And following this conclusion from than forth on / he did
do Appoynte the shyppyng of Troy /:. the shyppyng of troy / and all things
apperteynyg / and gaderd to gyder men of arms with great puyssance by the
Introduction of gammedes / and when all thassamble had mustryd and were gaderd
to gyder / he took leave of the king troos and of ylion / and went to the sea
and shyppyd all his meyne and knowing the situacions of the contrees by the
sees / he addressid his oost in to the sea of egee / where as was egeus sone of
tytan the great pirate which durst not have to do with hem in no wise / and
fro this see of egee / he did so much by diverse Iournees that he came and
arryuyd at the first port and haven of crete.

How saturn by the aid of Gammedes and of the trojans returned in to crete to
fight against Jupiter / where he was overcome and vaynquysshyd and Gammedes
taken.
AT that our that saturn arrived in crete the son was turned in to the west
and on the heuene began to appear the sterres. saturn knew the port / and
took land hopyng to enter the country secretly and went a lityll weye / and
there logged his people in a place conuenyent and did hem rest / ete and
drink by the space of fyfe ours / and than he awoke the oost and made the
trojans arm them and enter in to the royame but they were not far goon / but
anon after the son rising and approchyng a strayt passage the espyes and
scowrers came unto saturn and gammedes hastily / and told them that they had
seen the king Jupiter right strongly accompanied which kept the passage /
Upon this paas hit is to wete that when Jupiter was departed fro danes and fro
the tour darrain and was come in to Crete and desiryng to Accomplissh his
promise anenst danes / he did do Assemble his men of war / concludyng in
him self that faithfully he would go fecche the fair danes And bring her unto
his contre by force of Arms. what shall I say more / his Armee was all ready /
And came the same night where on the morn he hopyd to have departed / but as he
was in his bed that night in his cite of parthemye tidings came to him of the
Arryuyng of the Trojans / Wherefore he was constrained by force to change his
purpoos / whereof he was right sorry and passing heavy marueyllously / This
notwythstondyng sodeinly as these tidings were freshly brought unto him / he
aroos And took his men of Arms that he had assemblyd / And hastily bro^ught
them unto the strayt whereof above is wret^n / And there abode his enemies as
wise and well auysed. And it is not to be forgoten that in this Armee among
his men was the king of mollose which had late founden the Industrye and
craft to tame and break horses for to be ryden. And to ride them / And was
come he and his men for to serve the king Jupiter for his good renomee
accompanied of an honderd men that ran as the wind. And for this cause they
were called centaures / And these Centaures were also terrible and cruel that
they ne doubtid the puissance of king ne of non other what some ever they were.

FOr than to return to the matere entamed / when saturn knew that the
passage was kept and that Jupiter was than aduertisid of his coming he did do
tarry his ooste and said unto them / my children hit behooves that this
morenyng / ye so do in crete your deuoyr / not only in mustryng and showing
your corayges / but above that / that ye be redoubtyd and drad like the thonder
/ asseure your self of our querelle Jupiter mine enemy is here where he abides
our coming to the battle ordeynd / if we wole come to the above of our
entrepryse / hit is need that we draw theder / see what ye will say / Than
thus answered gammedes we ben comen in to crete for to correct your sone / and
to set you again in your siege. we shall do that we may do by our power and
furnyssh and fight freely with out doubtance or feer / and unto the end that
no reproach be Inposid unto us. I shall send and somone your sone first or any
swerd be drawn or struck smyten to the end that he yield him unto your
obeyssance And that he come and amend his mesdedes / and than gammedes did do
come his trojans by consent of saturn and set hem in ordynance of battle /
and when he had so done he sent oon of his ancient knights a noble man unto
Jupiter and gaf him charge to make the somacion such as is said to fore / The
troyan departed from the oost at commandment of gammedes / and did so much
that he was presentyd to fore Jupiter and said to him / Jupiter thou ought
know / that every sone owes obeyssance unto his fader. thou do contrary
to these things and show that thou art not sone of a king / but of
perdicion. For thou despysest thy fader. Instead of reverence thou have him in
hate / and thou make him war where thou sholdest hold him in love / and
thou put him to great dishonor and thy self where thou art hold and
bounden to do him worship / O Jupiter who shall give the absolucion of thy
lif dwelling in venym / who shall excuse thy sin / Thou art enemy of thy
fader / the caas is so grievous that their is no mercy ne excusacion / but if
hit depart fro the naturell clemence of thy fader / behold Jupiter behold
the end of thyn Insurrexion / All law po^ityf And all law wreton condemn
the unto the death And curse and Anathematyse the / hit is great pity thou art a
goodly young man / know that thy regne may not long dure / And that thou shall
more shortly be punysshid than thou wenest perauenture at this time For
gamynedes oon of the soones of Troy is here by in the help of saturn thy
fader with. twenty thousand. fyghtyng men which so meneth the by me that thou
return in to the mercy of thy fader And yield him his Royame all excusacions
set a part.

MEssanger Answered Jupiter / if I were suchon as ye say / with Just rayson ye
and other might give sentences and condempnacions upon me / me ought here both
parti^e. And I trow if gamynedes of whom ye have spoken / had herd mine excuse
he would not be mine enemy. I answer you that I love my fader saturn in as much
as he is my fader. But I say you on that other part / that he has often times
wyllyd to put me to death he showing him self my mortell aduersarye and no
thing fader. For every fader naturelly loves his sone. And After that regard
I shall keep me from him as from mine enemy / And will well that the Trojans
know if they come and Assaylle me that I shall defend me with all my
puyssance etc.

WIth this answer returned the said trojan unto saturn and gammedes and said
unto them what he had founden / saturn and gammedes swore than the death of
Jupiter / and approchid so nyghe the strayt that they came with in bow shot
that oon nyghe unto the other / and fro as fer as they saw echon other they
made great cries and showtes Jupiter had set his puyssance in two wings /
whereof he was chyef in the formest / and yxion and his centaures were
governors of the second / when Jupiter had seen that there was no wey but for
to meddle he said he would begin the battle / and after that he had
encourayged his people / he pryckyd his horse forth / and than happend and befell
a meruayllous thing / For from the hye clouds above came down an egle upon his
heed / and after began to flee about him making him feste and cheer / and not
departed ner left him during the battle.

BY the fleyng of this egle Jupiter and his people took in them an hope of good
adventure. And saturn and the trojans fille in a feere and doubt that could
not come out of their consaytes / what shall I say more when Jupiter saw the
co^duyte of the egle he had a great Joy in his heart / and as a man well
assured in his body / he entryd among tharchers of the trojans that shot
thikke on him / and rennyng as tempeste passid by their arowes / and tarried not
for resistance of shot till he came among the men of arms of the trojans.

THe trojans had never seen man on horse back to fore / and when they saw
Jupiter / they had went he had been half man and half horse / and there were some
that fled his coming and some abode and fought vailliantly against him than began
the bataylle of tht day They of Crete followed Jupiter with great Noise of
Tabours trompes and clarions And began to meddle with the trojans / they did
her deuoirs on both sides Jupiter bare to the ground many Trojans And well
enployed his horse on which he rode / Gamynedes and saturn on that other side
faylled not / Alleway Jupiter prouyd him self in Arms the as most expert above
all other / And abandoned his body and lif unto fierste of his enemies and there
was no man that durst have to do with him or abide him But he was slain and put
under foot by the trenchyng and smytyng of his swerd

Cruel and fires was this battle. the Trojans were with out fere And did
great prowesses and manly by the conduyte of saturn And of Gamynedes saturn
met Jupiter often times as he that sought great strokes but Jupiter that
knew him well / would never abide him / sayng that he would never set hand on
his person / but fled his death unto his powrs This notwithstondyng he sought
the death of his helpars And made no sparyng of their harnoys ne Arms of lether
/ of their heedys ne of their lives of young ne of old of vayllyant ne of hardy
/ hit was to him al^ oon he bowed neither to oon side ner to other for stroke
of gleue / of mace ne of guysarme / he had often remembrance of the fair danes /
And desiryng to be quyt of his enemies for to entende her deliverance like as
he had promisid unto her. He smote of heedes and Arms. Unto him was nothing
Inpossible At every At every struck he died his glayue with new blood and the
egle flawe allway about him now low now hye / whereof the trojans had great
despyt in hem self etc.

GAmmedes the noble trojan was of lityll stature / Allewaye notwythstondyng he
was of more gretter courayge than any other / and vigourously he fought again
them of crete / as he that intended nothing but to get worship and honor /
what shall I say they fought thus to gyder in this point from the morrow tyl^
even / without that any of both parties obtained any wynnyng or loss / and
than saturn wythdrowe his people on that oon side. And Jupiter returned with
the king yxion and the centaures / and yet folowyd him alleweyd the egle* and
satte upon his tente / which was made of bows and grene rysshis / ffor at
that time tents and pauyllons of cloyth were not had ne vsid / how be hit the
making of lynnen cloth / and of cloth of gold and of silk was founden before
this time In this night they of troy and theye of crete made great chere in
their tents and logys And dysposid them to begin again on the morn the
labor of arms / hoopyng all to have the better and victory / the hurt men
were dressid and the harnoys broken was made again and amended / they spack
ynowe of the prowesses of oon and other / but souerainli they held their
devises of the egle / and spack so much of him that Jupiter that same night
took a piece of cremesin sa^yn conteynyng a yerd and an half square / and made
theryn the remembrance of an egle of gold and set hit on a spear and made a
banyere / sayng that he would bear that banyere in all bataylles ever after.
And that he understood by the egle that hit was a tokene to him that he should
abide victoryous of his enemies And that he should be souerain king of Crete
like as the Egle is king of all fowlys.

How Jupiter disconfited again king satu^rne in bataylle and how saturn was
put to flight by see.
SVche were the deuyses of king Jupiter in this night / the which he passid
the most Ioyously that he could / And visityd the hurt men and confortyd them
And concluded with ixion that the day following the Centaures should have the
bataylle And they that had foughten the day before should rest them. After this
he slept on the grene And restid him unto the time that the Centaures put hem
in Array And went to horse back And so did Jupiter for he had lever deyed than
have been ydell At this time saturn slept not / ner was no more lachesse found
in him and gamynedes than was in Jupiter / they were seur that they should be
met with all and assailed of their enemies again. They adoubid and arrayed them
the best wise they couthe And about the son rising they rengyd and went
unto the Oost of Jupiter / encouragyng each other to smite and fight and
assaylle their mortell enemies hardyly for to avenge the blood of their felaws
that were deed in the bataylle the day before.

FOr to make short / than the Trojans were strongly achanffid by Appetyte of
vengeance / And were the first on the field / whereof they had great Joy in
her hertes And maad a right great cry But this Joy was anon unto hem abaysshid
and done. For suddenly as Jupiter and the centaures herd their cry they took
the banyer with the egle of gold their speres and their sheldes / and with a
Joyous soune of trompes clarions and tabours prickyd forth their horse which
redounded in to the air and reimyng as they that held not of heaven ne of
earth upon their enemies began to fight / certes when the trojans saw the
centaures mountyd on horsback rennyng as the wind they were so aferd and
affrayed that they had wend never to have seen light day / how wel^ they took
courage and abode them / and the centaures fought so myghtily among hem that
each oon of them bare to the earth a trojan with the point of his spear and
among other gammedes was born down to the earth among them / and some were hurt
a part and some releuyd of hurtyng / and some with out hurt / when gammedes
felt him self among the horse feet / he was in his heart terryble angry / and
said that he would be shortly auengyd / anon he aroos lightly and took his
swerd and seeing the centaure that had smyten him down doing merueyllous arms
among a great meyne of his folk / that myghtily wythstood his unmeasurable
strookes / he gaf unto him so great a struck as he was lenyng on the right side
to have smyten a trojan that he gaf him a great wound / by which he was so
astonyed that he drowe him down of his horse / and he him self leepe up in to
the sadel^ / This centaure was named Eson and was young and was afterward fader
of Jason that conquered the golden flees / When than he had receyuyd the struck
that gammedes had given him he made a cry so great that.x. centaures came
rennyng And deffended him fro the press And castyng down oon and other beat
down the trojans And cast hem down. And sparpelid their blood that all the
place was died reed / And that they fond eson and gamynedes that oon nyhe that
other And seeing gamynedes that he approuued him self to conduyte and govern
his horse And seeing their felaw put down from his horse / they were passingly
supprisid with great ire / And by mortal ire they ascryed gamynedes unto death
the trojans approchid / they being there fought manly again the centaures And
the centaures castyng and smytyng on gamynedes the trojans did their power to
defend him And put hem self in Iupart of death for him For many of them were
slain And many that were sore hurt.

THese centaures were strong huge great and lothly / the trojans had more of
courage than of body In this place gamynedes shewid ynowh of prowess And of
valeur And well deffended him awhile But in the end Fortune was to him adverse
in such wise that after he had suffryd many assault And that he had seen put
and cast to ground mo than a thousand trojans / he beheld that other side and
saw saturn torn at plain desconfiture After he saw that his trojans let
him to be put aback and to be put to death with out turnyng or fyghtyng again
And all break / And turn the back / Also them that were about him gaf hit up
and fledd / And than knowing this disconfiture that he had no remedy ner
recowerance. And that he allone might not bear ne abide the battle put him
self to flight / and fled after the oder and susteynd as wel^ as he might the
porsuyt that the centaures maad upon his men / and in the end he guyded hem
unto the poort where their shyppyng was.

Saturn than all dyspayed entryd in to his ship with great loss of trojans
/ and gammedes entryd in to an other / right angry and so dysplaysant that I
can not reherce / at the enter of the shyppys / oon party of the trojans that
were left were peryshyd in the sea / another party peryshyd by swerd and that
other took shyppyng / / Jupiter and yxion thankyd their gods greatly of this
victory / and concluded to gyder that they would yet poursuye their enemies by
the sea. for as much as they were yet great in nombre And yxion said that hit
was expedient to bring hem to plain vttrance for as much as they had fortune
with them / and to the end that they should never reassemble against them /
Jupiter accorded this poursuyte greatly anoyed for him seemed that he tarried to
long / And yet should tarry more if he entryd in to the sea / that he might not
be with danes at the day that he had promised her / This not wyhtstondyng
hopyng allewey to excuse him unto her he made him ready hastily to goo to the
poursuyt of his enemies and sent for his maryners and after went in to a temple
that was there by dedyfied unto the god Mars.

How Jupiter after he had sacrefied the egle poursuyd the trojans and of the
strong battle that he had against gammedes.
IVpiter was not so sone in the temple but the egle entryd also and set him
on the awter. when Jupiter saw that / after many thoughts he took the egle
and maad sacrefice And anon after came tydinges that his mariners were ready Than
he went out of the temple and recomanded him unto god Mars and came to his
maryners that had made all thing ready / And so went to see Accompanied wit^
the Centaures And of two thousand. of his men of Crete And sailed after his
enemies that he desired / For the trojans fled of force and maad all the
sail they couthe / In these two days Jupiter often times wyss head him with
the fair danes / And thought that his long taryeng should be noyous unto her /
when than the two days were past / the day following at three of the clock /
they of crete and they of Troy began to mete to gyders upon the sea They of
troy were in great sorrow / and they of crete in great Joy / At this time
saturn was not with the trojans as he that durst not return with them for
his shame that was befalle and was all discomfyt in him self and in dispayr.
And passed by the wawes of the sea drawyng in to the eest / When gammedes had
aspied the ships of Crete fro far / he had supposid first that hit had be
saturn. And tarried a while at Auere. but in process of time when ga^ynedes saw
the shippis coming by great force nerre / And saw the banyere of king Jupiter
appear / by which he understood varyly that hit was Jupiter and his enemies
And no thing saturn that he Abood.

When was gaminedes sore troublid and callid his felawship and shewid hem the
banyer with the golden egle And axid them what was best to do They answered to
him and said that satu^rne had abandonned them and given hit over / and that
they ought not to abide and tarry / but only every man to save him self /
Gammedes would fayn abyden the bataylle / for to prove / if they were as
fortunat and happy on the sea as they were a land / but when he knew the will
of the trojans / / that desired nothing but rest / made to draw up ankres and
sail forth fleyng and wythdrawyng from them of crete also much as in them was
possible / Jupiter and his centaures than seeing the trojans lyeng at ancre /
began to array and doube them with their harnoys / and when they saw their
enemies take up their ancres / they began to showte and follow / the pursuyt
was strong and dured three days and three nyghtes / and in the morenyng of the
fourth day / gammedes and his felaws aspyed land / and that was troy that
they saw / they drew to the port with great Joy / that sone was entremedled
with sorrow / For when they had taken land they beheld and saw that their
enemies foloweden them and came to the port all arayd and ready to bataylle /
This shame and loss smote unto the heart of gammedes in such facion / that he
ascryed and said in this wise unto his men.

MI brethern and my felaws fortu^ne has done to us a grace / by which we ben
brought and conduyt hither / But this grace is to us lityll prouffit as we may
plainly conceive / lo here is the king Jupiter which has done to us so great
shame as for to chasse us unto our owen terrytorye / and what shame shall be to
him that will now flee / and more over who is he that now will not hold the
bridell by the teth / Now behooves not to flee / But now hit behooves to
fight. this is force and necessitee for to venge his losses and his blood and
for to recouuer worship. We ben in our owen contre / if we avenge us not. we
shall torn in to perpetuell dishonuer For socours we may not fail / For now
the trojans ben upon the walls And gone up on the hyhe Edifices of the Cite.
that behold our londyng. And some there be that make them ready to well come us.
And who that now is not well couragid. never fare he well / late every man
enforce the virtue of his strength / For as for me. for to be hewn in pieces I
shall no more flee. I pray you that ye take courage and abide with me.

TWo things happend whiles he spack and showed thise remonstrances unto his
felawis. the trojans were advertised of the coming of their men. And of the
descendyng and landyng of their adversaries / And disposid them to resist and
wythstande them / And Jupiter and his men approchid the port / And with that
gamynedes left warnyng his felaws And ran unto the port holdyng in his hand
a strong spear / his felawis took exemple in his right hye courage and followed
him / Than began the both parties to make their cries that went up in to the
Air. Jupiter and his Centaures enforced them to take land / Gamynedes and the
trojans enforced them to deffende and to put hem fro the land / Great and sore
strokes were given / Many of them were perysshyd in the sea / And Many there
were that her blood was shed on the land / But Jupiter that had no felawe in
the place gate land in a lityll space. and sustained the feetes of the
skarmusshe by help of some of the centaures / that he made gammedes to
ressorte aback to his felawshyp / and so exployted by the hewyng of his
trenchant swerd that he made all his men to take land / and had lightly put
gammedes and his men to outtrance. if out of troyes ne had comen out the king
Troos and ylion with a great multitude of people that ran unto the rescousse and
help of the vayllant gammedes / that for to save his men offered and put his
body to Inpossible trauayll and labor.

THe king troos and ylion than made their course out of troy in right fair
ordenance / and exposed them to bear party of the trauayll of their blood /
Jupiter with yxion and the centaures let than them that he esteemed
vaynquisshid and overcome And adressid them against king troos and ylion and
them that folowyd them / how well that they had been feblid by the eyer and
being on the sea which lityll prou^^ited them. the centaures were great and
huge / and strong as olifantes hard as lions and aygre as tygres at this time
the weder was fair and clear the son shone fair when they began to meddle /
hit was a fair thing to see the recountres / and a good noise to here the cries
/ there was many a spear tronchonnyd. and many an arowe shot and many a staff
and guys arm broken / helmes ynowe frusshid and many skynnys of lions beres
and horses smyten and torn in to pieces / This tros and ylion were right aspre
and fires in the rescous of gammedes / Jupiter and yxion were vayllyant and
desirous to get honor And so faught and smote on the trojans on the right
side and on the left side that before them was no resistance ne raye holden etc.

THe banyer of the Egle of gold was allway in the most strength of the battle
/ / the king Troos that had never seen banyer used in bataylle was greatly
ameruayllyd what hit should signefie. And often times he hardyed him self to
fight again them that held hit / And would fayn have put hit down and smyten
hit in to pieces / But allwey he fond there so great strookes and so well
set / that he was fayn to go as fer back as he came nyghe / he was vayllyant
of his body And well knew the craft of war / Jupiter approwued him many
times and faught wyht him in many places / And noted him in his mind for a
notable man / there was in him no feer ne dread ne also in his sons ylion and
gamynedes they yielded unto Arms the deuoyrs / They did worship to their
bodies And to their puyssance / wyht out end they wrought and fought with
their enemies making their glayues reed in the blood of the trojans / they
followed with great force in such wise that they faught all that day
otherwhile before and sometime behind. And hit was so in the end that when the
son began to go down Gaminedes thenkyng on his great loss and desiryng to
recouure his worship / took a terrible and mighty Axe and enflamed of right
noble courage faught on the banyer of the Egle of gold where was the most
strength and smote down on that oon side and other so dismesurabli that his
axe changed lightly color and cried with an hye wys troyes troyes.

IVpiter had all way an eye on the banyer / when he herd the cry of gammedes
and saw his exployt he knew him / ^ whereof he had great Joy / for he sought
no man but him / he gaf over the place where he was in and Ioiously addressid
him unto him and said. O vayllyant trojan thou have shewde thy prowess all
this day / And now thou manyfestestt and shewyst thy self by great fetes of
arms and of great bruyt / Thou art only he that I seche among the vayllantes
of troy / Not only that I presume me more vayllyant in arms than thou / but
for as much as thou art he that haste assayllyd crete / and that I have
poursiewed the hither / Thou have assaillid and fought with me / puyssance
against puyssance and now late us fight body against body / and he take hit that
may get hit.

GAmmedes with this word lift up his axe. and castyng his eyes on Jupiter and
of that he had herd made him this answer / Happy and ^wreus king of crete I
know now that thou art worthy to have grace of fortune and that thou art more
wise than strong / Thou see that fortune is with the / neuerthelasse thou
enhaunsest not thy self above me I allow and preyse them as much as thou do
worship and honor to thyn enemy and dispreysest him not / but ymagynest that
he has courage at his heart / knew thou that thou doste thy self honor and
worship / For for to mespryse and blame another man / no man ought to auaunce
him self / I would that hit plesid the gods that thy fader satu^rne which is
beleft on the sea were now here / for it is mine intent that by his help we
should have reason of the And I shall come there to if hit be to me possible / for
I should be recouuerid of all my hurtes and losses if I might adaunte and
overcome the / And with out more words gamynedes late fle his axe and smote
on Jupiter / Jupiter couueryd him with his shield / which was smyten in two
pieces by the cuttyng of his axe / And than Jupiter enuertued him self ^ that
all that day had sousteyned and spared the poys and the fetes of Arms. And
comandyd his folk that they should let him allone with gamynedes for as much
as he was allone / In this place he approuyd him self against the Axe of
gamynedes / and employeng the steell of his swerd the most best wise that in
him was possible.

THus began the bataylle of the two champions of Crete and of Troies they were
both right expert to do the feet of Arms their Cries were hye and fires /
they smote each other fiersly and aygerly / the fire sprange out of their
helmes by the might of their strokes / but when fortune was on the party of
Jupiter / What might gamynedes do. His strokes were great And gaf unto
gamynedes many wounds / And in deed he took from him his axe by the mean of a
great wound that he had in the right Arm / And might have put him to death if
he had would. But for to make short process / When he had taken his wepen from
him he had pytie of him And sauyd his life / And did do take him to four him
to four centaures. and anon after hit began wexe derke / for the night took
from the day his light / wherefore hit behooved hem to take rest and leave the
feet of arms / And so the trojans wythdrewe them in to their cite and they of
crete unto the port of the sea.

How the king troos and ylion his sone made great sorrow for gammedes for they
wyste not where he was becomen / And how Jupiter went to the sea for to goo to
arges.
When troos and ylion were wythdrawen / they abode at yate unto the time that
all the trojans were comen again in to the cite / as they that knew not where
gammedes was becomen / whom they sore desired for to have founden / all they
that were in the bataylle of trojans were entrid And there was no man that cowde
tell the king tros where his sone gammedes was / or whether he was a live or
ded / And when he saw that he had no mo men left in the field he returned in
to his pallays sorowyng and gretely anoyed / and sent for them that were comen
again fro crete / And inquired of them of all the tidings. And what they had
don with his sone / As touching his sone they answered that in the euenyng he
was in the prees among his enemies but they wist not what was comen of him /
And as touching of the tidings of crete they told him / how they had sped in
their Iourne against them and how the egle appeared unto Jupiter / And how they
were ouercomen by the strength of the centaures / And how they wyste not where
saturn was becomen.

THese tidings gaf unto the king troos sorrow upon sorrow and to ylion also.
And the teres fill down fro their eyes / And in especyall ylion wept sore
bewayling his brother in this manyre. Alas my brother alas gaminedes / where is
belefte the glory of troyes by the maleureus and unhappy saturn / which has
failed them thy need At the left if thou had comen again we to geder should
have put us in deuoir to have avenged thy loss. we should have assayed our
bodies by fraternall love for to have recouured thyn honor / how is it Art
thou perisshid by parell what hard doleance and sorrow is the befalle / for to
say all / thy mesaduenture and myshappe is to preiudiciable unto the house of
Troy / Ilion fair sone answered Troos for oon aduersite hit behooves not to be
abasshid in the war for non adventure but to have ferme courage / war
gives this day victory to oon and on the morn takes hit away and gives hit
to a another And so putte^h each out. A virtuous and a manly man unto his
singular death ought not to be effrayed / if gamynedes be ded in the bataylle or
if he be taken / what remedy / hit is than expedyent either to avenge his death
or to socoure him. but our enemies ben in lityll nombre / we shall to morn
fight with them again And late the gods do their wylles of us / And I shall
not discorage me otherwise.

A Lion And the nobles of Troy conforted them in the words of king Troos /
and confermed his will for to go on the morn to assaylle their enemies / whiles
these things were in comenyng in the cite / Jupiter was in the field and made
great chyere with yxion and the centaures and being set at soper upon the
ground all about a great stoon. Jupiter sent for to fecche gammedes / And
made him to soupe with them. Gammedes was sore meuyd and had in his heart great
troble / how wel^ he took lightly refection with them / For he felt right
great ache and smerte in his wounds / And there recomanded Jupiter him sayng
that he was the vayllyantyst man that ever was seen among the most vayllyanst
of Troyes / / and for as much as he is in my mercy / and that it is he / that
late with my fader descended in crete / where he had gladly planted his name in
worship if fortune would have souffryd him I shall no more war to fore troyes
/ but I / shall enter again to morn in to the sea / and I will goo and put in
execucion a thing that lies me now sore at the heart / And will well that ye
know that I have entencion to go unto the royame of arges unto the tour of
darrain / for to deliuere acording to my promise out of the same tour the fair
danes / whom the king acrysius holds fast shytte in with out any rayson /
This conclusion plesid to king yxion and to the centaures for as much as they
had herd spoken of the strength of the tour darrain / And they thought wel^
that the argyens might not hold again their strength / when than they had
eten / they entered in to their shippis / And thought among other things on the
wounds of them that were hurt / / and also of gammedes / / and than afterward
they leyd hem down on the straw to sleep and about two ours to fore day they
disancred them and departed so secretly that the trojan had no knowleche thereof
And on the morn betymes when king tros and ylion issued out of troyes to
bataylle rengid in good ordenance they fond no man to have a do with all /
ner they could not see ner parceyue their enemies on no cost of the sea / they
had so fer saylid fro the port by that time that they were out of sight Thus
they had great sorrow meruayll^usly / And came unto the place where the battle
had been and buried the deed men / but now I will tarry of them and of Jupiter
And will return unto the history of danes.

How the king acrisius when he saw his daughter danes great with child he
sent her in to exyle and put her in a lityll vessel in the sea at the
adventure of fortune etc.
THe noble damoyselle danes abode with child of the seed of Jupiter as it is
said to fore After that Jupiter was returned in to his contre she abood passing
long in hoope tht he should return to by strength of people and should led her
in to his roiame as he unto her had promised / In this hope she mounted often
times unto the hye wyndowes of the tour / And castyng her eyes now hither and
now theder upon the mountaygnes weyes and streets for to awayte if he came or
might see his men of arms and his people of war / And with out end she had
always her eres epen to harken if she might here the trompes ta^ours or clarions
/ This hope duryd long unto the last day that Jupiter had promisid and sore
she complained in this time his abiding and said unto her self that he would
come / but But certes when even was comen of the day that he had set / and he
was not comen ner herd no tydynge of him / And when she saw that he came not /
and that the fruit of her belly apperyd she went down fro the wyndowe of the
hye tour / And all rauysshyd of dispayr. entryd allone in to her chamber / And
there she began to behold her belly / and said a pour belly I may no longer
hyde the / I have couerd the unto this time hopyng the coming of Jupiter / the
day is come and past that he should have comen / there is no tydynge of him. Alas
and he has also forgoten me. where art thou Jupiter. Art thou ded or a live.
if thou be ded speak to me in spyryte in excusing the of thy defaute / Tell me
what I shall do with thy seed. And if thou be a live what right evil adventure
holds the / art thou weary of me. of danes of her that thou enforcest by
reynyng gold. of her that thou so much desiredest. Alas thou promysist me thy
love and gauyst hit unto me And I received the yeft in good / / and gaf unto
the mine heart in like caas and yet more than thou wenest. And what shall this
be Jupiter my love and friend. art thou of the nature of false men as ypocrites
that pain them to deceive pour women and late them in dishonor Alas thou art
oon verayly / thou haste brought me in pardurable shame and have abandonned and
given me over. O malewreus man. O falls liar be thou cursid with thy rychesses /
And acursid be the our that ever I saw the / / I am ever by the put to shame
/ And by the mine end approaches I may no longer hyde thy works. where shall
my child become / every man shall see and know my trespaas. Alas my fader
shall put me to death I may not faylle of hit / for as for death hit shall not
grieve / save for the fruit that I bear / yet shall I keep hit as well as my
self at all adventure come what may come thereof etc.

IN these and semblable words danes passid over this night with out slepyng
or rest / fro then forth on she began to be all melancolious. And took this
so sore to heart that she fill in to a right grievous maladye when the maidens
that no thing knew of this caas saw her so evil disposid / they signeffied
hit unto the king Acrisius / And than came the king to visit his daughter /
And betoke her unto the Cure of his fisicians and medecines And demanded them
what maladye she had / They answered him in the presence of danes that she was
great with child / and that in short time she should be deliuerd / Danes
answered that they fayllyd to say the truth / And that she had never known
man And deuyed her caas as much as in her was possible hoping alwey to live.
For she knew well that her fader would dampne her to death / if he knew that
she were with child / and of this all the maidens of the house stryued against
the masters sayng that they had well and seurly kept the tour that no man save
the king had spoken to her / but if he were come Inuysible / Syn that they had
receyuyd her in to her governance. whereof the king was greatly abasshid and
sore wondryd.

When the king herd these debates and saw the state of his daughter he was
sore troblid. For by experyence he saw well And seemed that danes was with
child / he trowed and believed better the fisiciens / than the excusacions of
the maidens and of his daughter / And for to know the truth he sent all
the maidens of the place in to prison to arges / and betoke danes in keeping to
other women / And commanded them upon pain of death that they should tell him if
she were or happend to be delyueryd of child or nay with in certain time / when
danes saw her in these terms she began to fall in to weeping / the king
accrisius fro this day forth came every day to know how she did / she wept
with out cessing / she spack not but unto her heart / And she bewailed her
love and complained on fortune sorowfully / But when she had labouryd long in
these wepynges and that her fair eyes were maad great and reed about.xv. days
to fore the time of her chyldyng she began remember the cause why she was put
in to the tour / And that the gods had prenostykyd that she should have a sone
that should be king of arges in this remembrance she was confortyd a lityll /
and when the time came of.ix. monethis she brought forth a passing fair sone
which the ladies and women receyuyd and named him pers^ns / And after that
signefied hit unto the king / but at burthe of this child she excusid and put
out of blame all the damoyselles / and said that they were all Innocents
of her caas.

Anon than as the king acrisius knew the veryte of his daughter / And that
she had a fair sone / he had in his heart more of sorrow than of Joy / And
condemned her to death in deed. and commanded to two of his marouners. that they
should take the mother and her child And put hem in a lityll boot them both
allone And that they should carye them fer in to the hie see / that after should
never man see them ner have knowleche of them / The marouners durst not
reffuse the commandment of the king / But by his commandment they went unto
the tour darrain and took danes and her sone perseus And said unto the
damoysel^ all that / that they had charge to do / praing her humbly that she
would pardone them / and this was about midnyght When danes understood that she
should be cast in to the sea and her sone with her / she had hope for to escape
fro this paryll by the mean of the fortune of her sone / this notwythstondyng
the tre^es ran down from her eyes And weeping tenderly she took leave of the
ladies and damoyselles that had her in keeping / And let her be carried upon the sea making complainte and pietous bewaylinges

When the marouners had brought her upon the sea they left her in a litill
boot and put in her lap perseus her fair sone / And as hastily as they
might they conduyte her in to the hye see with out mete or drink and with
out steer or gouernail^ and gafe her over to al^ wyndes / Than was there many a
teer wept among the marouners and danes and perseus the young child the
maroners bewailed by verray compassion tht they had to see such a damoysel^
abandouned to parill of death danes wept in co^ceyuing the rigor of her fader
/ and the fawte tht Jupiter had don to her / and also for the peril which she
might not resist / and perseus wept for the blowing of the wind and for the
gross aier of the sea / that his tendrenes might not well suffer to endure In
this faco^n the marouners returned to arges / and the right disconfortyd
damoyselle danes went forth upon the wawes of the sea at the gree and will of
the wyndes / the wawes were right ferfull and left hem in to the air as
montaygnes the wyndes blewe by great storms / the lityl^ boot was born and
cast upon the wawes / And often times danes went and supposid to have
perysshid / but she had alwey hope in fortune. And so well hit happend that in
this aduersite she was cast in to the sea of apulye or naples / And there she
was founden by adventure of a fisshar / that for pity and charity took her in to
his ship and her sone and brought her a land for as much as hit was great
need.

AT this time the noble danes was as a deed body And half goon / when the
maronner had brought her a land she took a ring of gold that she bare on her
finger and gaf hit to the good man prayng him that he would bring her in to
some house where she might warm and chauffe her with her child for he was nyhe
ded for cold and was all in a trance. The maronner took the gold ryng and
brought the damoyselle and the lityll child in to his house / and made to them
a good fire and brought hem mete and drink / Asso^e as perseus felt the air
of the fire his heart came to him again and began to lawhe on his mother / when
she saw that / all her sorrows turned to naught and she took hope to her
fortune she adoubid and arrayed her sone her color came again she ete and
drank. what shall I say the fisshar beheld her / and than seeing in her so
much beawte that like to her he saw never noon / he went him unto the court
of the king of naples / and told him his adventure / preising so certainly
her beauty that the king sent hastily for to fecche her / This king was
named pilonnus and was sone to the Ancient Jupiter / And when danes was come
to fore him suddenly he wax Amorous of her. And demanded her name / her contre
and the cause why that she was adventured on the sea / At beginning she excusid
her self of all these things to tell / And began to weep / when the king
saw that he conforted her and said to her that he would take her to his wif for
her beauty / And spak so fair to her and so graciously. That she told him all
her lif / how she was daughter of ^he king Acrusius / and how she was shette
in the tour And how Jupiter had deceyuyd her / and how her fader had put her
in the sea / what shall I say more / when the king pylonnus herd all these
fortunes of the damoysell / he had pytye of her And wedded her with great
honnour And did do norysshe perseus / And gate on her a sone which was named
danus / but of this matter I will tarry and torn again to the history of
Jupiter etc.

How Jupiter retornyng fro troyes by see encountrid the great thief Egeon
which he fought with and over came and of the tydinges that he had of danes
whereof he was passing sorrowful.
When Jupiter was departid fro troyes as before is said he made his marouners to
saylle and row with all diligence for to withdraw fro the port And for to
approuche crete / for he knew wel^ that the time of his promise made to danes
was expired And tht displesid him greatly that he might not amend hit his
marouners than did all that they could do by the space of a day naturel^ but
that day past / there roos a tempest in the sea so terrible and out of mesure
that hit bare many shyppys with their apparayll under water brake their sternes
and helmes / and drowned all the shyppys reseruyd only that ship where
Jupiter was in / wherefore he wept outragyously / This tempeste duryd two days
and two nyghtes / they saw not that time on the heaven son ne moan ne sterres
/ / Jupiter and they that were with him wend never better have dyed how well
they escaped the death. And took land on the third day when the tempest was
cessid no thing in crete ner in the sea of Europe. But in the occeane so far
that they knew not the langage of them that enhabyted the port where they came
to Ancre.

When Jupiter and his people saw the dyuersite of the people dwelling in this
port and their manyer of living they knew that they were fer from their
regyon and than was Jupiter disconfortyd in such wise / that he wysshed that
he had not be there ner come on the sea for as much as he knew wel^ that he
might not accomplisshe his promise made unto danes his love / he made many
great bewaylinges touching this matter and more than I can say / And also
complained his men that he had lost in the storm and tormente as well as he
complained the defaute of his promise / how well when his felaws that is to
wete yxion and the centaures and gammedes had refresshid them and vytaylled
them and had well put all things in point and had taken all things
necessary for their ship / they disancred and departid fro this port and
took their way in to the eeste / And so exployted day by day and month upon
month that they entryd in to the sea Egee / but they had not long sailed when
egeon the great thief and rouare. which held at his will all this see /
disancred fro the port of the isle of deserte / And acompanyed with six
galeyes and with a thousand men of Arms came to fore Jupiter apparayllyng them
to bataylle in Intencion for to have destroyed them.

When Jupiter and the Centaures saw the conduyte of the thief / they knew
lightly that they might not faylle of bataylle / And sayng each to other that
they should defend them unto the death / they had not long hold parliament
among them but they garnysshed them with their arms and they displayed the
banyer with the egle of gold And in the displaing they made a great Joy as
they had been in paradis At this time Gamynedes had his wound heled / when he
saw that each man adoubed him to fight sauf he which was prisonner / he came
And kneled down on his knees to fore Jupiter and required him right humbly that
he would comande to deliuere him his harnoys for to help to his worshipp and
also to defend his lif promittyng to do his true deuoyr / Jupiter took up
gamynedes when he saw him so meke him self / And began to set his love on
him in such wise that hit endured unto the death / And that more he made that
his harnoys and Arms were yolden to him / sayng that fro than forth they shall
be brethern and felawis in Arms and gammedes answered to him that he would
always abide and dwell his servant.

Among these deuyses Egeon and his gallees aborded the ship of Jupiter and
escryed them to death Egeon was in the front before as captain / Jupiter
beheld him and knew him by his arms that he bare / and yet er any struck was
smyten he escryed him and said Thief and very rouare and pyrate how dare thou
escrye to death him that made the tremble and fle to fore him at the bataylle of
Crete under the regard of his sword dyed and made reed with the blood of the
unhappy tytannoys / behold and see me I am Jupiter the mortal^ enemy of all
thy lignage / Thou in like wise art mine enemy / and now art come to bataylle
against me / hit may be well said that we shall run each upon other by great
felonnye And that this recountre shall be right domageable for the or for me /
And late the gods do their playsir.

When egeon understood that Jupiter had said to him / And that he was the
destroyar of his lignage / he had the heart so surmountyd of ire and Inpacience
that he could not answer oon word And grynyng with the teth he began to smite
so hard toward Jupiter / that if the struck of the axe that he held had been
adressid / there had never be remedy of his life / but Jupiter knew the feet of
the war / and when he saw the struck come / he avoided hit / And haunsid his
glaiue and charged hit upon egeon so seurly that he could not avoid the struck
that was so peysant / That he was so astonyed that he made him fall down upon
the plankes of the galeye / Than made the pirates and thieves a great cry and
fille upon Jupiter and his felawis Gamynedes held his axe in his hands and
was not than idle / he did and wrought vayllyantly after his puyssance / And
so did the Centaures the skarmusshe was great / And many were deed / not of
the party of Jupiter / But of the party of the pirates / And so labored the
centaures that they died their galeyes with the blood of their enemies / And
that the pirates how well they were.x. against oon could not ner might not abide
to fore them etc.

THus began the mortell battle of the pirates and of the Centaures / when that
oon galeye had fought as long as they might / Another came on / Thus Jupiter
and Gamynedes had ynowh to do to fight / And they faylled not. for the more
they smote the more displaysir had the pirates / Each of their strokes was the
death of a pyrate / In process of time egeon came a gayn to the meddle dismayed
and fulfild with Inpacience / he put him in prees to fight in the most
strength. all dispayred to win all or to lose all. At this point the
bataylle was so terrible and so mortal that all the galeyes closid the ship
of Jupiter. And smote on hit / but this was to her vnhapp and ylfare for the
most part of them were slain And than gamynedes and Jupiter entrid in to the
galeye of king Egeon. where they fought so sore on that oon side and that
other of envy who should do best / That of all them that were with in / was
not left oon man but he was slain or cast in to the sea Reseruyd only Egeon
which Jupiter took with his hand and bond him with an honderd chains of iron
etc.

OF these chains of iron egeon had acustome for to bind his prysonners unto
the time they had done his will / when the pirates saw the myschyef that ran
upon them / And that her maystre was ouercomen and bounden with the chains
that he was wont to tormente his prysonners with all / they intended to save
them self / And wythdrowe hem from the ship of Jupiter / sayng that they had
fought with all / were no men but deuyllis / and that they were unhappy that
came unto her hands / / Jupiter had but oon ship the pirates sparklid abrood
oon here and another there / And when the centaures saw that they said to
Jupiter that hit ought to suffyse to have this victory and his enemy / And
that hit was no need to make poursuyt after the unhappy theuys / Jupiter
accorded the same and entryd again in to his ship with gammedes and egeon /
and after made his maryners to take her course again / And alleway he had in his
memory danes / hit needs not to make long deuyses of these bewaylinges and
Iournees and other auentures / he was a year long sailing by the sea / And in
the end of the year he arrived in his royame and there fond four honderd horse
which they of crete presentyd him to his byen venue.

THe queen Juno his wife made him great chiere for she louyd him with all her
heart / she festyd him and them that presented to him the horses / And he put
in prison egeon / And let gammedes goo fre where he would they louyd than to
gyder ever after as two brethern / when Jupiter had been there three days he
took four honderd of his men of the most puyssant / And made them noble / And
after made hem knights gyuyng to each of them oon of his horses. And taught
them and informed them the feet of Arms after the discipline of yxion and of
the Centaures And than when he had don this he assemblid a thousand pietons or
fotemen and two hounderd Archers. And in the compaygyne of them of the
Centaures And of the knights he departed fro Crete fyften days after his
retorn / And sent not for pluto ne for neptune And took his way unto the cite
of Arges in entencion to have rauysshid the fair Danes / But he had not fer
goon when he encountrid and met oon of the citezeins of Arges a noble man And
a worshipful that recounted and told to him all the lif of Danes for as much
as he demanded him tidings / And assured him on his lif that the king
Acrisius had cast her on the sea / For as much as she had brought forth a
litill sone against his commandment.

When Jupiter herd the Caas and the Infortu^ne of Danes / he began to sorrow
and sighe sore. The sweet came in to his visage And the teres in to his eyes he
called Gamynedes and yxion And told hem that his viage was broken And that the
king Acrisius had cast her in to the sea for whom he made this Armee /
Gamynedes and yxion conforted him the best wise they could And brought him
again to Crete he held him there solitaryly a while And lay by his wif Juno /
And Juno and her aunte seres made him good chere often times And so often came
seres that ones she axid the cause of his sorrow / He beheld the beauty of her
/ And that she was allone did so did so much to her that he had to do with
her / and knew her flesshly / and that she conceyuyd of his seed a daughter /
and after he determined in his will that he would goo in to secylle and
conquerre the contre wylling alwey to ocupie him self in any exercitees and
took leave of the king yxion and of the centaures / his shyppyng was ready he
went to the sea and came in to secylle and conquered hit with the isle of lennos
/ And when he had so done he went in to ytalye / And descended in to the house
of king Ianus / which receyuyd him and made him great chyer / and told him
that his fader saturn was come newly for to dwell thereby / And that he was
souerainly louyd of all the people for as much as he taught hem to labor
the vynes and corns

All the blood changed in Jupiter when he herd that Ianus spak to him of his
fader satu^rne. how well he went for to see him / and saw him and fond his
fader making and foundyng a new cite in the place where now stante the
capytole of rome / And in such wise he submyttyd him to his fader / that
saturn took him to his grace / and made pees with him / And also acorded to
him that he should enjoy fro than forth on his royame of crete at the acorde
and making of this pees were the king Ianus and the king euander / and they
dwelled that on nyhe that other / that is to wete Ianus in a cite called
laurence / And euander in a cite being nyhe the mount. auentyn And so was the
king ytalus of cyracuse that made in this time a new cite named albe upon the
river of tybre / All these kings made great chiere of the pees of the fader
and the sone / And thus Jupiter abidyng there / he acqueynted him with the wif
of king euander named Nychostrate for as much as she was right expert in the
science of nygromancie and in charms and sorts / And so he lernyd this
science / Jupiter after this took leave of her and of his fader saturn and of
his neyhebours / And left there saturn / that was there married again unto a
woman callid philiris of whom he had a sone callid picus that was fader of
king famus husbonde of the queen fatua of whom hercules was Amorous as hit
shall be said in the second book / And returned in to Crete And there fond that
his wif was deliueryd of his sone vulcan / And that his acqueyntyd amite seres
was deliueryd of his daughter named proserpine / whereof Juno was right evil
plesid and content / And complained to Jupiter of the dishonor that he had
don to her / but Jupiter set naught there by but laughed / And was more Joyous
of his daughter than of his sone / For his daughter was meruayllously fair and
wlcan his sone was foull and courbbackyd / how well for to live in pees with
Juno he married seres unto a noble man named siccam and gaf to hem the Royame of
secylle and the Cite of siracuse / And sent hem for to dwell there with
proserpina / And hit was not long after that he sent his sone wlcan in to the
isle of lennos / whom he betoke to govern to three men called berroutes
sceropes and pyragmon / And these three men kept him so well that he came to cage
and that he was a man of right enhauncyd courage and learned all sciences in
especial nygromancie Geomancie and promancie. And made many meruayllous
things that be not for to believe wherefore I will tarry now of him and of
Jupiter / And I will trete of his sone perseus for as much as of him came
Alcumena.

How the queen Meduse came to Athenes to worship in the temple the goddess
pallas / And how the king neptunus wax Amerous of her and how she deceyuyd him.
IN this time when Jupiter dwelled pesibly king of crete / and that his sone
vlcan waxed and learned the craft of nygromancie / / In the land of esperye /
passid out of this world a king named porcus a man of right great enterprise /
which the esperiens called god of the sea of spaygne Auncyently named esperye
as said is / This king left three doughtres that had not but oon eye as the
poets say. that is to say that her pryncipall charge was unto the vanytees
of the world / And therefore they were called gorgonnes that is to say
cultyueresses or laborers of the earth for as much as they intended unto
vices that beheld erthely things Of these doughtres oon was named meduse that
other ewryale and the third scenno / Meduse that was the eldest of that other
succeeded in thempyre and in the royame. And the poets say that she had head
of a serpent / gyuyng by this to understand that she was sonuerainly wise and
subtyl^ / After the death of king porcus this meduse gouuerned hyely her royame
and held pirates and men of war / And in her beginning she took and hauntyd
the sea of ewrope in feet and with right great tryumphe descended on aday at
the port of Attenes / and sent unto the king Neptu^ne to require him that he
would grant unto her that she might enter in to his cite for to worship in
the temple the goddess pallas / which was newly maad Neptune did great
honor unto the messangers of meduse / and Accorded unto her that she should
enter in to his cite and in to the temple / Forseen that she should have none
with her save her damoyselles / when meduse herd the answer of king Neptune
/ she concluded that she would go in to the temple / whereof was a great renomee
and was a companyed with many damoiselles so richely arrayed that hit was a
tryumphe for to see / she entryd in to the temple and in to the cite And there
she turned in to stones not only the men that beheld her but Also the women
and among all other specially a queen that was named yde.

BY this hit is to understand that this meduse was so of excellent beauty and
was so passing rich. that all they that beheld her / gafe hem self over
perfitly to couoyte her beauty and her rychesses / And therefore write the
poets that they were turned in to stones. For they that dispose them and give
them to the delices of this world ben lykned and compared unto hard stones /
whereof may no good come Thus than meduse entryng in to Athenes conuertyd and
turned many men in to stones in so much that Neptunus herd these tidings And
desiryng to see this queen he went him in to the temple where she was in
contemplacion / And he had not long behold her / when he felt him so
couoytous of her and of her love that he said to him self that she should be his
wif. And that she should never escape him.

THis meduse was long space in contemplacion this during neptune desired her
beaulte more and more / and his heart Iuged in him that he should come to his
entencion / but anon after that his heart had made this Judgment / he a lityll
debated considering the excellence of her another Judgment trauersid and
^ourded in his entendement that constraynd him to say these words that follow
/ alas in what matyer in what sorrow and in what right great and enflamyng pain
ben they that been brennyng in love by long space of time / that I that now
begin / find me in somany sighs and pain / that I wot never how I may in
time come unto this lady for to require her to be my wife / she is shynyng in
all beaulte and in right haboundaunt rychesses / this is that me lackyth / she
beholds me among other whiles in her prayers / hit may happen well that love
may torn her heart for to make thaliance of her and me / and what is this /
men say that love hurts no man / but if hit be be his eyes / if the eyes be
not made for to see / I shall say that my desire shall hap well / where am I
/ where I am I put me out where is my heart where is my desir / I wot never
what I think / And my thought may be abusion And mine abuse / may well be
reuersid / Mine eyes perauenture wene to see that they see not / Mine eres
ymagyne to here and yet they ben deef / I find my self in a great plain and
vain ataynt / and yet more in a superfluous error more than any man may have
/ For when I see this lady more excellent than the other in beauty and
richesses / reason tells me that she is not comen hither for me / And when I
behold that she is allone with out men in my cite who shall again say my
will. I shall require her to be my wif after that she has don her devotion /
And if she accord to my request my work shall do well And if she gaynsaye
and with stand hit than I must use force and auctorite royal.

THus when Neptune came to this conclucion Meduse aroos fro her contemplacion
And lokyd right fair Neptune went to her And did her reverence / And after
prayed her that she would goo to his ryall palace for to refresshe her Meduse
thankyd him of his curtoisie And said that she might not well tarry there at
that time / when neptune understood that she was in will to return with out
to Areste her in his hows ne in his cite he was sore displaysid in his heart /
Alleway he held manyer And drew her a part and said unto her changyng color.
Madame I am sorry that ye reffuse to take patience in my hows / I am king of
this cite / The gods have not given to me so much hap / that I have yet
any wif any lady or damoysell / hit is so now happend that the gods and
fortune has enspyred you to come hither Certes hit is so now that your right
hye beauty that perisshid the eye of my heart / And has made me so couoytous
of you that I give unto you. heart. body. and goods / And all that a lover
may give unto his love and lady or any king may give / wherefore I pray you that
ye will descend unto my palace / to the end that I may have comynycacion more
secretly there / And tell unto you the right great love that I have in you.

Anon as Meduse understood the requests of the king she began to frown and
not wyllyng to be other wise / she answered to him. Sire king if hit were so
that mine heart desired acqueyntance and co^mynycacion of oon man more than of
an other in truth if I so fond me / I should hold my self right happy
findyng my self in the grace of your eyes / but the matter goth with me all
otherwise / I love the men as much oon as an other / I have entencion to abide
and continue in my virginite / ye be a king ye have given to me saufconduyt to
achyeue my pilgrimage I require you that ye hold you plesid and that ye do in
such wise as ye had never seen me / Dame said neptune how shall I do that ye
say / when my heart is all given unto you / Sire answered Meduse hit behooves
first to know and after that to love I have told you hyer that I have
entencion to abide a virgyne / what may hit prouffite you to say that ye have
given me your heart / these ben but lost words. Dame said neptune the dyamond
shyneth not tyl^ hit be pollisshyd / ye were never perauenture desired ne
required of love more than now / wherefore ye have no more love in oon man than
in an other / wherefore ye must understand that the hauntyse makes love / And
if ye come with me I make no doubts and soiourne that your will shall change
And that ye shall take alyance with me Sire answered Meduse my will is
unchangeable / notwythstondyng said neptune hit must change / And abaysshe you
not. Sire answered. Meduse I see no thing that yeuyth me cause of enbaysshement.
For I feel my heart ferme and stable in his operacions / ye be a king and have
given me saufconduyt for to furnysh my devotion at the temple of the goddess
of your cite / Rayson and honor should govern your courage / Dame said neptune
if your beauty surmounted not the beauty of other women I should consent anon
your return but when I conceive you formed in so hye degree of nature / that
nothing lackyth in you / And further when I see that the great goddess pallas
has enspyred you to this my cite / Rayson may have no place And how hit be by
love or by force / ye shall be my wif / For I had lever dye And run in to
all the deshonnours of the world Than for to faylle to have your Alliance.

When Meduse that was wise had understand the words of Neptune and saw well
that he was outragyously achauffid of her Amorous desire / and that she might
not ascape his puyssance for her beauty / but if hit were by any adventure Than
she changed her here in to couleures / that is to say that where force reigned
she wrought by subtilte And said unto the king Sire I know that ye be a great
and puyssant lord / and that love has meuyd you by force to take me to your
wif Syn your playsir is such I am co^tente to do all in such wise as ye have
demanded / and that this same day be maad the marriage of you and me / but for
more solempnly to halowe the fefte of our espousailles I require you of two
things First that I may return unto the port to my people for to array and
dress me with my triu^phant richesses / for I ne may employe to more great and
glory than this day of my marriage And secondly that ye will do array and
adresse the ladies of this cite for to receive me as hit apperteyneth For I
will well that ye know that in all the remenant of ladies of the world / ye
shall not find any that have more meuable goods ne richesses than I have

NEptune was than as oon all rauysshyd in Joy when he herd this answer of
meduse / he thankyd her of her sweet words And agreed to her to do in such
wise as she had devised / And anon sent again this Meduse unto her galleyes
hopyng that she would return again to be his wife / but when she by the subtylte
of her wit was rendered again at the port / where neptune had no puyssance Instead for to return to the cite / she did do disancre all her shippis And
let sail fall and in all haste wythdrewe hem fro the port And instead to
array her in vestementis nupciall she took her arms and made all her men to
arm them / And thus she ascapyd fro neptune which was in great sorrow
merueyllously / And in great Anger said that she had head of a serpent / And
that her here is were turned in to coleuuers to the end to hyde more graciously
the malice of her and the manyer how she had deceyuyd and begyled him etc.

THus than ascaped meduse the hands of neptune by the mien of her head
serpentyne / And neptune abood conuertyd and tornyd in to stoone / that is to
say in erthely affections of richesses of meduse / And went not after her for
as much as her puyssance surmountyd much all the puyssance of atthenes / Of
this thing ran the renomee through all greece / And the beauty of meduse was so
recomanded. that of tho parties went all day many knights auenturyng their
lives / And many of them were turned in to stones and many lost their tresors
innumerable / enforcyng them by Arms to conquer this lady / which withstood
all way here assaults and assayllyng. And all way abode vainqueresse of them
/ Meduse set nowht by king ne prince that would have her to wife She was all
set to get and gader the tresors of the world / if her fader had been
strongly coueytous / yet was she more covetous / And she comen again fro
athenes in to her royame After she had put under in subjection the greeks that
exposed them against her as said is. she so mountid in to the ^^pe swalowe of
couetyse and avarice that she made war unto all her nyghebours. And dauntyd
hem / and constraind them to pay her yerly great tributes / whereby her astate
and name aroos and was so greet / that the bruyt thereof ran in to many far
regions And among other in to the cite of naples where reigned the king pilonne
as before is said.

IN this time that the renomee of meduse was in his bruyt. Perseus sone of
danes and of Jupiter was in the verdour of his beginning and tempryen strength
/ And daily required his mother and the king that they would give him leave to
search his Auentures When than pylonnes herd speak of the haultesse of Meduse
of her rapines and of her avarice / he beheld that his sone in law should do a
virtuous werk / if he might correct her / told to perseus that he would send
him theder Perseus thankyd him and said he would enploye thereto all his
puyssance Than the king pylonne sent for men of Arms and made ready thretty
galeyes for thexercyte of perseus / when all was ready / he called to him on
aday perseus. And dubbyd him knight for the order of cheuallrye began that time
to be vsid in all the world hit was ordonned that that same day perseus should
go to the sea / And when the king had accomplisshed all the serymonye to the
caas required in the paynems wise Perseus took leave of the king pylonne And of
his mother danes and of the damoyselles And right Ioyously entryd in to his
galeye / After they dysancred and departed fro the port of naples with great
bruyt of tabours and trompes / And with banyer splayed saylyd in to the hye see
/ hit was a good and a fair sight to see his departement there was many a teer
wept / every body loved perseus for so much as he was humble and debonayr /
The Apulyens departed never as long as they might see him / And than after
they returned home prayng unto the gods that good and right happy might be
the fortune of perseus / And the noble knight went by the sea and by the
ports with out adventure / what shall I say / he so exployted that he came in
to affrike that was named lybye at that time / And there would have refresshid
him at a port beside the strayt of gybalter / where as was king Athlas the
great astrologyen / but this king put him fro landyng at this port / And came
in arms against him and showed fro far sign that he would keep his contre
with the sword / Than perseus which would not there employe his Armee
wythdrewe him fro the port en entencion to avenge him another time of that
rudesse if fortu^ne would help him / he passid the strayte and sought so long
the royame of meduse / that anon after he fond hit and had very tydinges by
certain marchantes / that he fond labouryng on the sea. that told him that she
and her susters soiourned in a cite which stood on the ryuage.

Great was the Joy of perseus when he understood these tydinges / his folk had
great need of vitayll / he callid hem all and said that they should make hem
ready and Arm them / for they were nyhe the place that they sought / and than
as they saylid always forth about three owres to fore the even they saw the
Cite where meduse was Inn / And more over they saw meduse and her susters
with great nombre of men of war that renged them on the port so richely
arrayed and in point that hit was meruaylle to see. when perseus saw this he
dyuydyd his Armee in three egale bataylles / each of ten galeyes and ordained
and put in capitaynes of war. And wisely informed hem how to nyhe and
approach the port. And after he put him self in the first battle And the
poets say that the gods pallas gaf to him than a shield of cristall / that
is to understand that he approuchyd right wisely the port that was upon the
great see of spain And that he conduyted him self by such prudence. That is
likenyd to cristall / That he came and fought hand of hand the puyssance of
meduse. And that shynyng the right clear shield of his prudence in receyuyng
and yeuyng Infinyte strokes he gate land and constrained meduse to return in
to her cite by force by force of arms and by prowess / and with great
dyscipline and fightyng of his sowdyours / At that time the head of serpent of
meduse might notwythstonde his first fortunes. For she that was acustomed to
put under foot and overcome all them that exposed them in arms against her. At
this time was put to thextremyte / where she had put other to.

How perseus vaynquysshed in bataylle the queen Meduse and she fled in to her
cite.
SVche was the enter of the war that was between perseus and meduse where the
gorgonnes fortunat / which meduse had cherysshed in right hye degree / fille
down fro the whele of fortune / which whele had consented that the prudence of
perseus should be cause of her humylieng and mekyng / This notwythstondyng
meduse took courage in her self and reentryd in to her cite / And gaf charge to
oon of her men to go unto her enemies and to enquere of them who was chief and
captayn of hem / And what thing he sought in her country / The hisperyen at
commandment of Meduse departed fro the cite And came to the ooste of the
Apuliens that intended for to logge them that night / he did so much that he
came to perseus that took his refection upon a table that he had maad of a great
stoon of marbell and said to him in this wise. Sire the vaynqueresse of men
has sent me to thee for to enquere what thing thou wylt do in her contre to
the end that she may know what she has to do / Messanger answered perseus I
have entencion to fraunchise and make fre the men fro the seruytude that thy
maystresse holds hem in / And to make her that has but oon eye / that she
convert and torn men no more in to stones And that her richesses shall be no
more the causes of the loss and perdicion of knights which would have her in
marriage / For against her malice of the serpente I shall be armed with prudence
/ and will wel^ tht she know that to morn with out longer delay I shall give
assault unto her cite / In caas she come not against me in battle.

WIth this Answer the esperien returned unto Meduse and recountyd unto her all
that he had herd / Meduse assemblid than all her men of war and said to them
/ hit is not meruaylle though I have mine heart anguysshous when after that I
have vaynquysshyd great companyes of men of Arms that I see that shamefully we
ben goon a back and withdrawn in to this Cite by the prowess of an handful
of men / O what Anguysshe is this to them that have been in custom to overcome
and to tryumphe in all manner wars / where ben the hye enterprises by which
we have made all the sees occidentall to fere and dread us. Where ben the
glayues that had been yolden to us of the kings our trybutaryes / where ben the
Arms and strengthes that has made to tremble the mountaygnes and roches of
libye where be they that this day have taken feer for prowess / dread for
hardynes dishonor for honor At least sin this thing is so governed hit
behooves to pass the best wise we may / but now hit behooves also that every
man courage and virtue him self. And that to morn hit be recoueryd that by us
this day is lost / The enemies of this Cite have don us to understand and
know that to morn they will give us assault / If we ne furnyssh them of
bataylle. And how hit be also that they ben trauayllyd of the air of the sea /
hit is much better that we furnyssh them of bataylle at this time than we
should abide longer Our enemies ben strangers. here heth our triu^phe or our
mortal mysaduenture / if we overcome them hit shall be a memory of us far
and nyghe in all honor / if the caas goo contrary we shall run with the
loss of our lives in to derision and mocquerye of all peples / And what is
this shall the blood be spread a brood of them / that have made the ground read
of the blood of other. shall the honor be wastyd and lost And also the name
that we have gotten with so great labor / All the world takes courage and
hope / these two things ben also couenable in war / as the arms And with
out them shall never man attain to the crown of victory / A than take heart
to you / and dispose your harnoys and arms / to morn shall be the day that ye
must need do shine your deeds the best wise ye may and for to keep your
renomees and your tytles of honorable prowess.

DAme answered oon of there capitayns it is great damage / that ye ne were a man
/ For if hit had be so / hit is so apparent that ye should have subiuged and put
under all the monarchye of men / As ye say / we must needs keep our renome
/ if fortune has been to us this day froward / to morn she shall torn to
prouffyt / the wounds and hurtes that been made in our worship and blood we
most bear hit and take hit in gree. And our prowess and honor shall to morn
put us to fore the shame / we shall esuert^e us Conne not ye rise so erly
that we might be on the front of hem well a rayed and apparaylid for to
labor for the prosperity of your request / when meduse herd the good will
of her captain / to whom consentid all the other / she was right Joyous / and
concluded with them that she with all her puissance should bespringe and assayll
her enemies at midnyght in hope to come upon hem unawares This co^clucion
thought good unto all / And each man withdrewe for to take her rest and for
to make ready his harnoys Meduse slepte not much this night as she that had the
heart always great / and sore chargid with appetite of vengeance / And at
midnyght than she sowned to arms / and made hem to be ready and adoubed. she
took her banyers tht were right rich / her men were diligent I nowh to arm
them for of that craft they were well enduced / And when they were ready and
assemblid to fore the palais riall / Meduse and her susters yssuid out of the
gate in rich astate / and gyuyng good morrow to her folk / with as litill noise
as she might she deuidyd hem in two companyes whereof she made oon company to
depart by oon of the yates of the cite / and she her self co^duyted that other
by the yate tht was ayenste the port or haven etc.

AT this time the air was pure and net / And the sterres twinklid / And the moon shone and put away the derknes of the night acordyng to her celestyall
office / When meduse was in the feldes she went after the ryuage of the sea /
And supposid to have taken perseus and his folk but she faylled. For as soon as she yssuyd out of her cite / hit was parceyuyd of the wacchemen of the ooste
of perseus. And they signefied their coming to perseus and his men that slept
in her harnoys And thus when she approchid unto her enemies / and had supposid
to have distressid them / / she fond them arrayed and renged in good ordenance
of bataylle / whereof there aroos a right great cry of both parties / And with
this cry there engendryd a great scarmuche / so eygre and fires / that hit was
need unto all / to put forth her prowesses and their strengthes / there was
many man cast down deed upon the sand / there was many a swerd dyed reed with
blood / there came on the second bataylle of meduse making great bruyt in
Ioynnyng of the bataylle. And than had they of naples strong party for to
maystrye etc

IN this tempeste perseus gafe him to no rest* he had always his eyes open /
his eeres bent to here / his arms enhaunsed to smite / he was quyk and in his
grene yougthe / his sword trenchid and cutted dispairly / he smote no man ne
shield but he al to frusshid hit and slew down right / Meduse that always put
her in the most strength and frayes / and most prees by mighty great courage /
for to entretene and to hold to geder her men / seeing often times the
appertisements and the noble fetes of arms of her enemy perseus / had great
sorrow / For his only conduyte held the apuliens in estate and array / And there
was none that might resist his strength / or at least that had might for to
resist him / This thing turned to great displaysir to meduse / Alleway she
bare this displaysir and vsid her prowess the best wise she might / she did
great damage to her enemies / And smote down here and there so vaylliantly that
she seemed much better to be a man than a woman / And better became her to
brandissh a sword than to spynne or torn a spyndell.

How perseus in this bataylle slew the mighty suster of meduse and venquysshid
the bataylle.
THis scarmuche than dured long with great betyng down of men of Arms and of
knights Thenuye that meduse had of well doing of perseus gaf to her Arms more
force and strength that nature had given her / she was full of malice / And she
could keep her well fro the swerd of perseus / And all way she was enuyronned
of the best men she had. what shall I make long count they fought in this
facion unto the day with out that any wyste to whom me should give the victory
/ but than like as the son began to sprede and show his bemes and rays / In
semblable wise perseus began to show the rays of his prudence / And
braundisshid his swerd And seeing on that oon side the banyer royal he smote
in to the prees. And drew to that part castyng men down deed on the sands
moo than an honderd / This banyer was square four foot made of cremesin satin /
And in the mids was an image paintyd whereof the body was a figure and facion
of a woman and the head was of a serpente etc.

MEduse was never far fro this banyer / for as much as she drew her allwey
theder to for rescuse / When perseus was comen theder with great suit of his
folk he cried perseus perseus. And liftyng his swerd that was temprid with
blood from on end to that other / hit happend that the first struck that he
gaf in this place fille upon oon of the susters of meduse so terribly that she
confounded ded with a great wound beginning on her heed down to her stomach /
than they of naples smote on the hesperyens with all her puyssance / Tho smote
perseus endlong and overthwart on the right side and on the left side / his
strokes were so mortal that they affrayed not only the most feeble of his
enemies but all the most strengest and also the asseured meduse.

Great was the occision / In this point meduse enforced her power to wythstonde
the great force of perseus / This notwythstandyng she that a fore times had
ouercomen the men was than ouercomen / And having late the courage lift up and
the heart more fires than any man / she was veynquysshid of despayr / for the
only cheuaulrous conduyte of perseus that had broken her banyer / that had
smyten her men in pieces party slain with his swerd and party fled. And that
he had not only made reed his swerd and right hand with her blood / but the sea
by small goters was made read of the warm blood / in which meduse lost her
ferocyte / All her presumpcion all her strength and all her vigor so evil
went and all the work on her side. that when she had seen her banyer
destroyed / When she had seen the most victoryous of her knigthes confounded
by tempest of death / when she saw her men of Arms leave the bataylle and flee
to fore perseus as to fore the image of death / Fynably she saw all her
puysance torn in to destruction general / whereof the end was that each man
gaf hit over / And every man that might save him self sauyd him by caves And
busshes / here oon and there an other so sore affrayed that hit was a pietous
thing to here their cries And many sauyd them in the cite and many were slain
in the fleyng / of perseus and his men.

How perseus conquered meduse and her cite And smote of her head And how he
went to fight against the king Athlas of septe a mighty and puyssant geant
etc.
PErseus at this disconfiture poursued meduse fleyng in to her cite and entryd
in with her and the most part of his people with him. That faylid him never to
put to death all the men defensable that they fond to the end that no
insurrection should be against them / but they spared the blood of women And
lityll children by the commandment of perseus. And among the other as perseus
had found meduse that was put in a cisterne / he had pytye of her / how be hit
he smote of her head / in such facion that the blood that yssuyd out engendrid
pegasus the fleyng horse. by the head that perseus smote of / of meduse is
understand that he took from her her royame And depryuyd her of hit / And
bannysshid her pour and nakyd / And by the fleyng horse that was engendrid of
the blood / issued fro her head / is understand that of her richesses Issuyng
of that royame he founded and made a ship named pegase / that is as much to
say / as good renomee And this ship was likened unto an horse fleyng / For as
much as the good renomee of perseus was than born fro region to region / in
such wise / as upon an horse fleing And for as much as perseus went in this
ship in dyuerce contrees where he gate him a great name.

BY this facion than perseus conquered the head of Meduse / and did do make
pegase the most swyft ship that was in all the world And abode there certain
nombre of days seeking and serching the tresours of meduse and the rychesses
in which she and her susters had set her entencion and her heart There fond
perseus stones precious and things meruayllous / when his ship was made he
filde hit with precious bagues and Iuellis And leuyng in this cite men for to
govern hit and conduyte / he went to the sea and took for his arms / the
arms of meduse / And restyd not till he came to the poort of the cite / where
reigned athlas / sayng that he would put him under and subiugue him before er he
returned in to his contre.

This cite had to name septe / athlas knew well the arms of meduse and fro as
fer as he saw pegase the ship he knew the arms that were therein / than he
thought that meduse had be veynquysshyd of these strangyers and doubtyd sore
their coming / this notwythstondyng he did put his men in Arms / And
bewailed much phylotes his brother otherwise named esperus that kept the
gardyn with apples of gold with his doughtres when his folk were armed he
rengyd hem upon the port in good ordenance And anon after came to the port and
there liuerd assault full of dyuerce and sharp fierstees / Athlas was young.
strong of body and puyssant of people / he defended him vayliantly And kept the
port with the point of his swerd so well that by this assault / Perseus
conquered no thing on him in two days that the assault dured / but that was
more by the strong nature of the port than by the strength of the swerd of
king athlas

THan when perseus saw that he had not folk ynow for to take this port / he
withdrewe him in to hye see and sent in to naples unto the king pilonnus half
the tresors of Meduse signefieng to him his hye adventure / And requyryng him
that he would send him a thousand sowdyours / the king and Danes had great
Joy of these tidings / And at the request of perseus assemblid fyften
honderd fyghtyng men which they sent in to libye with their propre sone danus
whom they ordained chyef and captain of that Armee / When perseus saw come
these fyften honderd fyghtyng men / fro as fer as he had aspied them in the sea
he knew that hit was his socoure that came to him. and took his horse volant /
And went to mete hem / And fond there danus his brother / to whom he made the
most great chyer of the world / And entrid in to his ship / And there abode
all that day festyng him / And after when hit came to the night he commanded his
maryners that they should row and sail toward septe / and they said to him
that on the morn they would deliuere him at the port / with that the marouners
put hem in deuoyr to do their craft so well that after the night was past
about the son rising they shewid to perseus the haven and port of septe.

THan was Perseus full of great gladness and called danus and said to him my
brother / We ben now comen to the port where thou shall get this day honor
and worship / if hit plese the gods. For if the good adventure help us / the
honor shall appertain unto thee to fore me / that durst not enbrase allone by
my puyssance / A than in the name of all our gods late us enploye here the
head of meduse / hit is mine aduys at this time that she shall do torn in to
stones all them of this regyon / That is to understand that by the and thy
men that by the mean of the rychesses of meduse be comen hither / they of this
cite set to fore us / shall be constrained to abandone and give over their
poort / And flee between the walls of stones of their cite / My brother Answered
danus I have good hoope and trust in fortune that she shall be thy help / but
for the honor and worship of this werk hit shall not torn to my prouffit /
but unto thyn that art sechar of so honorable awerk / And I desire no thing
in this party but the name of a soldier For at thy souldees enuyronned only
of the love of our fraternity I come for to serve the / and if the rychesses of
meduse had not comen in to naples / with thy right good fame these warryours
had not comen in to libye / than for conclusion hit is to conceive / if in this
work be honor that hit torn in to thy glory and loenge / but this
notwythstondyng I shall not fail the / but for thy love and worship I shall
expose to the assault all that I may and hold of nature And I pray the to
dubbe and make me knight.

WIth this word Perseus drew out his swerd and after gaf to danus the order of
knyghthode and sin commanded that each man should garnyshe him of his armures /
And than made dysplaye banyers standards and penous / and other recognyssances
and knowlechinges / After did do sown his trompettes Clarions and tabours And
than after renged all his galeyes / And them set in right fair and good
ordenance did so much that he came to the poort / which was all full and
enuyronned with libyens that were ready to cast on them speres darts and
stones. For they of that contre were right experyent of the war / And also to
aborde this poort there was a right great bruyt And a right grievous assemble /
Perseus was in pegase and assayllyd the libyens at on end. And danus was in
another galeye and assayllyd them in like wise / And they put hem both in
the most danger of the assault they had great sheldes and large where with
they coueryd hem / They dredde no struck of glayue ne sword ne of stoones they
put hem self in to the mids of the port / And there they gaf the assault
where many were deed on that oon party and on that other plente of fightars in
such wise that at thentree there were many apukens confounded and put a back.
For they were than hoote and aspre but after this when they had gotten land /
Perseus and danus began to smite so dismesurably upon the libyens that they
beat hem down with out remedy now here now there at right side and at lift
side all made read with their blood / Also Perseus gaf so great a struck with
his glayue unto athlas / that purposid to have come broken the passage / that
never after athlas had no hope / ne durst not come among the strokes / how
well that he was great strong and puyssant.

SO much coueytous of victory were perseus and danus and they of naples / the
libyens had not be accustomed to find so fires and mortal arms as them of
perseus / the king Athlas wist not what to say he encouraged his people the
best wise he couthe / this notwithstanding he saw hem beten down of his
enemies with out nombre and with out mesure / and saw forther that they of
naples wan always And when he had seen all this / and also beheld that these
men had vaynquysshid the queen meduse / he Iuged in him self that he was not
puyssant ynowh to resist their strength / and the hardness of this bataylle
should be to him more domageous than vayllable / so sowned he the retrayt and
fled not in to his cite / but in to a right hye montaygne that was thereby / And
therefore say the poets that athlas by the sight of the head of meduse was
turned in to a mountayn / / And fro than forth on was this hille called athlas
and yet endures the name unto this day / And for as much as athlas sauyd him
there among the stones / he founded syn a castle where he dwelled unto the
time of hercules.

How Perseus turned the king athlas in to a stone And how the queen auria wife
of king pricus wax amerous of the knight belleforon that reffused her. whereof
after he had much pain.
When perseus and danus saw athlas and all his folk put to flight First he
chaced hem unto the mountayn / where they were turned in to stones / dyeng with
their blood caves / busshous weyes and paths And secondly when he had put hem
unto utterance / as much as they cowde they drew to the cite whereof the yates
were not shette ner kept with noman And entryng therein they ne fond but a
litill nombre of matrones and young children which made a terryble great sorrow
/ All the young men and women were fledd unto the feldes and had abandonned
their cite with their folk and goods / When perseus and danus were with in /
and saw that hit was all abandonned to hem and her people / All that they
fond / they passid that night with great Joy and gladness and making great
chier thankyng their gods of their victory That they had given to them. And
on the morn perseus made to beat down the gates of this cite. After he commanded
that every man should take his butin And when they were laden with all. Perseus
and danus went to the sea in to her galeyes. And so sayllyd forth leuyng
athlas in the montaygne where he gafe him unto the study of the science of
astronomy.

IN this time Jupiter made aliance with king tro^s by the moyen of gaminedes
And in sign of love and frendshyp he gaf unto ylion a vigue of gold which was
set in the palais of ylion as hit shall be said in the third book / and hit
was not long after the king troos consumed the course and end of his regne /
and his obsequie was hallowed and made solempnly at troy in great habou^dance
of teres / and than ylion was crowned king of this cite / where he lived
peasibly in a^pliacion and encresing of seygnourye and lordship / and wedded a
noble lady of the cite of whom he receyuyd a sone named laomedon / And for as
much as I find not tht ylion did any thing after his coronaco^n ner made
other thing save tht he achieued and made his palais of ylion / I shall speak
hensforth of laomedon his sone that reigned after him. And here I shall leave the
faytes of this ylion / and yet er I write of laomedon I shall poursiewe my
matere of perseus / and for to come thereto I shall racounte an history that
fill after that perseus had turned king athlas in to a mountaygyne.

IN this time than that perseus began to give his life unto right digne ocuures
and works of noble fame. Accrisius belefader of this perseus and naturell
fader of danes / was put out of his kingdom and royame and of all ^he
seygnourye of arges by a conspiracion that Pricus his brother made against him
And there was left unto acrisius of all his royame no more but only the tour of
darayn whereto he fled for refuge / This acrisius and pricus were naturell
sons of abas lawful sone of linceus that was only left a live of the fifty
sons of egistus by the mercy of his wife ypermestra daughter of danaus.

PRicus than having vsurpyd fro his brother Acrisius the seignourye of the
royame of Arges had a wife named aurea / that was so norisshid That of custom
gaf no charge but to habounde in delyces / and on a day she beheld among her
servants oon so well accomplisshid a knight that nature had no thing
forgoten in him touching his body / of whom she was enamoured / she was young
And her husbond pricus was ancient in his works and condycions And much
less desired the carnal desirs than his wif did / how well they were both
right nyhe of oon eage / This knight thus beloved had to name bellorophon. when
Aurea had put her study to love this knight / she solicited him with her eyes
and of semblauntes drawing him to delight and voluptuosite / but the true
knight that had his heart ferme and stable which parceyuyd well her
countenance / dissimilid and feigned that he was blind in this party And in
the end when the lady saw that by semblant ne sign Amerous that she shewid /
he employed him not ones for to plese her / but fled her compaynie The most
evil wise that she might she intended to torn her love in to hate / and her
fair countenances in to fierste so enuenymed that for to make him dye / she
accusid him to fore her husbonde the king pricus / sayng that he would have
enforced her and required justice Instantly.

AT this accusacion maad / bellorophon was present And sore abasshid and
surprisid at the beginning / but in heering the lady speak at long he assewrid
him self and excusid him / saing madame never plese hit unto the gods / that
for to couere mine honor / I do discouere the disworship and fawlte of another
/ late never man advance him self to deffame another this knowing I shall say
the truth and if there be any man that worthily may prove tht against me / and
overcome the litill noblesse of my heart I shall remette in Judgment of all
noble men the residue of my days Alas lady and fro whens is comen this abusion
for to impose on me that I should have willed to enforce you when or in what
place was this don or where ben the withnesses of the cry tht ye made at the
afray where ben the proves that shall say that ever in my lif I was with you
allone / hit gives me meruaylle fro what heart departed this dishonor tht ye
note in me / and for what cause hit is ymagined aienst me for I will wel^ tht
al^ the world know / tht I have seruid you trewly and loially And that I never
thought dishonor unto you ne unto the king / to whom I pray that he will
take and make Informacion upon my living and to understand in like wise
youris And if hit can be prouyd and appear that I have trespaced that I may be
punysshid. but I pray also that if I be found Innocent / that I may have
light basolucion.

SIre said the lady that strongly was obstynat in her error / / I make me
party against him / if than I accuse him hit is truth / hit ought not to
demand wytnessis of his folly / In this caas I am worth two wytnessis / For
all the world knows that when any ylle man will dishonor a woman he
called no witnesses ne no proves thereto / and does his damnable will the most
secretly that in him is possible And so wend bellorophon to have don with me
whereof I require sentence and Judgment of him / with this word Pricus assemblid
his counceyll / And hit was Iuged that the lady should be believed and that
bellorophon should be culpable of death Than spack pricus to bellorophon and said
/ Fair sone thou know and felest that I have louyd and norisshid the
louyngly thou understand the accusacion of thy lady / the caas is so foull /
that hit may not be purged by denyeng / For if hit were so the evil boys and
garsons should aldaye dyshonoure as many of our women as they could find / In
this caas the ladies have a prerogatyfe for to be believed / And need not to
bring forth wytnessis / And for as much as thy maystresse has vaynquysshid
the and required Judgment of thy trespaas / thou art condempnyd to dye / but
for as much as a fore this time I have had great love unto the And that I
know the a vaylliant man of thy body / I shall relece and attempere this
sentence in this wise / that thou shall goo fight aienste the chymere of
secille And if thou may adaunte her and maistrie / I give the thy lif and
give the plain absolucion of all / moienant that never after thou replicque ne
reherce this trespaas.

SIre answered bellorophon sin that fortune consent that I be attainte of any
infelicite / And that the preuelage of the ladies domyne and go above reason I
had much lever to be vainquysshid by wrong cause and evil / than by Just and
good cause And thank you of the moderacion of your Judgment. And make vow
here in your presence that in all haste I shall goo in to secille to prove me
ayenste the chymere And shall see if fortune shall help me to get again the
lif which she had made me lose by your Judgment / Than the noble knight
departed and took leave of the king / of ladies and damoyselles / Took also his
armures And goods And made covenant and bargayned with certain maronners to
bring him to scecyll / when they were acorded he went to the sea with litill
compaygnye / And he was evil at ease at his heart when he saw that fortune
was to him so diverse / how well he conforted him self in his good quarrel /
And sayllyng on a day on the sea of helespont his maronners lokid in to the
weste And saw come a right great flote of ships of war which dysconforted
them so sorowfully that it was wonder / And they awoke bellorophon that / that
time slepte / And said that they were ded and lost.

BEllorophon confortyd his maronners the best wise he cowde / And told hem that
disconforte cowde not help hem / and thus spekyng a galeye of advantage went
out before his felaws and fleeyng on the sea like unto a bird adressid her
unto the ship where in was bellorophon And aborded hit. and who that will
demand what the name was of the galeye. And what men were there Inn / / I
shall say him that this was pegase and that perseus was therwythinne Seeing
that he might speak to the maronners that carried bellorophon to secylle / Axed
and demanded them what they were an in to what regyon they would goo / when
bellorophon herd perseus speak / he beheld his mayntene and countenance and
Iuged in him self that he was of a good house / and said to him / Certes sire I
have much great Joy of that I see that the ship and maronners ben so well
adressid and in so good recountre as your is / For ye seem well a knight of
noble feetes / And so I shall you say my caas after that ye have made your
arynge / At first point than where ye have enquired what we be / know ye that
in arges we have take our birthe / And as to the second I answer you that we
have entencion to go strayt in to sccylle / to the which I am constrained by
the rygour of a mortal^ Judgment cast upon me at thynstance of a lady called
Aurea that Iniustely and untruely has complaynd upon me saying that I would
have enforced her / This lady that I speak of is wife to the king pricus /
which newly and fresshely has bannysshid and excylled his brother Acrisius out
of his royame / And this king for to plese and satysfye the accusacion of his
wife. has condemned me to death / relecyng allway an hope. For the good and the
agreeable services that I have don to him he had acorded me to live / if so be
hit plese the gods that I may by possibilite vaynquysshe and overcome a
chymere that is in secylle / unto the which ^ go for to assaye me / so I pray
you that in owr Infortune we be not let by you neither by non of your
compaygnye.

UAllyant knight answered perseus as hit is true that the heart of a noble man
takes pity and compascion in the dystresse and passion of his semblable / the
record of your caas has percyd mine heart of a charitable mys^ricord and pity
/ by which ye may seurly understand not to have by us any enpeschement upon
your Infortunat lif / and for as much as the hertes of them that would be
endured at calling to the craft of Arms singulierly deliten them in auentures
of great poys and weyghte to enhaunce them / I shall accompanye you for two
causes / the first is to expose my self to the dissipacion and destruction of
the chymere if hit ^^ppen that ye adaunte her not / which I not presuppose.
And the second is for after the chymere vaynquysshyd I may be guyded by you
unto the royame of Arges. For fro now forth I will be enemy unto the king
pricus in the favor of the fader of my mother the king Acrisius And for to
late you have more gretter knowleche of this matere ^ I tell you that I am
sone of danes That same properly tht she conceyuyd in the tour darrain of the
seed of Jupiter / and that same in person that king Acrisius made cast in to
the sea but this notwithstanding I shall take no vengeance on his demerites /
but for the honor of the blood and of the womb of whom I am issued / I shall
do him socours and aid / And pray you that ye will be my felaw and brother of
Arms. And that ye will come in to my galeye / And send home again your
maronners in to her contres if hit plese you.

When bellorophon herd the good words and Answer of perseus he made alyances
with him and entrid in to his galeye And gaf leave to his maroners and
acompanyed him with perseus and danus that for love of him took their way unto
Secylle where they arrived by space of time and took land / And that same day
bellorophon Armed him desiryng to find the chymere and took leave of perseus in
such wise as he that put him in paryll of death / The poets write tht this
chymere had the head of a lion womb of a chieure and taylle of a serpent / but
for truth hit was a mountain Inhabitable that had in his heyghte above a
passing great cave of lyon^ / / and in the myddell of the hill hit was full of
chieures And at the foot benethe hit was aduyronned and set round about with
serpentis / These lions and serpents were passing domageable and noyous unto
the contre about and nyghe / when bellorophon than saw the mountain he went
theder / and perseus and danus followed him they had not long marchid / when
they saw and beheld mo than a thousand lityll serpents with many great
dragons / / of whom some arestyd about bellorophon and cast out of their
venym / and the other passid forth and come rennyng upon perseus and danus /
which had promysid to bellorophon that they should there do no feet ne
entreprise of Arms / but if hit were by constraynt and in defending their
bodies.

Anon as these three vayllyant knights saw these cursed bestes / they took
their swerdes and smote upon and many beheded of them / but with this they had
great pain and traueylle For these bestes were cruel and full of orgueyll And
hardyed them eygrely to hem / And if they had not ben well garnysshid with
abillementis of war / they had there sonner have found death than life
bellorophon went alleway a fore And smote down right and heded and smote in to
pieces many / Perseus ne his brother danus fought not but to the bestes only that
came upon them / when bellorophon had a litill holden the stour and the bataylle
against this vermyne and that he had founden more aspre and more biting / For
the point and the egghe of his swerd was made terribly blont and smote against
her hard scales and skynnes / Than lepe down and out of her hooles the chieures
and the lions and came down for tassaylle the knight in so great nombre that he
was all enuyronned with them etc.

SOme of these bestes escapid fro him and came to perseus and gaf him new
ocupacion for to employe his strength and prowess / the lions lepe about the
neck of bellorophon some time in such nombre that in no part he might be seen
/ Alleway by his abilite he could well save him self / but he had never ascapid
there came so much vermyn upon him there and bestaill and on perseus and danus
which rachid and assayllyd them / if he had not won a roche upon which he
gate up with great pain and right great sweet of his body for to go upon this
roche / there was but oon strayt way / than siewed him the lions and with hem
the other bestes / And held hem on the way of the roche and at the foot roryng
and making great noise about him so terribly that perseus and danus had non
other hope for the knight but that hit had been his last day / For he had so
many bestes about him that hit was likly that the egghe and cuttyng of his
swerd might not long dure with out hit had been worn or broken / than the
lions that might not touch his body / boot the stones And arachid them with
their claws / the serpents flewe up in to the Air / And lift up their
bodies upon their taylles and cast fire and smoke out of their throtes unto
the roche / And the most hardiest of the lions oon after that other rengyd
them in bataylle against him and shewid her teth receyuyng his strokes sore
set / And they fled not but abode as bestes famylier and sore coueytous of
man's blood in whom reigned souerayn fierste as much as in any wild best of
the world at that time.

Hard and meruayllous was this bataylle / as perseus and danus beheld and
thought in what facion they might socoure bellorophon / the noble knight
defended him to his power / And beheld how he might save him fro this paryll /
he cast his eyes upon a great stoon that henge over the weye of the roche where
upon he was mou^tid / and than he thought if he might make that stone to
fall down that he should slay the most part of these bestes than he began a
lityll and a lityll to wagge the ston and to seek the Ioyntu^res that held hit
/ and so much labourid that in the end he made hit to fall upon the lions
serpents and chienres in such wise that in the falling he made all the roche
to tremble and ferid in general these unhappy bestes that they were there
forfrusshed like as the thonder had run upon them / And yet that more is of
the tombling down / hit made the roche that bellorophon stood on so shake that
he tumblid down thereon / And was so astonyed that he wiste never whether hit
were day or night.

THe stone was great / And brought down many stones with him / Perseus and
danus at the beginning wend that all the mountaygne had tumblid down / And
were not well assured in hem self. This notwithstondyng they beheld plainly the
end. And seeing after the noise and tempeste that their felawe lay upright
reuersid upon the top of the roche They had supposid that he had been ded /
Than they made great sorrow And were displaysant And approuchid the roche /
where they fond the bestes liyng under the stones ded And they went up on the
mountain / And than knew that bellorophon was not ded / whereof they recouerid
great Joy And cessyng their sorrow. They took the knight between their arms
And perseus demanded him how hit stood with him and how he felt him self etc.

How perseus vaynquysshid the monstre of the sea. And exposid him self again
him for the love of Andromeda etc.
PErseus and danus awayted gladly the answer of bellorophon / And they held
him for the most best accomplissid knight that ever they saw / what shall I
make long process of this matere Perseus and danus serchid this mountayn /
And went in to the caves of the bestes / but they fond none / And always satte
bellorophon upon the roche For he might not goo for the frusshyng and bruysing
of his foot / And than as the two knights had circuyd and goon about the
hille / they returned to bellorophon and than perseus said to him / My brother o
how well art thou now worthy to have of me preysing and loenge / thou haste
this day don a good and an holy werk by thy worthy conduyte / thou have gotten
unto thy name the crown of glorious fame Thou haste passid the strayte way
and passage of Infortune fro whens thou art issued cler as the son / And not
only thou have labored for thy well and vtilite / but for the well and
prouffit of this regyon / For thou have slain the wards of the serpents and
the portyers of the lions that kept this contre Inhabitable / which shall fro
hens forward be enhabited and ocupied with people / Bellorophon was all a shamed
when he herd the glory that perseus gaf unto him by mekenes and humylite that
was in him And answered if there be any worship in this work that hit shall
torn as well unto hem as to him / And they began to preyse echon other / and
they ete upon this hille that same night after they had made sacrefice unto
their gods / And thedir camalle the Apuliens where they made great chiere /
Syn they took all the skynnes of the lions / and the heedes of the serpents
that were ded in sign of victory and charged them in their galeyes And they
bare with hem in to their galeye bellorophon which might not goo And finably
they went unto the sea And sayllyd and rowed toward the poort of Athames
which was nyghe by / but when they wend to have drawn unto this port /
suddenly there roos a tempeste on the sea so great and hidouse / that they were
constrained to abandonne hem unto the wind. and passid forth by the haven and
their fortune was such that they were brought in to sirie / upon the sea of
palestyne. And brought hem in to the port and haven of Ioppen / Where reigned
Amon and in palestyne reigned cephus and phyncus etc.

THe same time that perseus arrived there by this tempeste / the poort was so
ful^ of men and women and children / that hit seemed that all the world had be
assemblid / perseus came theder allone for his folk were disparklid upon the sea
/ some here and some there in their galeyes / when the siriens saw him arryue
by force of the wind / they assemblid a great nombre about his horse volant /
And the king Amon seeing that hit was chargid with the hedes of lions / / he
was sore abasshid And for to know fro whens was that galeye comen he enquired
who was the maistre / at which Inquisicion answered perseus / And demanded of
the king courtoysly in what contre he was arrived / the king told him that
he was in sirye / And that the Royame apperteyned to him when perseus knew
that he spack to the king / he said / Sire I am descended unto this poort by
the disposicion of fortune / Also my men ben sore trauayllyd by the tempeste of
the sea / that has been long troublous unto them / I require and pray the
that thou be content / that I and they may come a land here for to refresshe
us / And if hit happen in time coming that thou or any of thine have to do of
semblable courtosie in naples which is the place of our domynacion / I promise
the by the parolle and word of a noble man / that the merit and thank shall
be rendryd unto the / the king answered / noble knight there ben so many
exploratours now adays sayllyng by the regnes and contrees / that a man may
not well know to whom he may affye and trust / this notwythstondyng I see
well by your facion / that I trow that ye will not give us to understand
other thing than truth / I Abandoune to you all my contre / And pray you.
that ye will come and take patience in my hows / And furthermore I counceylle
you / that ye depart and come out of your ship / For if ye abide there long
ye shall be in great peril / For as much as we know certainly / that in to
this poort shall come anon a monstre of the sea that shall devour a right
fair virgyne and maid / which is here by / bounden upon a stoon for the crime
of her mother and by my sentence / And if ye tarry here till his coming / hit
is to doubt that hit shall be the wors for you / Bocace in the genealogye of
the gods ne touches otherwise the cause why this maid was thus exposed to
the monstre / wherefore I pass over and who demands the name of this maid
Bocace says that she was named Andromadas.

When perseus had vnderstonden that there was bounden this maid / he desired
to see her / for the meruaillous Judgment that was given upon her / and arayde
him with rich vestementes and clothes / and sin issued out of the galeye / And
took out also bellorophon which might not yet sustene him self / and after
he went unto Andromeda / There were her parents and cosins in great nombre
which labored in sorrow and great plente of teres / when perseus saw this
maiden that was passing fair in her degree / which never saw her like ne
paralle he had pite of her and said to him self that if he might he would
deliuere her fro this peril. Than he called her friends and said unto them in
the presence of Amon / I have certainly great pity and compassion of this so
fair a damoyselle / And also am esbayed how the gods suffer and endure that
she is so fortuned in her tender years / if hit so happend that she might find
any knight or noble man / that would unbind her And for charity expose his
body against the monstre for the love of her should she be quyte / They answered
ye / A than said perseus if I would for her sake adventure my self in this
work / And if hit so fortuned that I had the grace to overcome and surmounte
the monstre and for to put him to utterance / shall ye be content that the
maid be my wife / They answered yet ye / And I promise you said perseus and
swear / That she has founden in me a knight that shall put his body and lif
in Ieopardye for her etc.

WIth this word perseus sent to feche his Arms. And after went to the
damoyselle and vnbonde her from the stone / And deliueryd her to her friends
and kynnesmen / Saint Augustine in the book of the cite of god reherceth that
yet in the same poort is the stone that Andromeda was bounden upon / that they
of Ioppen keep for a sign and memory of the victory that perseus had of the
monstre / All they that were there meruaylled greatly of the entrepryse of the
knight / and knowing the monstre / they Iugged him ded / alowyng his hardynes
that they seemed that hit was to great / Oon and other spack of this matere /
Perseus Armed him Ioyously / when he was armed he came to Andromeda and kyste
her taking leave of her / and said fair maid Pray ye unto the gods for your
champion / that for your love submytteth him self unto the peril of death To
the end that by your oonly suffragies I may come unto the right stok of love /
And that we to gyder in Joy be Joined in marriage which I bye at the prys of
my life / Noble knight answered the maid / I am more beholden to you / than to
all my kennesmen and friends know ye that if my suffrages may obtain anenste
the gods / ye shall return saulf fro this entrepryse. Than perseus went him
to fore the stoon / And Andromeda kneled with great humylite with both her
knees upon the earth in prouokyng her gods unto the help of her champion /
And there were many matrones upon the bancke of the sea that for compassion put
hem with her in contemplacion / and by this example of them all the siryens
began to pray for the prosperity of the knight / reseruyd only the king
phineus which prayed for his death / And that for this cause for as much as to
fore the Judgment given on Andromeda / he had fianced and trouthplight her / so
had he well willyd that the monstre had devoured perseus to the end that the
marriage of him and of her might have been ended what shall I say more when
perseus had so put him self forth by the stone / he beheld toward the sea and
held in his hand a good glayue and passing strong / and he ne had not long
seen the situacion and taken leyzer to see the place / when there sprange out of
a swolowe or an abisme of the sea a monstre so great and so horrible / and so
dreadful that hit seemed that he had be made for to destroy all the world / he
was rowhe and went on four feet like a best / And his form was so
diffigured that none wiste whereto he might be likened / when than the siriens
saw him put out his heed of the swolowe. There was none so well assured but he
ne tremblid for fere. And many were so afraid that they fled in to their
howses and reentred in to their cite. This notwitstandyng perseus as soon as he
saw him sourdre. He ran to him as hardy and right well assewryd and smote him
with the point of his glayue so apoint upon the right eye that on that side he
made him blind. Whereof the monstre felt so great pain that he came out of the sea with open mowth and wend to have swalowed perseus / And perseus went
aback a litill / And put his glayue between his Jaws in to his throat so fer
forth / That he could not draw hit out again / And so of force hit abode in
his throat more than four foot.

TT the second struck the monstre made a meruaillous cry lifting up his heed
and wenyng to have cast out the tronchon of the glaue which abood in his
throat. But hit would not be / Alwey the monstre assayllyd perseus and wend to
have swalowed him in to his throat / And perseus alwey roof at him with his
sword and put him at defense and smote alweye at his throat and about nyghe
his other eye / And so well intended the work that after he had given him many
wounds he made him on the lift eye like as he did of the right eye / And
than as the monstre went here and there / And made many wentes with out
seeing and knowing where he went poursiewyng his adventure Perseus gaf him
many wounds / serchyng his heart. And at last he fond hit / And fynably he
adresshid so that he persed the heart of which struck he made him to fall
down ded.

How phyneus would have had Andromeda / And how Perseus answered him that she
should be his wif
PAssing Joyous and esbayed were the siryens when they saw the good fortune of
perseus. And saiden oon to another that such a knight ought be preysed above
all other men The king Amon took great playsir to see his conduyte / And
seeing the monstre labouryng in his death he went down to him enbrasing him and
said / Sire the gods govern thy fortune / And syn they have receyuyd the in
her favor and grace there is none that may anoye the / In a good our were thou
here arrived demand what thou will And I shall do the have hit / Sire answered
perseus / I have preseruyd fro death the damoyselle / I desire none other thing
but her / O vaylliant knight said phineus that was there awayting thou
thinkeste to gloryfie thy self for to have gotten in an half day more honor /
than an other knight shall get in an honderd year / And greatly thou ought
be recomanded / Forseen that the beaulte of this maid deceive the not / know
thou that I have trouthplighte her / and by right she ought to be my wif Many
days ben goon and exspired that in the presence of our bishop we promised to
take each other in marriage / This infortune is after comen to her / Thou haste
releuyd her / And wolst therefore have her / The beginning is fair / but the
end is foul And if hit so hap that thou do me wrong / I late the wete that
I shall not suffer hit For in this contre I am a king and have great puyssance
All the glory that thou haste gotten / shall be quenchid / wherefore I pray
the / that thou forbere in this caas / And that thou suffer me to take that is
mine. And take thou that / that longs to the.

DVryng these words perseus beheld toward the sea and saw fro fer his
galeyes coming that oon after that other adressing them toward th^s poort /
whereof he had right great Joy. And said unto phyneus. king I make no doubt
that thy power be great in this contre. but know thou right well that I know
no man living that shall cause me to leave that longs to me / when I was comen
hither I fond this maid condempnyd unto death / At that time she was all
abandonned to the death I have sauyd her / I say to the that she is mine and
thou ougthest to have no regard to any promise that she has made to the or
to any other / and so I have entencion that she shall be my wif And if thou
wylt debate and fight for her assemble thy power and make the ready in thy
bataylle / Loo here come my galeyes ready for to receive the. And if I hau. not
people I now / yet I have in my cofres the most part of the tresours of meduse
for to send for men of Arms in all places where I may get hem.

When phineus considerid this answer and knew that he was the knight that had
vaynquysshid meduse / whereof that the renome was great and run thorugh out
the world / he could none otherwise answer to perseus but that he might do his
playsir. All the kynnysmen of Andromeda were angry with phineus for his folly
And made him so ashamed that he departed thens / And went in to the cite /
After they went to behold the monstre / And than came saillyng and rowing the
apuliens unto the poort / And they comen brought perseus and Andromeda in to
Ioppen with great triumph / and yet that more is / perseus and Andromeda
espousid each other that same day and lay to geder And the solempnyte duryd of
their weddyng.xv. days / during this time the siriens came to the poort daily
for to see and behold this monstre / Plunius rehereith that of this monstre
was born to rome a boon of.xl. foot long also great as an oliphant / late them
than that read this hystorye search how great and huge this monstre was / when
only oon of his bones was so great / the romans for a great meruaylle have and
keep that bone What shall I say more at the end and expiracion of this feste
of the weddyng of perseus and Andromeda. Perseus took leave of the siryens / And
garnysshyd his galeyes with vitaylles departid fro Ioppen And went to the sea
ledyng with him his wif Andromeda / And fortune was to him so good that in a
litill time he passid the sees of syrie / And came to land at the poort and
hauene of thebes / where he was receyuyd courtoysly of king Creon that than
reigned a young child.

How perseus restablisshid in his royame the king Acrisius And how he slow
the king by evil adventure.
IN thebes refresshid hem these Apuliens and made alliance with the king After
they departid fro thens. And took their way by land toward Arges under and by
the conduyte of bellorophon that than was hooll and helid of his foot which
knew well the contre / when bellorophon had guyded hem so nyhe Arges that in
an hour they might run to fore the gates He signefied hit unto perseus And
than perseus made his oost to tarry in a valeye And sent danus unto the king
pryeus to somene him that he should yield the royame unto king Acrisius Danus
went to Arges. And accomplisshed the somacion. The king pricus answered to him
that he was king And that he would hold that he held. And manaced perseus
unto the death if he depart not fro the Country hastily / Danus returned unto
the Oost of perseus with this Answer and made to him the report ^ Perscus
than hoped that king prycus would come to him and give him bataylle and had
thereof right great Joy and playsir / For he desired nothing in the world more
than to be in Arms And for to entende and take heed unto his works / He
ordained that night that he should depart his bataylle in three. Whereof he gaf
charge of the first battle to bellorophon Which required and desired of him
the vawarde with right great Instance / And he him self held the second
bataylle / And to Danus he betoke the third / And And thus when he began to
set forth bellorophon on his way / he had not far gone when he saw fro fer
the king pricus that knew of their coming by his espyes And had set his
battle arengid by good ordenance.

BEllorophon had with him but two thousand fightyng men / when the king pricus
saw him come with so lityll a company / he supposed that hit had be perceus /
And wend to have had all won before the hand by auantage / And maa^ his people
to meue against hem of which hastily began a cruel and hard bataylle / And of
this battle was pricus right Joyous at thassamble / And well employed his
Arms and his sword and did meruaylles / but at that time that he supposid by
force to have abiden victorious and vainquer of his enemies / he cast his eyes
toward thebes and saw perseus and his bataylle that descouerd and showed hem
self / whereof his fortune was such / that in the beholding the head of meduse
which he bare payntyd in his shield of cristall / that he and all his folk in
a moment were turned in to stones That is to say that he and all his meyne had
lost their strengthes and corages / And that they might no more lift their
swerdes than might statues or images And than pricus fled And all they that
flee might / some in to the cite and some in to the feldes at all adventure.
Perseus daygned not to follow the chasse be cause of their pour conduyte / And
thus pricus escaped the death And abandonned and gaf over the contre / And went
with hem that fled in to calidonie / where he was afterward put to death by
hercules / And perseus went in to the cite of Arges / whereof the yates were
open / And With out any men that made any deffence when he was in the Cite he
made an edicte upon capitayll pain that none be so hardy to do any force ne
violence / After that he sent to seek his geant fader Acrisius. And told to
him who he was And so deliueryd to him again his Cite and his royame etc.

OF this courtoysye Acrisius held him self greatly beholden unto perseus and
a^id him and inquired of his daughter danes and of their adventures. Perseus
told him all that he knew. And than Acrisius was right sore desplaysant of
that rudenes that he had done And for to amend all He adoptyd perseus in to
his sone. And gaf him the full power to govern the Cite And he him self
withdrewe him in to the tour of darrayn / And than sent again unto naples
danus his brother / with whom went bellorophon And he gaf unto hem and to their
company great tresors at their departement. Perseus sent many Argyens in to
li^ye. And made them to enhabite the country. And thus abode perseus in Arges
with his wife Andromeda of whom he gate many Children That is to wete scelenus.
blache Demon Erictreus and Gorgophon Which all becam men. And took wives yet
regnyng the king Acrisius And among all other gorgophon had oon wife / Of
whom he had two sons Alceus and Electrion Alceus engendryd Amphitrion And
electrion engendryd Alcumena of whom came hercules / what shall I make long
process of the faytes and of the generacions of this Perseus He governed
passing well the Royame. And loved much the king Acrisius / But there fille an
hard fortune unto him in the end / For as he went on a night allone unto the
tour of darrain in will to visit the king / The gardes and kepars of the
tour knew him not and fille upon him and hurt him / when he felt him smyten
/ he put him self to deffence / The noise wax great / the king herd the
bruyt and came rennyng down for to depart the meddle / And threstid in to the
prees in such wise that perseus knew him not / And with his glayue so smote
him that he slew him and all the porters with him And anon after when he came
in And fond him ded / he remembrid and thought he had put him to death after
the prenosticacion of the gods. And made great sorrow / And did do ordeyne
his obsequye right solempnly / And at this obsequye happend for to be there
Jupiter and his sone vulcan / / which at that time practicqued to geder the
science of magike and nygromancye etc.

AT this time vulcan forged and smote the thonders unto Jupiter / That is to
say that he meuyd him self by smytyng and tempestieng by fire and swerd the
royames of their neygbours And the poets say and make many fables of him
whereof needs to make no mention at this time. Perseus than did great honor
and worship unto his fader Jupiter And in like wise did Jupiter unto perseus /
And each told other and reherced of their adventures / but when thobsequye was
done of king Acrisius. And Jupiter beheld and saw perseus so heavy that he
could have no Joy / he returned in to crete unto his wif Juno And there he
exercysed him self in the science of magique. And than when perseus fond
himself allone in Arges and saw that he might recover there no Joy / he
departed fro thens and went unto the cite of micenes but he reigned there not
long for as much as the death of Acrisius renewyd all weye and could not put
hit out of his mind And so departed thens and withdrewe him with a great ooste
in to Oryent / where he gate and conquered by Arms a great contre which he
named perse after his name And there founded the cite callid persepolis after
that he had vain quysshid and put to death liber pater which made him war And
than when he had so done he pourueyed for his children in such wise that his
two sons Alceus and electrion with Amphitrion and ^^^umena dwelde in thebes /
and bachedemon regnid in perce Erecteus upon the reed see and seclenus in
^uicenes / But of all them I will tarry at this time And shall speak only of
Amphitrion and Alcumena that loved so well to geder That they took day that oon
to wedde that other / And the cause tht meued me to write of this.ij. Is for as
much as of Alcumena came hercules which first destroyed Troy etc.

How Jupiter lay with Alcumena And how queen Juno sent two serpents for to
slay hercules / And how hercules stranglid the two serpents.
IN this time when Jupiter came again in to crete. And tht he with vulcan his
sone and Juno practiqued by their study the science of magike after that /
that vulcan had forged the thondres of Jupiter Amphitrion wedded the fair
Alcumena in the cite of the^^s with great honor and also with a great
co^raignye of kings queen's and of ladies / the feste of these espousailles was
great Jupiter the king of crete / and the queen Juno were there during the
feste / Jupiter contynuelly beheld alcumena for her great beawte Alcumena was
the most fair woman that ever was seen All his delectacion / and all his besy
cure was in beholding the ladies / he desired nothing but for to be allway
among the ladies And allway had the eye upon them / but in effect he beheld
Alcumena most in especial^ In whom he had a souerain playsir / In the great
habondance of his sight And so sore fixed his eyes in her excellence / that his
heart began to meddle in such wise that he was Amorous and covetous of her love
/ In this couoytise and desire he let pass the solempnyte of the wedding And
returned in to crete / but he had not long soiourned there when the said
couoytise meued so certainly in him / That on a day he began to speak of
Alcumena in the presence of Juno. And said unto gamynedes his squire.
Gamynedes what seems you of the beauty of Alcumena. Sire said the squire me
thinks she shyneth in all manner excellence of a lady. And that for to
comprise all her virtues / there is no king so great / but that he might well
seem to be of Alliance of oon that is of less beaulte than she is.

When the queen Juno understood tht Jupiter held his devises of Alcumena / At
that same time she was sore meuyd with new Ialousye For she had often times
ben Ialous of Jupiter. And thought in her self that if she might she would do
sle and put to death Alcumena After these devises Jupiter felt him self sore
susprised and surmounted of the couetyse of love. And for to over master hit
and to late hit pass he took his bow and his arowes in entencion to goo to
the wood for to slay some wild best And went forth accompaygnyed only of
gamynedes / but as soon as he was issued out of the gate / there came and
recountryd him oon of the knights of thebes / that did reverence unto the
king and said to him / that the king Creon of thebes sent him unto him and
required him that he would Aid and help him to war against the king of
Thelleboye / That had trespaced again him When the king Jupiter had herd the
message of the knight he was right Joyous of the request of the king of
Thebes / And took the knight by the hand and brought him to his palace / And
there feested him and made him good chere / And after he said that with right
good heart and will he would socoure and help the king Creon in his war /
The knight of thebes with this Answer took leave of king Jupiter / And returned
unto thebes / Where thapparayll and ordenance was maad to goo unto thelleboye /
Hit was not long after that the king Jupiter made his army And hasted him as
much as he might. that shortly he might come to the hows of thebes where he
hoped to find Alcumena / When all thing was ready he took his way And so
spedde him in his Journey that he came to thebes where he was right honorably
and worshypfully receyuyd of the king the queen and of the ladies The king
Jupiter at his coming forgate not to look / / if he might see Alcumena / But he
saw her not / where of he was in great pain / And wyste not what to do And he
looked after Amphitryon / But he could nowher see him / / whereof he was more
abashed than he was before In this abasshement he approchyd to king Creon And
demanded of him where Amphytrion was the king creon answered him that he should
hastily come and that he assemblid his men of arms at the castle of arciancie
which he had given him This castle stood between thebes and atthenes upon the
river And was a passing fair place and strong Anon as Jupiter had understand
that king creon had given Arciancie to Amphitrion / he ymagined sone that
Alcumena was in that place / And was in will to have goon to that place / ne
had been that he dredd the talkyng of the people And also he fered to make
amphitrion Ielous / This considerid the king Jupiter and abode in thebes not
well plesid for as much as he might not see Alcumena / And passid there the
time the best wise he cowde till Amphitrion. and other were comen Than departid
fro thebes the king creon And went for to lay siege to the cite of thelleboye
Accompanied with king Jupiter and many other. during the siege they of the cite
assayllyd often time by bataylle again their enemies / but they of Thebes had
all way so good fortune That in the end they of thelleboye yielded hem of all
points in the will of king creon. and thus when the king of thebes had
ouercomen and subiugned the cite he returned unto his contre with great Joy
etc.

When Amphitrion saw that her enemies were ouercomen And that there was no more
peril. He had great desir to goo see his wif Alcumena And for to dispose him
the more sonner to be with her He departid fro the oost with leave of the king
accompaygnyed of a squire only / when king Jupiter saw amphitrion so depart
upon his way / he began to think and auyse him of a great subtylte for to
come to his entente / And he departed fro the Ooste with gamynedes only / And
as soon as he was in the field on the way they two to geder / Jupiter entryd in
to deuyses with gamynedes / And said to him Gamynedes I have great affiance in
you and more than in any man that lives wherefore I shall tell you privily a
thing secret Which I shall accomplissh as me seems / / which ye must hold
and keep secret Truth it is that I am Amorous terrybly of dame Alcumena / By
no manner in the world I may not forgete her ne put her fro my desire. how wel^
she knows not the pain that for her love habou^deth in me / for I never was
so hardy to discover to her my caas / ner never durst show hit her / for as
much as I know her wise chaste and virtuous / this consideryd thynking on
this thing and werk / I find me ful^ of abusion And confess my folly / how
wel^ I am in a manner despair now / for I had supposid to have fou^den the fayt
of love in Alcumena / ne had been the sodayn depertyng of amphitrion Which yet
grueth me in manner an hope / For at the time that I saw him depart fro the
oost for to go see his wife in the company of his squire / I ymagined that in
all have I would goo unto Arciancie by a more ner and shorter way For I know
the passage long syn. And that I would transfigure my self in the form of
amphitrion And you in the form of his squire for to goo unto alcumena and to
make her understand that I were Amphitrion / Gamynedes upon this entencion and
purpoos / I am comen on the way to go theder with you / we must needs win
upon Amphitrion on this way a night and a day / and therefore late us go now
meryly / Me thinks that love shall help me / And when Alcumena shall see me
transumed in to the form of Amphitrion / And you as his squire she shall not
be so wise to parceyue mine enchauntement.

GAmynedes herkened right diligently the will and purpoos of Jupiter and
promysid him that he shall enploye him in this work as much as in him is
possible And so they rood with good will and great desire the more short way /
and in ridyng and going Jupiter disposed him in his enchantemens / he sped him
so that he arrived in an euenyng at the castle of arciancie / when he was
there arrived / he transfigured him self and gamynedes in such wise as he had
before purposid / And than at the same our that Alcumena slept / And that each
man was abedde they came to the castle and so knokkyd at the yate that they
awoke the porter / The porter came to the wyndowe. And looked down bynethe and
saw Jupiter and gamynedes by the moon light / him thought and seemed that hit
was Amphytrion and his squire / wherefore he opend the gate and received them in
such wise as he should have done his lord Amphitrion / After brought him unto
the door of the chamber where Alcumena slepte / And awoke her. sayyng that her
lord was comen / After he returned to keep the gate by commandment of Jupiter
And alcumena opend her chamber unto Jupiter / which entrid in with great Joy
And at thentre into this chamber / Jupiter and Alcumena took each other in
Arms and kyssid / wenyng Alcumena that hit had been Amphitrion / and when they
were so beclipt each in others Arms Alcumena demanded him fro whens he came
Jupiter answered and said he came fro thelleboye / and that after the yeuyng over
of the town and yeldyng of their enemies / he departed fro the Oost for the
love of her accompanied only of his squire / to come the hastelier to her /
Than Alcumena was well content of the words of Jupiter And axed him if he
would ete or drink / Jupiter answered that he would no thing but go to bed with
here / what shall I say more he lay with her and had that he desired / The
king Jupiter had never so great Joy in him self / And going to bedward bad
gamynedes that he should go to the chamber door and abide there without and so
gamynedes departid fro the chamber / and Jupiter approuchid to Alcumena by
great love And so complaysid her in love in as much as his power might extend
In this wise and by this facion came Jupiter unto the secrets and Joy of love
In deduysing him self with this lady. That him seemed expedyent for to enchaunte
all them that were in the place And than he slepte with Alcumena And after he
aroos / And came to gamynedes which kept the wacche at the door. And told him
that for to conduyte this work secretly he must enchante all them of that
place in such wise that they should not awake unto the coming of Amphitrion.
And he would that he should go to the gate to awayte if Amphitrion came And if hit
happen he said that he came by day light. I shall deliuere to you a pouldre that
ye shall cast in the air against him. and this pouldre has such virtue that
shall keep amphitrion fro approchyng this place also long as the day endures
And than when hit is night And he knokke at the gate. ye shall come to me And
than we shall opene the gate and bring him to his wife / And after that we
shall return fro hens etc.

THe king Jupiter with these words wrought in his science and made his
charms and sorts in such wise that all they that were in the place might
not awake / with out deffetyng of his chantement / when he had so do he
transumed gamynedes in to the liknes of the porter and comysed him to keep the
yate / After he returned in to the chamber of Alcumena And shette fast the
wyndowes / that no light might come in. And after he went to bed and lay
with the lady and awoke her and there made all the residue of the night and
all the day following taking his playsir with her / so acertainly that he
engendrid on her a right fair sone conceyuyd under the regne of the best
constellacion of heaven / / In the end when king Jupiter had be with her a
night and a day / about the hour when the son goth down in to the occident /
And that him seemed that Amphitrion should come / he made by his science Alcumena
for to sleep. After he roos up and made himself in the form of oon of the
servants of the place / And he had not long tarried after / That Amphitrion
and his squire came knokke at the gate / hit was than night. When gamynedes
herd him knokke / he came to the gate and opend hit / Amphitrion wend that hit
had been his porter He salued him And he demanded him where his wif was / The
vaylliant porter said to him that she slepte / And so brought him unto her
chamber / And Jupiter so going charmed him that he had no desire to ete ne to
drink / When he was comen in to the chamber he awoke Alcumena / That was all
abasshid when she saw Amphitrion / she had supposid for truth that she had
seen him a good while to fore / and she groped about her in the bed. And
wend ^he had dremed And when she had groped and tasted about her in the bed
And that she fond no person there / than was she more abashed than she was
before / Notwithstondyng she aroos and came unto Amphitrion sayng to her self
that she had supposid to have seen him before / And that he was comen / how well
she made great chyere to her husbond sayyng to him that she had all the night
dremed of his coming / After they devised of many things. Fynably he went to
bed with her / And lay with her that same hour. of whom Alcumena conceyuyd
yet a sone of Amphitryon / Jupiter and Gamynedes departid than fro the castle
/ And there left all them slepyng that were with in the place / that none
awoke till hit was on the morn. they had wend that they had slept but oon
night. But they slept a day and two nyghtes. And this work was achieued so
secretly that never person could espy hit / By this manner the f^yre Alcumena
conceived two sons that oon of Jupiter and that other of Amphitrion / By space
of time the fruit of her womb began to appear the tidings were born all
about And also in to Crete and came to the eeres of king Jupiter and of Queen
Juno The king Jupiter this heeryng Was passing Joyous and glad in the presence
of Juno He beheld gamynedes and began to wexe reed And after shewid right a
good semblant and gaf preysing to the gods for the concepcion of Alcumena And
spak much good of her That the Ialousye of this old queen / Renewid and
fresshid and plantid in her heart a right mortal envy upon Alcumena.

WIth the renewyng of this envy the queen Juno concluded in her courage medlid
with the multeplyance of Ialousye that she would sle and do dye Alcumena by
enchantement of sorcerye For in that craft she was an experiente maistresse /
O old cursid woman / she held her than musing in her heart her cursid Ialous
thought And leyde her eeres to here Jupiter speak of Alcumena with out any
thing to repleye again. But finably when she knew that the time of childing
of Alcumena approuchid / she departid fro crete secretly all allone and said to
Jupiter and did him to understand that she would go disguysed in certain
secret pilgremages And went her forth unto Arciancie / where was a temple
standing right nyghe the castle and was made in the remembrance of the
goddess dyane. This old queen than entrid in to this temple no thing for
devotion that was in her / but for to espy if any person came fro the castle
for tenquere of thestate of Alcumena / she was disfigured by her craft / This
craft vsid after simon magus in the time of saint peter / And of the emperor
Nero / when she had been there a lityll. Galantyse that governed Alcumena was
there long in oroysons and prayers to fore the representacion of the goddess
/ At the end when she had don / she aroos fro her contemplacion / And wend to
have returned. But this old queen came against her and saluyed her. And for to
come unto her purpoos she said to her fayntly dame I am all abasshid /
wherefore Answered galantyse / for as much said she as I am not in certain where
I am. love said galantise ye be at the castle of Arciancie For this temple is
of the Appertenantes of the castle and stands between thebes and Athenes
Dame said the old Juno I trow that this is the place that Amphitrion and dame
Alcumena dwell / ye say troth said galantyse And how fare they said Juno /
right well said galantyse my lord Amphitrion is in good point / and my lady
Alcumena is ready to bring forth a child / she abides ner awayteth longer
day ne term / And therefore I may no longer tarry hit is time that I return
to her / to the gods I commytte you.

GAlantys with this word went her to Alcumena which began to trauaylle and
feel the pain of childing And the false old queen abode in the temple in
entencion to do dye and slay Alcumena in such wise as she had purposid Than in
the stead of sayng of orysons / she began to make certain fendly and deuelissh
works / this don she made her legs to cross on over that other And satte in
that wise and than the same moment and time tht she had so do Alcumena by the
strenght of the sorcerie began the same wise her legs to cross on over the
other and sat in the same manyere as the old Juno did / In such wise tht
there was no man ne woman that might make her do otherwise The pour alcumena
felt than the most aspre and sharp throws of the world For her fruit would
come out And she might not in no wise for as much as her legs and thyes were
so crossed on over that other / she cried and playned pietously / and was in
right grievous martirdom The mydwyues could no remedy / she was three days
holden in this point allway her legs crossed on over an other / During these
three days galantys. And the ladies and women on after an other came in to the
temple of dyane for to (...) pray for the deliverance of Alcumena / And
alleway they fond there the old queen sit with her legs crossid and oon
over an other / but they fond her never in oon semblance and likeness / For at
each a time she transfigured her in diverse liknes and figures of bestes or of
women to the end that they should not perceive her ner her craft / how well she
could not so transform herself but that galantys that often came in to the
temple took head of her / which fond allwaye there a best or a woman sit
in the manyere that Alcumena sat in her chamber. Alcumena had been than three
days in pain / At the forth day when than galantys wax melancolious and
angry of that she saw in the temple she assemblid the women and said to them.
Certain fair dames hit must needs be tht the pain that my lady Alcumena
suffers comes of some sorcerye and wycchecraft / for all the pain that she
has comes of that / that she may not depart her legs and unfold hem /
This is mine ymaginacion. And I am of auys to pourueye sone for hit / For I have
seen in the temple at all times that I have been there more than three days a
woman or a best with legs crossed or folden as my lady has here is / me
seems for troth that hit is some evil creature / which wills evil will to
my lady and that by her sorts constrayneth her to sit so as she does / if
hit be so I shall deceive her / For oon of you and I shall go in to the temple
faynyng right Joyous and glad chere / And shall thank the goddess dyane
saying all a high that my lady is deliueryd of a fair sone And than when that
creature that allway is there and changes her in diverse forms have herd our
preysing / if hit be so that she will any ylle to my lady. I doubt not but she
shall lose contenance And that all troublid she shall depart wenyng to have
faylled of her chantement / and than if hit be troth that I suppose. My lady
may have some manner of allegiance of her pain etc.

THe women during these words remembryd hem what they had seen in the temple
the woman and bestes that galantis spack of / And were of oppynyon that
galantis should do like as she had purposed / Than galantis and oon of the women
departed fro the chamber and went to the temple And entryng therein they saw
on the oon side where the false old queen satte as she was wont to do and
had transformed her in to the guyse and form of a cow / They passed forth by
/ well assured with out making of any semblant of sorrow or other thing
saauf only of Joy / and when they were comen to fore the Awter they kneled
down and Joined her hands to gyder and said. Dyane souerayn goddess thy name
be preysed in heaven and in earth For thou haste given this our to my lady
Alcumena and suffryd her to bring forth in to this world the most fairest
child of the world / with these words they roose up and returned again. And
as they went they saw the cow suddenly depart out of the temple and ran
upon the feldes / And in the same time and Instant Alcumena aroos / and was
deliuerid of.ij. fair sons / er galantis and her felawe were comen in to the
Chamber.

When galantis was comen unto Alcumena and fond there.ij. fair sons which she
had brought forth / she was full of Joy of that / that she had begyled and
deceived the false old Juno / she told than unto the ladies and to Alcumena
how she had seen the cow And how she was departid fro the temple / And
asscuryd them that hit was some evil person / And that she had hold alcumena
in this danger by sorcerye The ladies sent after to espy the cow / but they
herd never after tydinges of her how well alleway they Ioyed in the natyuyte
of these two sons / of these tweyne that oon of them was great and right fair
by great excellence And that other was lityll and feeble The great child was the
first that was born and was named hercules And that other had to name ypecleus
/ Hercules as some say was the son of Jupiter and well resemblid and was
like unto him. And ypecleus was the son of Amphitrion / the tydinges of this
natyuyte anon ran all about / and all they that herd speak thereof made Joy
and were glad thereof / reseruyd Juno / For she had never Joy in her heart
after that she herd in the temple that Alcumena had made and brought forth a
sone / she departid than fro the temple as said is in form of a cow /
dispityng in her heart the goddess diane And was so troubled that she had
neither wit ne understanding And thus sorowyng when she was a lytill
withdrawn fro the temple she took again her own form of a woman. And went
upon the mountayn of Olympus / there she wax pensif And began to think her
adventure after she smote her self on the breast with her fyfte and said / what
a vaylleth me to be born of the ryall blood of saturn / what auaylleth me my
patrymonye of the world of gold / what auaylleth me the dyademe of crete / ne
what auayllen me the sciences of the world that I have learned by great study
and labor when the goddesses ben against and contrary unto me in all thing.
The king my husbonde rekketh not / ner sets naught by me / no more in mine
old days than he did in my yougthe He has every day a new lady / O what
destyne / fortune will thou never torn thy whele Shall I alleway suffer my
tribulacions and this pain. Certes when thou fauourist me not And that I
behold that of all my desires. There is not oon that may attain to effect /
All shame and vergoyne redowblith in me. And that I am so put in despair /
That mine Infortune must needs be cause of shorting and lassing the naturell
course of my days / with these words she beheld the earth and not the heaven
And thought a while And after that said And am I not well Infortunat and born
in an evil hour My craft and sort auaylleth not against mine enemy Alcumena I
have faylled anenst her / but certes. I shall prove my self against her sone /
to the end that his mother may be my felawe and hold me company to make sorrow
For I shall do slay her sone. And by this mean for that she is a woman and
mother I shall give her cause of Anger Anoye / and displaysance.

ACursid old vyrago conspyryng than against the pour Innocent Imagyned that
she should take two serpents charmed and coniured in the death of the sone of
her enemy / and that she would some night put in to her chamber to the end that
they should estrangle him / with this conclusion* she departed fro the mountayn
And returned in to crete There being she so labored by her science. That she
did do assamble on a day secretly all the serpents of the country. she was
allone and well understood and knew this marchandyse / When she had assemblid
them all / she chasse two the most felonst and most enuenemyd / and put hem
in her lap and bare hem home / and after awayted aday when king Jupiter was
goon in a far voyage / and than faynyng yet that she would goo on some
pilgremage / she departid allone fro crete / And did so much that in
disguysed figure she came in to the castle of Arcyancye / The king Egeus of
Athenes and the king Eristeus of Athique were at that time comen in the
castle to make good chere / hit was in the euenyng when Juno entryd / when she
was with in she made her self Inuysible by her craft / And sought fast about
to find the chamber where as was the sone of alcumena / she sought so long
that she came to the door of the chamber / where there was a wyndowe open / she
went to the wyndow and looked in / And in the beholding she saw two noryces
and two sons / whereof she was all abasshid and began to thenke. Thus as she
was pensif. Alcumena came for to see her sons. And festyd hem in such facion
that the old Juno conceyuyd and knew that both two were her sons / whereof
she had great Joy / For she concluded in her falls and evil courage that she
would do strangle both two by the serpents etc.

ALcumena departed fro the chamber by space of time. And Juno let the night
wexe derke. The norices leyde the children in her cradels to sleep. and they
slepte And after they leyde hem self down and ^lepte leuyng a lamp brennyng in
her chamber. Than when they were a sleep at that time that Juno would
accomplissh her work / she opend her lap and made to lepe out the two
serpents charmed and enchanted in the death of the.ii. children and put hem by
an hole in to the chamber / when the venomous bestes were wythynne they lift
up their heedes / and smellyng the two children adressid them unto them yeuyng
the first assault unto ypecleus in such wise that they stranglid him and
there murdryd him / After the death of ypecleus these two serpents came unto the
cradell of hercules tht was awaked that same time / when the serpents were
comen to the cradell / they put hem / oon on that oon side and that other on
that other side / And mounted upon the cradell but this was to their evil case
/ For as soon as they went up hercules parceyued them and was a ferde be cause
they were fires and dredefull He than esuertued him self and took out his arms
in such might and puyssance that he brak the bonds in which he was wrapped
and swaded in and so did that he had his Arms and his hands at large / And
than when the serpents ran upon him. He put hem a back by naturell strength
and force many times / And fought with hem with his fystes right long but
fynably when hercules saw that the serpents oppressyd him more and more and
cessid not to assaylle him / He took in each hand oon making a great Cry / And
held hem so fast and sore / that he stranglid both two etc.

THe noryces awoke at the Cry that hercules made And aroos up hastily and
went to the cradels for to see their children / And they fond ypycleus ded.
and they fond that hercules held yet the two serpents in his hands /
sodeinly as they saw that meruayll they cried pyetously / with that Juno the
false wycche and sorceresse that all had seen fled her way sore trowbled and
terrible angry of that / that the serpents had not wrought and achieued her
purpoos as well in hercules as they had done in ypicleus And Amphitrion with
Alcumena awoke and came in to the chamber where the noryces were which made
sorrowful and pietous cries And entryng therein they saw hercules at oon side
yet holdyng the serpents / And at that other side they beheld ypicleus all
swollen of venym and ded / Than the parfonde sorrows came and ran to the botom
of her hertes / Alcumena began to cry and weep by naturell pytye / Amphitrion
was all afraid / many damoyselles and other folk came in to the chamber which
all were aferd to take away the serpents for fere of Anguysshe. And there was
none so hardy that durst approach to hercules for the serpentis that he held
in his hands which were swollen of the venym Allewaye hercules made no heavy
ner werse chiere / but lawhed to oon and other And was there in this state so
long that the medicynes and surgions camen. and by their science took fro his
hands these venomous bestes / when Amphitrion saw hercules deliueryd fro the
serpents / He recomforted alcumena that was nyghe ded for sorrow And made do
brenne and burye ypicleus All they that were there had passing great meruaille
of the puissance and strength of hercules that was so young a child. And that
he had foughten against the serpents / and by excessive strength and might had
strangled them.

THe night passed in the facion and manyer that I have reherced / on the morn
by time amphitrion would show and manyfeste this meruayllous and glorious
victory / he did do take hercules and made him to be born to Atthenes in to
the temple of the god Mars with the two serpents / and he in person went
accompanied of king Eristeus / The false old wicche Juno folowid a far
after in a dissimyled figure and state. When Amphitrion was comen in to the
temple he sent for king Egeus And assemblyd the people And after he took
hercules presentyng him unto the god Mars. Thankyng him of the victory that he
had sent to hercules against the serpents. After this he lift him up and
showed hercules unto the people recountyng and telling to hem his meruayllous
adventure. And than thus when hercules was showed and put in the Common regard
and sight of the people / And that every man gaf him lawde and preysyng / The
false old Juno being in the prees with other / After that she had long seen
the noble child / That in all his members he resemblyd and was like to king
Jupiter for to put amphitrion in Ialousye of his wife And for to make him to
have hercules in suspecion / she said unto them that were about her / Certes
Amphitrion is a very fooll when he weneth and thinks that hercules be his
sone Behold the members of king Jupiter / And the members of this child / ye
shall find no difference / This child and Jupiter ben both of oon semblance /
And have like figures and shappe / what that any man says This child is the
sone of Jupiter and of non other. when this old Juno had sown this cursid
words. she withdrewe her aparte out of the prees and took an other figure /
to the end that she should not be known. And than these words were sown a
brood and told forth of them that herd hem in such wise / that a great
murmr sourded and aroos upon Amphitrion / And hit was reported to him / that
men said that hercules was son of king Jupiter for truth and each man
said so by advertisement of the old Juno / When Amphitrion herd these new
tidinges / he began to behold the child. And in the beholding him thought
verily that this child had holy the very semblance and liknes of king
Jupiter. And than began to enter in to his heart a right great doleance and
sorrow and thus after entryd in to Ialousye. Alleway he held manyere and made
as good countenance as he might and cowde / For to eshewe the sklaundre. And
anon after that the people were withdrawn he called the king Eristeus and
prayed him that he would do norysshe hercules / sayng that never after he would
see him And that he believed fermly that he was the son of Jupiter Eristeus
conforted Amphitrion the best wise he could / wenyng to him to have put this
Ialousye out of his mind / but he could not / what shall I make long
rehersaylle Eristeus emprised to keep and nourysshe hercules / and made him to
be born in to his house Amphitrion returned unto Arcian cye where he fond
Alcumena sore discomforted for these tydinges which she had receyuyd / And
much excused her against Amphitrion / and the false old queen Juno went unto
crete / of whom I shall tarry and shall come to speak of the first adventures
of hercules.

How hercules began to Olympades and how he wax amerous of Megera the daughter
of the king of Thebes And how he shewid his strength in all manner of games
And apertyses.
THese tidings of this first Adventure of hercules was anon spredde by all
the prouynces of greece / Some sayden he was a bastard and the sone of Jupiter /
And so recounted plant in his first Comodye / And other sustain that he was
the verray sone of amphitrion And so recou^teth bocace in his book of the
genealogye of gods / how well / whose sone that ever he was / Eristeus had him
in keeping And did him to be nourisshid hardly and not tenderly with out the
cite of Attycque / For the kings and the Citezeins and dwellars in towns / In
this time made her children for to be nourisshid out of good towns / And made
hem for to lie upon the bare earth all nakyd for to be more strong with out
entryng in to Cytees unto the time that they had puyssance and strength to
haunte arms Ligurgis had ordained this law and many other that follow First
he ordained that the people should obey to their prince And that the prince
should beferme in Justice and live sobrely And that merchants should do their
marchandyse yeuyng oon ware for an other with out any monoye / And that each
man should avenge him openly / And that a young man should have in a yer but oon
gown / and that oon man should not be more galant ner queynte than an other /
and tht no man should renew wrong passid And that men of arms should have no
wives to the end that they might be more sharp and fires in the war And for
to content her fragylite humayn. he ordained that nyghe the ostes should be
certain women comune in places called fornyces / whereof comes fornicacion
These were the laws that the greeks used in the time of the beginning and up
coming of hercules For than to come again to my purpoos / hercules was
norysshid in an house that stood in the plain feldes / and was often times put
out in to the rayn and wind. And lay the most part of that time upon the
earth with out any other bed / he lay ofter so than upon heye or dreyd
straw In this nourysshing he wax and grew in all beawte. strength. and
prudence / he was humble. courtoys and gentill All good manyeres began to
grow and shine in him / he was sober in etyng and in drynkyng / he slepte
gladly on the feldes / he shot and drew the bow daily / When the king
Egeus of Athenes had herd spoken of him he made to be norisshid with him his
son that was named theseus / Hercules and Theseus were both of oon Age And
louyd right well to gyder Theseus was strong and mighty and a fair child and
had wit ynowh / But hercules passyd And shone as far above him as the son
shyneth above the sterres when he was seven yer old he excersiced wrasteling
and ouerthrewe And cast the grettest and the strengest that came to him. Not
oon and oon at ones / but.v. or.vi. or as many as he might set on his hands
And did so great fectes of strength / that out of thebes of Athenes and of
Atticque daily came men / women and children for to see him The more and elder
he grew / the more enforced his strenghte / when he was x. yer old there
might no man stand ne abide in his hand At.xiii. yer of his Age / he began
to do and sue the Arms And of his propre mocion he thought that he would goo
upon the mount Olympus / And there he would abide and answer all manner men
theder coming by the space of.xv. days And to receive them / In Arms or in
wrastelyng or at any proof or assaye of strength. And for to come to theffect
of his enterprise. He awayted a day when Eristeus came for to see him / And said
to him / Sire ye have nourysshid me unto this time like as I were your own
sone / if fortune were to me as contrary as nature I knowleche that I should be
the most Infortunat child that ever was born / Some say that I am son to
Jupiter / And other say of Amphitrion how be hit I have no fader but you only
/ That do me to be nourysshid with your substance / wherefore I draw me unto
you as to my fader / And aduer^yse you how that I am purposid for to be on the
mount of Olympus in as hasty time as I goodly may / And there I shall abide
all them that theder shall come.xv. days during full / For to furnyssh them
at the spear. At sword / at wrastlyng / and at re^nyng / alleway forseen that
hit be by your license and leave. And that hit plese you of your courtoysye to
give to him that shall do best some prys / to the end for to meue the hertes of
noble men unto vaylliance that they might Attain to worship / Eristeus
answered and said hercules fair sone ye can require me of no thing that is
honest and worshipful but I shall be thereto agreeable ye be young. how well ye
be strong and puyssant. And I wot well there is no man that may endure against
you. Syn hit is so that ye have the will. I am right well content that ye
show the proef. And the strength of your yougth / and for to conduyte and
bring this enterprise unto your worship / I shall array you as richely as if
ye were my propre son. My fader Answered hercules I thank you of this grace
and kyndenes / sin hit is so your playsir / hit behooves you to chese a man of
great understanding and of Auctorite that shall goo unto all the royames of
these Marches for to show unto the kings princes and gentill men the will and
enterprise that I have taken. Fair sone said eristeus ye say trowth / ye
shall make your lres conteynyng your entencion And send them to me / And than
when I have receyuyd them I shall do so good diligence That ye of reason shall
be content.

AFter these deuyses and many other the king Eristeus went home and hercules
took enke and parchemyn / / and set him to write the lettres of the form of
his paas / which he would make And contained in this wise Gretyng be to all
kings. princes. knights. gentill men. ladies and damoyselles / fro the
esquyer unknown and well fortuned / we late you have knowleche that the first
day of the month of may next following / the esquyer unknown shall be on the
mount of olimpus for to dispose him in habillemens conuenyent unto Arms at
the playsir of the gods and fortune / and for to resseyue all them that been
of noble house and name / that will and shall come theder by the manner that
follows / In the beginning the first three days he shall hold a paas of
wrestling / And he that shall do best by the Judgment of the Iuges thereto
comised shall win an elephant of sin gold / the fourth day he shall run a
forlong or a stade against all them that wole run / And he that best renneth
shall win a courseur leuyng / At the fyfte and sixthe days he shall shote
with the hand bow / First at the most strayt and nyghe. And after at the
most far / And he that shoteth most strayt and nyghe shall win a glove of
gold / And he that is best at far shall have a bow and a sheet of Arowes /
At the seventh day he shall cast the stone against all men. And he that best
does there at. shall have a rich dyamont. At the eyghte day and other following
unto the fyftenthe. He shall do Arms. And if any will prove him self oon alone
against him he shall be receyuyd forseen that during the first six days he
shall come and present him unto the Iuges And he that so does best shall have
a rich sword And if hit hap that they that shall come to this feste will
tornoye to gyder in manner of a battle in Ioustyng with courtoys rochettis and
fyghtyng with swerdes Rabatnes / The Iuges shall ordeyne Capitaynes such as
them shall seem conuenyent / And who that best does in this excersite shall
win a chappelet of lawrer All these things to fore wreton the said esquyer
unknown promytteth to Accomplissh And prays unto all noble men ladies and
damoyselles that they will vouchesauf to come and see thassemble of noblesse
which shall be parformed by the playsir of the Inmortall gods / Which will
give to the receyuours of this mandement multeplyance of honor and encresynge
of good fortune etc.

When hercules had wreton this mandement and grossyd hit up he sent hit to
Eristeus which red hit And him seemed that the Inuencion of the auctour and
makar was good and right digne to be put in memory And callid on of his
knights and gaf him the charge and office to go publisshe this mandement in
the courts of all the kings of greece / The knight enprised with right good
heart to do the said office And this was the first officer of Arms that ever
was / he went to Athenes. Thebes. Arges. Lacedomone. Archade. Achaye. perelye.
Magnefie. Crete. Ephese. Pepos. Triopolye and Thesaylle / And all about he
publisshid the mandement with out declaring who he was that should keep the
paas / They that herd speak of the squire unknown and understood his hye
enterprise Iugyd him that this came of a noble courage / And that he might not
fail to get honor and worship / The knight for to furnyssh this viage
had.iiii. months term to acomplissh hit / During this time hercules disposed
him for to furnyssh his paas / And so did the kings and noble men for to come
theder / What shall I make long process. when the even to fore the first day
of the paas was comen / The king Eristeus brought hercules upon the mount of
olimpus / And fro all parties came theder so many of noble men / ladies of
damoyselles that the nombre might not be extemed / the mount was full on all
sides / In this night there was great bruyt and noise of oon and other for to
make their tents and loggys of bows and leaves and their tabernacles And hit
ought not to be forgoten when the even was comen / the knight that had
publisshid the mandement Assemblid in a common tente all the kings that were
comen theder And required them in the name and on the behalue of the esquyer
unknown / That they would chese among them / such as should be Iuges and give
the prys / when the kings that were there had herd and understand the request
of the noble esquyer / They thankyd him / And they Chesse three kings for to be
their Iuges / That is to wete the king of Thebes called Creon The king of
Arges named Gorgophon. And the king of Myrondone named Eson which was fader
to Jason. They were wise and ripe / They enterprysed the office with a good
heart. And that night passid over with great Joy / For they assemblid in a
tente / which was made for to daunse / And the kings with the knights young
and old went theder And thus began the feste which endured to mydnyght in
daunses and in songs

THe king Jupiter and Amphitrion were not at this assemble by the counseyll of
king Eristeus Which let hem have knowleche secretly. That hercules was he
that should hold and keep the paas / for to eschew all words and langage that
might sourdre or rise upon the cause of the na^yuyte of hercules / For
amphitrion on that on side believed not tht he was his sone And / Jupiter on
that other side said that he apperteyneth not to him / he sent hem word tht
they might do no better Than not for to come to this solempnyte / which was
most special thing and the most new tht ever was spoken of at that time The
first day of may at the our what time the son cast his hete upon the earth
/ hercules did do sown a trompe for to make the ladies to go up in to the
scaffoldes and places And anon after / they being mou^tyd and set Hercules
lepe out of his tente in habillemens to wrestle And came in to the myddis of the
place or field Making reverence unto the Iuges. kings and to the ladies / he
was than.xiiii. yer old full accomplisshid. Anon as he had don the reverence
The knight Officier of Arms Made a cry and said / hye and excellent Iuges we
late you have knowleche with all kings. knights / and gentill men of Arms /
Ladies and damoyselles That here is the esquyer unknown / comparant in his
person upon the mount of olimpus And presentith him self for to fornisshe the
contenu of his mandeme^t by order and after the manner that the chapitres make
mention / wherefore if there be any man that will prove and assaye him at
wrestling Late him come and he shall be receyuyd etc.

THeseus of Atthenes at the end of this cry / and at the commandment of the
king Egeus his fader entrid than in to the feld / he was a passing fair child
and a gente At his coming he salewed hercules And said to him Master of all
habilites corporal / I am come hither no thing of presumpcion but for to learn
/ whereof I have need / and therefore I recomande me unto your grace / My brother
theseus Answered hercules I may more learn of you / than ye of me / wherefore
late us put us in pain to win the prys / hit must be begonnen at on end
These words accomplissid the two noble esquyers approchid and seasid each
other / Theseus employed his puyssance / And hercules suffrid him to do as
much as he would or cowde / with out showing and puttyng out his virtue and
might again to him. And so they shoke and lugged each other / but finably
hercules cast theseus / the most softly and favorably that he cowde / whereof
the lawghter was great among the ladies and damoyselles / Theseus than departid
fro the place. And went among the ladies and damoysellys / Prayng them that
they would take hit in gree. That he had don / Than came unto the paas many young
esquyers of whom I know not the names / And they labored and traueyllyd
largely for to get honor and worship. But their labor prouffityd little
unto them. as to the regard of the prys / For hercules cast and put to the
earth all them that came. And the wrastlyng duryd four owres contynually / At
the last at the request of the ladies the Iuges made the wrastlyng to cesse
for that day / Be cause that they seemed that hercules was young / And that he
had achyeuyd a great work etc.

When hercules had understand that the Iuges had made cesse the wrastlyng he
was right sorrowful / For in his wrastlyng he had a singular playsir / The
Iuges with Eristeus came to him And made him do on his Clothes and Array him.
After they brought him in the common halle where as the ladies were daunsyng and
syngyng Ioyously / And said to him that he must daunse and sing like as other
did Hercules excused him sore / His excuse might not auaylle / He was set on
the dance in the hand of a right fair damoysell Named megere of young eage /
but she was right well adressid of wit and understanding she was daughter of
king Creon / / when hercules saw him in the hand of oon so noble a
damoyselle. He was sore abasshid and shamed / The damoysell on that other side
was also shamfaste. For as she had seen hercules wrestle / she had set all
her love on him. And they wiste not / none of hem both what to say. how be it
instead of words / they vsid preuy and covert regards hercules caught a
singular plaisir to behold and see the damoyselle / And the more nere the
damoyselle was to hercules the more her heart she set on him what shall I
say / love in this night submysid and constrained them to love each other with
out spekyng / their be awtes was cause thereof / men should not have founden in
all greece two so fair children ne better accomplisshid they were ynowhe
beholden and seen / And in especial hercules for his prowess And every man
meruayllyd of him and of his conduyte.

BY space of time than / hercules was brought fro the feste in to his tente /
his tente ne the tents of the kings and of the ladies were not maad but of
brawnches leeues and of herbs giuyng good odor and savor / hit was not
known to make tents of cloth ne of silk. Hercules passid this night more
entendyng to think on the beawte of megere than for to sleep The day following
at our competente he came unto the paas And there were many young men strong and
deliver And the strengeste of all greece / But hercules with oon Arm threw
and cast hem / And that day and the day following he cast and put to the
earth moo than three honderd / And there cowde not so many come to him but he
cast hem down and put hem under / / with out any chauffing him self ne
greuyng / At that time he gate a right great glory and honor there. Megere
often times beheld him. And in like wise did the ladies and damoyselles And
many there were that set their love in him / and thus he passid the paas of
the wrestling to his worship all three days At the fourth day he assemblid
all them that were come theder for to run / And he made them that were most
feeble to ride upon the best courseurs that were in greece / And after he shewde
hem the forlonge or stadye / And made hem to meue and run And he ran after
the horse and men But he passid all them that ran And with out taking ones
his breath he ran the forlonge / And came thereto to fore all the ryders and
rennars. whereof he was gretely preysed and had a great lawde. and some men say
that he ran also swyftely as an heart Of this course that hercules made all the
world wondered / And held hit for a meruayllous thing / And wrote hit in her
books Among other things worthy to be put in memory.

AT the fyfthe and syxthe days following / hercules took his bow and his
arowes And went in to the place that was ordained for to shote in with the
bow The ladies and the damoyselles were there / Hercules and many other shot
at most strayt and next the mark / but shot by shot as to the regard of
the nyghest / he shot allway in a lytill ring of gold And as for shotyng a
far / he passid the ferthest on the field.xxiiii. stredes his bow was so
great that hit was the charge and burden of a man / No man cowde bend hit but
himself Hit was a playsir to see him / he gate great loos and bruyt the two
days And yet gate he more the day following / which was the seventh day of
the paas For when hit came to the castyng of the stoon a far / oon aftre
another Than he cast hit in enployeng his strength in such wise tht he
passid.vi. paas further than any man that at that time enployed him in the
excersite Than they that were comen to this feste cried with a high voys. the
squire unknown is neither the son of amphitrion ne the son of Jupiter /
but he is the son of god of nature which has garnysshid him with double
force and redowblid an honderd fold / In his Innocencye he ^ainquysshid the
serpents And in his yougthe he surmounteth in wit. force and vailliance all
the world / Blessid be the womb that conceyuyd him and bare him for to
glorify Greece / For certes the time shall come ones that he shall be the
glory of the greeks and their triumph And well shall help them if they have
need.

SVche were the words of the kings of the ladies and of the damoyselles of
the nobles and of the vayllyans Each man preysed him in his guyse / The fair
megera herd gladly the loos and preysing that men gaf him / but yet she saw
him more gladly do his feetes and vaylliances And hit is no meruayll thaugh she
saw him gladly and gaf her to behold him For in hercules was / that was not
in other / his beawte surmounteth the mesure to the portion and quantite of his
force and strength / what shall I say after that each man that cast would the
stoon had done / he went in to the common tente / where many an Amerous man was
with his lady / and there he began to put him self forth a litill / And
deuyse with oon and other. And well becam him / For he had a right hyhe and a
cler understanding Megere and hercules in this euenyng often times beheld each
other secretly / here regardes met and smote each other / other while And
than of force they changed color / In this chaungyng of color / there was not
a vain but he was meuyd And by this meuyng grew amorous desires in
habou^dance of perfonde sighs / which were nourisshid in the abismes and
botoms of their hertes

Among all other things for to speed the matere The kings and the ancient
knights assemblid hem in counceyll For as much as they had many young knights
that were comen and had abiden fro the beginning of the feste for to do arms
against hercules / The puyssance and strength of hercules was well considerid in
this counceyll / And for as much as hit was verray semblable tht no man might
dure against him / Hit was ordained that he should do no Arms particular And
that the days that were yet to comen of the contenu of the feste fro two days
to two days they should tornoye in manner of a bataylle / whereof should be
capitaynes two kings that were there That is to wete tandarus that was fader
of menelaus husbond of the fair helayne / And yxion that was king of
thesaylle. These two kings emprysed with a good will this charge And hit was
ordained that hercules should late them tornoye unto the time that the oon
party were at werse And that than he might help that party so suffryng /
unto the time that he had brought hem to their above This ordenance was shewid
in the tente by thofficyer of arms / What shall I make long count / They
that were before named for to fight And do arms man for man against hercules
were right Joyous of this new ordenance / The feste than cessed And oon and
other wythdrewe hem unto on the morn till they came to the feldes for to begin
the first tornoye / And there were well five honderd squyers / And three honderd
knights all Armed as for to go in to bataylle. Reseruyd that her swerdes were
rabatnes and not sharp and that her speres had rochettes of tree or of wood The
king tandarus And the king yxion were richely arrayed and well horsed And
Armed well with quyer boullye / and ran in the most hardest place of this
assamblee / there were no more but an honderd knights a horse back For the horse
at tht time were but litill known ner used All they on horse back and they a
foot were partyd in two companyes like in nombre / that oon of these companyes
was deliuerid to tandarus / And that other to yxion / And when tandarus and
yxion had all that they ought to have / they that had horses at the sow^e of
the trompe were ready for to Just / and ran oon against an other so courageously
that they trowblid all the Air with duste and pouldre that roos by their horse
feet / At the recountre each met with other often times / And there were some
overthrown under the horse And some reuersid and turned up so down at coopyng /
and some there were that brakke their speris knyghtly and cheuaulrously For there
was plente of vaylliant knights / but at the point when the knights on horse
back had don their feet And that they set her hand on her swerdes the
pietons or footmen began to renew the tornoye with so great bruyt and noise
that all the mount redounded / on that oon side and that other there were many
speres broken and sheldes vnioyned / They foyned with her speres eygrely /
their strokes and foynes were great each man shewid the quantite of his force /
hit was Joyous to see. the speres flewe in the Air by pyeces / there were great
cries / None spared other / Ancient ne young. The ancient beat and faughte
with the young / The young men by great courage learned and siewed the old men
When their speres were broken they took their swerdes Whereof began a new stowr
Joyous and playsant in forgyng their helmes and hewyng on the sheldes so
coragyously And in especyall they of the party of yxion / that they of the
party of king tandarus were constrained to cry hercules unto the rescows etc.

When hercules herd that they cried after him / he was passing Joyous / For
hit was noyous to him to be idle and to see other labor He was nyhe by the
tornoye / beholding them that did best He had his sword in his fyfte / At
the Cry that they that were put to the werse made He went unto their aid and
help / And began to tornoye on the side where were the grettest strokes given
/ so plesantly that hi^ was Joy to behold. The king yxion came against him
for to sustain his faytes and to hold to gyder his folk But certes to his
byen venue hercules smote him on the shield in such wise that all a stonyed he
bare him to the earth and down of his horse / Tho began there a great showte and
laughter / As well on as other began to entende to the rescousse of king yxion
/ Hercules put him self in to the prees. And made renges on all sides so great
that tandarus and his folk recouerd and entrid in to the battle of their
countrepartye / At that time began again the tornoye strong and sharp They
that right now fled / took heart. force and virtue to hem again by the
weldoyng of hercules / and recouerd vigor and strength Hercules of all them
that were there was take heed of / his strokes surmou^ted al^ other with out
mesure / he brought again tandarus to his above with litill labor Finabl^ he
did so great prowess that day and in the days following that he was
recomanded above all the men of the world / what shall I make long process
of the tornoye and of the pass temps of this feste / there were three great
tornoyes and notable At each tornoye as soon as hit happend that oon party was
put a back and to the werse / Hercules by his well doing recouerd hem and put
hem up above again / No man took head but to his glory Every man said well of
him at daunces at festes every man louyd him / each man him worshippid / there
was no tongue of noble ne of vilayn but that gaf him lawde and preysing / whereof
the conclusion was such that all the prises abode with him And also there were
given to him many gifts of the kings that were there / The days of this
solempnyte drew over the last night / the kings and the ladies and nobles
assemblid in the common tente / And of oon common accord they would that fro yer
to yer they and their eyres should hold and renew the feste that hercules had
begone and stablisshid For they said that hit was the most honorable pass
temps that ever was made in greece / and named the feste Olimpade / by cause of
the mount olimpus. And they had hit so recomanded that fro thens forth / they
noted their mandemens and their lettres perdurable of the year of the first
olimpade / In such wise as we say the year of thin carnacion These things
ordained given and promised / thofficyer of Arms of hercules thanked all them
that were comen to this Olimpade After that / each took leave of other and
departid on the morn. And thus finysshid and ended this feste etc.

How hercules saylled by the sea in to esperye. And how he vaynquysshid the isle
with the moutons or sheep And vaynquysshid philotes And slew his felawe.
AT the departing hercules passes lightly the withdrawyng and departing of
all them that were there Reseruyd the departing of megere / he knew not the
maladye of love unto the time that he saw her depart in to her contre /
megera went unto thebes / and hercules drew him to athenes / right pensyf and
the^kyng much on his lady And sore desiryng to see her went in the company
of Eristeus unto athenes where they fested hem four days long At the fourth
day tidings came That unto the poort and hauene were comen strange folk by
fortune. which were clothed in right plesante robes and garments When the
king Eristeus herd these tidings / He sent anon for to fecche these
strangers to him / and axid hem fro whens they were They answered him that they
were of the occident and of the regyon of hesperye / where is the regyon of
hesperye said Eristeus And what manner contre is hit. Verayly answered oon of
them I trow that in all the world is no better contre. For there is haboundance
of all things that is necessary to man's life And I can well tell to you
That in the places of our conversation. And where we have our hauntyse. There
ben many yles lyyng about the ferthest parties of Maurce be yonde Ampolesye
Where grow all the best things that men can think And there is a king
named philotes / fair sone of a king named Athlas. Which ben of the
generation of greeks And it is not to be vnremembryd that the king phylotes
accompanied with the daughters of king Athlas fond late an isle right playsant
/ as was his adventure This isle is all plain without mountaygne or valeye /
hit is in such wise as is a gardyn all grene. And there ben there in so many
sheep and moutons that it is meruaylle / which ben kept and cherisshid there
also diligently as they were of fyn gold / Of these moutons that I speak of /
we have our robes and gowns maad we and they that may have them must bye them
at great pris of gold / we ete the flessh and clothe us with the skynnys And
know ye for certain that in to this isle is but oon entree / And he enters not
there in that would For the king philotes and an other geant which ben wise and
subtle and meruayllously strong alwey keep thentre of the isle And allwaye
that oon waketh / while that other slepeth / Certes said Eristeus by that /
that I understand of you the isle that ye speak of is of great excellence /
This philotes that ye make mention of / what man is this king philotes The
stranger answered and said that he is the most redoubted and drad king of the
parties occidentall. He is a geant that by his force and strength has conquered
the isle with the sheep. And ha^h put out them that dwellid and were
inhabited there before / he is so strong that it is but late a goo that he said
if he might find a man more strong and puyssant than he is / he would never
after bear arms to fight in battle during the lif of that other etc.

THe king Egeus than gaf leave to the strangers to depart fro his presence
and commanded that noman should gif hem empesshement in her retornyng toward
their contre. And they went and departed. Eristeus abode with egeus. And
eristeus came to hercules and theseus / And wysshed by a great desir to have of
tho moutons sayyng to hem that he would that hit cost him as much gold as a
payr moutons weye and that he had a ram and an ewe for to engendre in his
contre / In that time were no sheep in greece When hercules had herd the desire
of king Eristeus / suddenly he said to him Sire ye have desired here to have a
payr of moutons appertenyng to the daughters of Athlas by the conquest and
Arms of the strong geant philotes I promise you here for troth upon my
gentilesse / That fro this day three wekes / I shall depart by water or by
land for to fecche and get them And that I shall never return in to greece
unto the time that I have founden the isle and that I shall oppose my self
against the geants that keeps hit / And shall assaye if I can get the isle upon
them like as philotes has gotten hit upon other When the king Eristeus had
understand the enterprise that hercules made / he was passing sorry For he
louyd hercules as much as he had been his owen sone / he reprysid him fro that
hye enterprise / wenyng to have broken hit but hercules answered so wisely and
so rypely that eristeus was content to suffer him to goo unto this adventure.
And theseus with him.

THe renomee of this vyage was spradde anon in all the contre / Egeus and
Eristeus made ready for their two sons a right good galeye and well garnysshyd
hit of all manner things The galeye and all other habillemens were all ready
in good time At the end of three wekes They went to the sea And with them
right many noble greeks And rowed so forth till they came in to the high see.
where they sailed and rowed many days with out findyng of any adventure to
speak / For at that time the sea was but lityll vsid neither of thieves ne yet
of merchants / what shall I say / their patron in process of time brought hem
in to esperye that afterward was named spain And there sought so long the isle
with the sheep / that at last arrived there / at the paas / The geant that was
comysid to keep the enter and the ward of the isle slepte not at that time /
when the greeks descendid But issued out of his hows And came all Armed unto
the strayt passage / where might no man gone up but oon at ones And he cried to
the greeks / syres what seek you here / Hercules answered we seek the moutons
that been in this isle for to carye some of them in to greece. The geant Answered
have ye money I now / if ye have so ye shall have I now / how said hercules
shulle we not have them otherwise / no said the geant Than said hercules / at
the least late us have them at the pris that ye have gotten hem / how said the
geant / the king phylotes has conquered with his swerd the isle and the moutons
Hercules answered mine entencion is in like wise to conquer the isle upon him /
if ye wole defend hit / haste you ye must have the battle against me / or
ellis late me the isle that I may do there in my will.

Anon as the geant had understand the conclusion of hercules / he made him
ready to defend the paas. And blewe a great horn that was there hangyng on a
tree. At sownyng of the horn the daughters of Athlas awakyd philotes. And
told him that some were there for to get the paa^ / and that the geant had
blown the horn / Philotes with the words roose up and armed him and came to
the paas And fond that hercules by force had put a back his geant That
reseruyd philotes was the most subtle man of arms of all hisperye He was
sore abasshid and began to sihe / But this notwythstandyng he had not long
soiorned there when hercules smote the geant but on the right sholdre by such
strength and virtue that the shield of the geant was fall fro him and his arms
all to frusshid And his glayue entryd so far in to his body unto his heart
that he smote him down ded at his feet.

When philotes saw his geant ded / He came unto hercules for to defend the
paas sayng that he would avenge his geant if he might / Hercules had great Joy
when he saw philotes come to the paas And said to him king thou art well come
/ I have now Joy in my heart syn I shall prove my self against the / men say /
there is no struck but of the maistre now late us see how we shall work to
gyder. well and happy be he / that well shall do and prove him self. Philotes
in the heeryng of these words came unto the paas and held a great bordone with
which he smote sore upon the shield of hercules and made him to disauale a
paas / whereof philotes began to lawhe / And thought for to have smeten yet
hercules with that bordon / which was a shamed of that other struck / he kept
him well and awayted so tht in the smytyng he caughte hit and rached hit out of
his fistes / and casted hit in to the sea / than was philotes all abasshid of
the force of hercules / when he had lost his bordon he took his sword and came
for to fight with hercules / philotes was at auantage / For hercules was under
him / they assaillid tht oon tht other right arda^tly and well they kept hem
both two / In this day they faught with out cessyng also long as the day
endured / The night came oon that they must rest / They lay there both two
upon the paas They slepte no thing / for hit was no time / both two kept the
wacche They endured hit well for they were accustomyd for to wake Thus wakyng
philotes had many words unto hercules and demanded fro whens he was. And
hercules told him the truth After they spack of their bataylle And at the
seching and pourchas of philotes They promysid each to other That if any of hem
were vainquysshid / he that were vainquysshid and ouercomen for to save his lif
/ should be holden to serve truly the vainqueur all his lif during etc.

DVryng these deuyses and promyses. The day sterre That the poets call
aurora began to arise in his regne. The air was clear and net. The sterres
shone At this our hercules cast his eyes among the sterres. And seeing there
Aurora shine above all other / he began to remember his lady megere Alas
Madame where be ye now / I would hit plesid the gods that ye remembrid as
well me as I remember you. In truth the light of this sterre eschauffeth the
Amorous fire / whereof I was late seasid by thadmynystracion of yowre beawte /
ye be also far shynyng in beawte above the maidens of greece as this aurora
shyneth above all the other sterres / of whom the nombre is so great that no
man can tell. O noble megere the right clear sterre / your remembrance
enlumyneth mine heart Like as this sterre enlumyneth the heaven. And me thinks
that by this remembrance when I come to the battle I shall preuayll the better
/ wherefore I promette you if fortune help me like as I desire ye shall have
your part of all that I shall conquer etc.

THe night drew over the day began at the point of the son rysyng hercules
was all esioyed of the souenance and remembrance that he had had of his lady.
And took his sword and said to philotes / / we have soiourned long ynowhe /
Lo hit is day And the son ryseth / hit is better that we excersite Arms now
Than when the rays of the son ben gretter. Late us take this time er the
great hete come and late each of us do his power / Philotes that was all ready
was right Joyous when he herd hercules / For him toughte that he should sone
and in lityll space speed his matter. And said to him. Hercules I am ready. And
was syn yesterday to achyeue this battle. Keep you as well as ye can / ye have
slain my geant the most subtle man that was in all the Occydent. Whereof I
have great displaysir. But at the least syn his death may not be recouured by
death of a man / I shall put me in pain and deuoyr / to have a new souldyour.
And that shall be ye. or else my sword and fortune shall fail me / Shall I
so said hercules and if your sword and fortune fail you / What tidings. By
my gentylnes said philotes that befelle me never. And if my maleheure and
mysauenture run upon me / than must I needs by your servant by condition /
that I shall never after enter in to battle at my empryse / Ne empryse of non
other during your life / Ne for you ne for other I shall never fight / but if
hit be / my self defendaunt with out other words the two champions approchid
each other and smote to gyder so sadly and sore that the place redounded of her
strokes In a litill while they had detrenchid her sheldes by great quarters /
philotes might not fail to smite on hercules / but his strokes were nothing
so great but that hercules might bear hem well ynowh with out greef or
souffryng great damage.

THus began the battle again of the two geantes Hercules was hyhe as a geant /
he was right Aspre in Arms / he did much pain to get the paas / but yet he
might never attain to smite philotes a plain struck for as much as philotes
was above on the paas / which conteyneth well two cubits of heighte. When
hercules saw and knew that philotes kept his paas with out abassing or
aduenturyng to come down He thought subtylly that he would feign him self weary
And lityll and lityll after he began to smite more febly than he did before /
After that he reculed him self and smote fro far as he had fayllid and ben
weary / the greeks were a ferd and wend he moghte no more / and than philotes
sprang down fro the paas wenyng to have put him to utterance / but than when
hercules saw him to fore him And that oon was no more hyher than that other
Hercules came to his place again And gaf so great a struck to philotes that he
made him recule and goo a back more than four foot Philotes was than all
abasshid / And repentyd him that he descended fro the paas / but that was for
naught for the repentyng might not auaylle. Than he took courage and enhaunsed
his swerd and smote hercules on the lift arm so hard that he gaf him a
wound that the blood sprang out / when hercules saw the Arms of philotes
besprenct with his blood / he made none other countenance but that he would
suddenly be avenged of the struck In gyuyng to philotes three strokes whereof of
the first he brake his helm and smote him on the heed / And of the second he
gaf him a great wound on the right sholder And with the third struck he made
his swerd to flee out of his fystes / And than he caughte him in his arms and
after long wrestling he cast him to the earth / In such wise that philotes
yielded him servant unto hercules And promysid him to serve him trewly all the
residue of his life And that he would bear his Arms After him in all place
where he should goo / Hercules receyuyd to mercy phylotes. And than called
theseus and his felauship They came and were right glad and Joyous of the
victory that he had don. Than hercules Philotes And all the other went in to
the isle where they fond the daughters of athlas greatly disconfortid for the
death of the geant / and for as much as hercules had also conquerid phylotes
their wardayn / Hercules and phylotes confortid the daughters the best wise
they could And there the greeks refresshid them the space of three days / The
fourth day he took.xxx. ra^mes and.xxx. ewes / and brought hem Into their
ship After that they went to the sea without any harm doing in the isle for
the love of the damoyselles / they departid thens and went to the sea /
Accompanied of phylotes Which was conquered by hercules as said is / and after
loved well hercules and trwly served him ever after / but of their Iournees I
shall tarry for this time / And shall speak of a monstre of the sea tht the
gods sent to troy for to devour the fair exione daughter to king laomedon

How hercules fought at the poort of troy against a monstre of the sea for the
daughter of king laomedon.
IN that time as bochace reherceth in his genelogye of gods in the third
chapitre of the sixte book / Laomedon the king of Troy was besy to wall and
mure his cite with mures and towers to the end to make hit more strong / he
was not well garnysshid of tresors ne of monoye for to accomplisshe his desire
/ he went unto the temple of the god of the son and of the sea That were
passing rich And took all the money that he cowde find / promettyng to pay
hit again at a certain day and time set / by the moyen of this money he
closid and fortefied the Cite of Troy with mures and towrs / The warke was
costlewe / how be hit in lityll time he achieuyd hit And hit was not long
after that the work was finysshid but the day came in which laomedon should
pay and render unto the temples of the gods the money that he had taken and
borrowed At which day. The prestes of the temples came unto laomedon and
demanded him if he would render the oblacions and offrynges that he had taken
out of the temple Laomedon daigned not to speak to the prestes but sent hem
word shamefully that they should return and keep her temples wherefore he was
afterward sore punysshyd / For in the same night after that he would not here
the prestes The great winds began to rise and meue that on against that other
and caused the sea to rise in such wise that hit entryd and folowid in to the
town so far that hit filde the streets full of water and drowned a great
part of the town Above this in eyghte days following the son shone so
Ardantly and gaf so great hete that the pepl^e durst not goo in the air by
day time And that dried the superfluyte of the haboundance of the water of the sea that was left / Whereof roos a corrupt and a mortal vapor that Infectid
all the Cite Whereof engendryd so great a pestelence that the most part of
the trojans were smyten to death by the great Influence of the corrupt Air.

BY this pestelence they of troy fill in great desolacion The cytezeyns men
and women / young and old dyed with out spekyng suddenly / the fader could not
ner might not help his child in necessite / ner the child the fader at that
time reigned in troyes neither love ne charity For each man that might save him
self fleed a way for fere of this mortalite / and gaf over and left the cite /
And went to dwell in the feldes / And among all other the king laomedon
seeing the destruction of his royame went in to the isle of delphos unto the
temple of the god Appollo / for to have the counceyll of the god towchyng the
health of his Cite / With laomedon went the most noble and the most puyssant
men of Troy. when they were comen unto the temple / They put hem in
contemplacion and devotion to fore the ydole. And the devil that was there in
answered them and said. The money which was taken out of the temples / and not
rendryd and paid again / Is cause of the malady and vengeance of troy / And I
do all the trojans to wete that never shall troy be quyt of this maladye
unto the time that the said Cite pourueye to Appese the gods / In this wise
That is to wete that every month they must chese oon of the virgyns and
maidens which must be set on the side for to be devoured by a monstre that
the gods shall send theder And the said virgyns shall be chosen by lotte or
adventure. And in this wise must the cite do for tappese the gods
perpetuelly / unto the time that they find oon man that by his arms and his
might shall overcome the said monstre etc.

AFter these words and answer laomedon and the trojans assemblid to counceyll
upon this matere And concluded that for the common well and health of troy /
They would put her virgyns in the Ieopardye and adventure to the servitude of
the monstre with out any excepcion or reseruyng / Than they returned unto
troy / and took their virgynes and cast lotte among hem And on her that the
lotte fille / was taken and brought to the sea side. And anon after was seen
comen out of the Abismes or swolowe of the sea so great a tempeste that the sea aroos and was troublid The sea brought this monstre And a right great flood
of water lift up the monstre by times out of the sea / he was as great as a
balayne or a hulke. And than he took the virgyne and swalowed her in / And
went a way again in to the sea And fro than forth the pestelence seced / thus
was troyes deliueryd of their sekenes and maladye by the oblacions of her
virgynes that were offered unto the monstre fro month to month / And thus as
said is. her virgynes were deuourid / hit happend that in the end of the
month tht the sort or lotte fill on oon of the daughters of king laomedon
named exiona / This daughter was young and fair and welbelouyd of all the people
When this lotte was fallen on her / she was not oonly bewailed and sorowed of
king laomedon her fader and of his sone pryant and of her suster Antigone and
of her cosyns and alyes / But of all the people men women and children /
Notwithstanding their weeping ner the good renomee of her cowde not save her
For for the common well and health of them all / She was put in thauenture of
the monstre / The noble virgyne was ready for tobeye. The king laomedon brought
her upon the sea side accompanied of noble^ / ladies / and damoyselles with
great suit of trojans ^^^^goys and marchans / all they made sorrow for her an^
^^wlayned and bewailed her / what shall I say / At the point that she was
thus brought theder / Hercules at aventure arrived at this poort of troy with
his moutons / and he willing to refresshe him there made to cast his Ankers
out / and going out and taking land he beheld on that oon side and saw the
trojans weeping and bewaylyng exiona in castyng a brood her arms / and wryngyng
their hands that he had pity to see hit / And desiryng to know what them
ayled put him self in to the press / and saw there where they bond the
fair Exiona in the route Attyred of ryall Aournementes all discolourd and full
of teerys as she that abood no thing but the death Hercules meuyd with
compassion on the damoyselle. Adressid his langage unto king laomedon for as
much as him seemed that above all them that were in the place he was a man of
Auctoryte And demanded him wherefore tht the damoysell was there bounden /
laomedon casted his eyes all bewept on him / And was all abashed to see his
gretenes and his beawte nevertheless he answered him what art thou tht art so
hardy to demand me of mine Infortune / Which is to all common in Troy Sire
said hercules I am a strounger / and I love the worship and honor of ladies.
And there ne is thing that I might do for hem / but I would do hit unto my power
/ and for as much as I see this damoyselle thus entretyd / In the favor of
all ladies I have axed of you the cause and I will know hit or put my self
in adventure for to dye with her / And there for I demand yet again what
trespaas or sin has she done / that thise men thus bind her My sone answered
laomedon I se well that ye be ignorant and know not the terms and the cause /
wherefore this damoyselle my daughter is here abandonned. There is no man but he
may well know hit. For she shall dye for the salute and health of troy And I
shall tell you how we be comen thereto / The gods of the sea and of the son
has enmachyned and greuyd troy with a right great pestelence. That took his
beginning of a surhabondance of the sea / whereof the streets of troy were full
in every place of water After this deluge and flood the time was meruayllously
hoot and outragiously By the great heete of the son this see was dried up. Of
this dryenes or drought engendrid a vapor Infecte And of this vapor ensued a
pestelence. And for to resist this pestelence I have been in the oracle of the
god Appollo Where I have had answer that for tappese the gods and to sesse
the pestelence / The gods of the son and of the sea will that fro month
to month be taken in troy of the virgyns by sort or lotte for to be exposid
and offryd in this place unto a monstre of the sea / The trojans were content
to fulfylle the will of the gods and I with hem / we have castid our lottes
upon our virgynes / whereof many ben swalowed and englowted by the monstre And
now the sort or lotte is fall on my daughter will she or not / she must
needs obey and appayse the gods / After her shall come another / There is no
remedy / And this shall dure upon the virgynes of troyes perpetuelly / For hit
is the destyne that Troy shall never be quyte of this right hard seruytude
and thraldom / unto the time that they have found a man that allone shall
vaynquysshe and overcome the foresaid monstre by his puyssance and prowess /
which shall be Impossible How be hit that it is true that all the men of the
grettest Cite of the world can not find manyer to vaynquysshe him he is so
great and dreadful / And for these things considered demand me no more My
daughter shall dye for the common well of the place of her natyuyte / / She was
born in a good our / when the gods will / That by lotte and this fortune she
be to them offered Sire answered hercules / Tru^y I wene that under heaven is no
Cite so bond and thrall as youris is. How be hit hit ought to be understand
tht the gods will not suffer / That this malediction shall hold and endure
pardurably / ye must live in hope / if fortune and the gods will do me that
grace that I might vaynquysshe and overcome the monstre and make Troy free of
this servitude what reward would ye give me / Truly said laomedon I trow not
that hit be possible tht ye should vaynquysshe the monstre Who is he that shall
expose him to so great a folly / hercules answered / unto a vaylliant heart is no
thing Inpossible / if I triumph upon the monstre and save thy daughter what
reward shall I have / laomedon answered / if thou maiste do that thou sayste / I
have two horses the best that been in all the world / which I love as well as
half my royame / I shall give hem to the as to the best knight of knights
and as to the most hardyest of hardy. Sire said hercules. Hit is ynowh to me
and suffiseth to have the two horses. Late me allone with your daughter. I have
a trust and hope that this day I shall labor for the well of troy. And that
I shall fraunchyse and make free the virgynes and maidens of that cite But I
pray you if there be in your cite any great bar of iron or of metal. That ye
will send for to fecche hit to me for to deffende me with all.

THe king laomedon and the trojans were all abasshid when they saw themprise
that hercules had made And at the words of hercules the king remembrid him of
a great clobbe of iron that lay at the entree of his palais of ylion that was
so heavy that the strengeste man of troy had ynowh to do to leye hit on his
sholder he sent for hit and presentid hit to hercules And hercules lift hit
up as hit had been a litill glayue Philotes and theseus were present at all
these things Hercules took leave at them and at the press and recommanded him
unto their prayers / and forth with all the sea began to rore terrybly Laomedon
and the ladies and they that were there took leave of exione and at hercules.
And recomanded them unto the mercy of the gods / and went upon the downs
for to see the end / Thus abode exione allone and all dispayred upon the
gravel with hercules / Than hercules knelid down on his knees upon the gravel
tornyng his face unto the Oryent. and made his prayers unto the godde that made
the monstres and terrible bestes requyryng him that he would give him force
strength and virtue of power for to deliver exione from her Infortune of the
monstre / This oryson accomplisshid hercules entryd in to a lityll boot / where
exione was in. And anon after the sea roryng more and more grew and aroose in
such wise that the boot floted and was lift up and born by diverse wawes
Following this in a great trowblyng of wind when the sea was risen in great
habondance of watres hercules and the trojans saw coming the great horrible
and unmeasurable monstre / bringyng with him a tempeste so terrible that hit
seemed that all the monstres of hell had been with him he made the wawes to
redowble a^prely / he lift him up above the water and put out his mosell unto
his sholdres / that of the swalowyng in of the water / sprang out of his
ghilles great floodes of the sea / That mounted so hye that hit seemed that hit
had been a goulffre that had perced the clouds / For to say the very truth
of this monstre / he was so horrible and so ferdfull that only for to look on
and behold / The most hardy and assewryd of troy tremblid for fere as a leef
on a tree / This notwythstandyng hercules was no thing aferd / Allewey he
comforted Exione that fill down as ded. He took his clubbe. The monstre came by
the boot and cast his mosell unto Exione wenyng to have swaloghed her in / as
he had done the other vyrgynes before / Hercules kept her / For he smote him so
acertaynly upon the mozell that he gaf him a right great wound so sore and
heavy to bear That he made him to goo a back and recule in to the botom of the sea / Than in the falling of the monstre in to the sea / the wawes a roos hyhe
in to the Air / whereof hercules and exione were all wette of the wasshing and
springyng of the wawes / their boot was born with the wawes upon a bancke of
sand where the sea was so low / that the monstre might not well swymme with
his ease unto hem / The monstre alleway swa^me after hem and coming nyhe to
them lift up his head / and in the liftyng up There issued out of his throat so
great habondance of water of the sea That the boot was full of water and sanck
in such wise that hercules was in the sea unto the great of his thyes And
exione stood in the water unto her myddell etc.

Anon as hercules saw him in this Adventure. he had great displaysir in him
self More for the pain and dispayr that exione had than for the dread that he
him self had The king laomedon Theseus Philotes and all the other supposed
than that hercules and the damoyselle with out rescousse had been devoured of
the monstre. The monstre than sekyng his proye. Leep again against exione with a
terrible wawe Hercules had his clubbe ready on his nekke. And awayted no thing
but the monstre desiryng to avenge him of the displaysir that he had / And that
he would have don him Dischargid his clubbe on his heed so myghtily that the
bar entryd therein and the blood sprange out / Than was the monstre more wood
upon hercules / he cessed the assault of the damoyselle And assaylled hercules.
And allwey as he lift his heed out of the water / he desgorgid upon the
vayllyant champion great flodes of the sea / but this notwithstondyng he could
not do so much harm unto hercules / but that hercules did much worse to him
Hercules sued him with his clubbe / and made him to rebonte in to the botome of
the sea / by the peysaunt weight of his strokes.

THe battle endured long between hercules and the monstre / / if the monstre
might ones have towched hercules / he would at on gulpe have englowted or
swaloghed him in / He had a wide and a great throat out of mesure he maad
great noise and bruyt. He was ardant in excersisyng his office Alleway hercules
faughte with him boystously / And held the virgyne by him And what thing that
ever the monstre did He could not so suddenly lift up his heed out of the
water / But that with oon struck of his clubbe he was rebouted allwey unto the
bottom of the sea / What shall I say hercules was often times in parill for to
be drowned The peril was great and more than I can reherce Fortune was with
him and the damoysell / he fought and beat the monstre vayllyantly / And so
exployted in smytyng contynuelly on his mozell and on his heed that the sea
withdrewe And took fro him the spirit of life and all to frusshid his brayn
vaynquysshid him and slow him / And after when the sea was withdrawn and
far ebbed / he took exione by the hand and brought her upon the dicque and
delyuerd her unto her fader the king laomedon.

How Laomedon shette hercules out of troy And how hercules swear that he
would avenge him.
When the king laomedon saw his daughter thus deliueryd fro the monstre and
troyes made quyte of the seruage of the pestelence / he enclyned and thanked
parfondly hercules After he descended unto the sea side accompanied of hercules
theseus philotes And of the trojans and went for to see and behold the
monstre that was so great / that three honderd horses might not meue him fro
the place where he was / Oon and other took head for to see the strokes that
hercules gaf him And they could not see all / but in that they saw they
meruaylled For hercules had broken boones That hit seemed not possible to break
/ and they had founden the heed hurt in so many places. That with great pain
they cowde not know whether he had head or none Of this hyhe and increable
victory the trojans enjoyed them meruayllously And had hercules more in grace
than any man in the world. when they had seen and behold the monstre ynowh
they departed thens and brought hercules in to Troy / They came not so sone
unto the dycque but they fond exione new clothed with new array and
vestementes. And as for hercules all that he had upon him was weet and nothing
dry The king laomedon would have had him to have changed his habites and would
have give him new but the vayllyant squire refused hit all / sayyng that he
had been well acustomed not for to be allwey well at his case / In this estate
than laomedon brought hercules in to Troy unto the castle of ylion and his
greeks with him and fested hem as hit apperteyned Hercules and his greeks were
four days triumphant in ylion During these four days the troyans went out
in great rowtes for to see the monster / and gaf so great loos and preysing to
hercules That laomedon had envy there at / Dowtyng him that the people would love
better hercules than him / He sent hercules and his folk out of the town for
to hunte And as soon as they were out of Troy / He drew up the brygge and
shette the yates against him / When hercules wend for to have entryd. Laomedon
spack to him and said to him fro far / that he had mened by conspiracion the
cite against him And that he would no more receive him in to the tou^n / hercules
was passing wroth when he understood thaccusacion of laomedon And answered him /
that never in his live he had tought any vilanye to him / wherein he chargid and
offryd him self to prove by bataylle in the field and to aventure his body
again.xxx. other / that would say or mayntene the contrary / which offer
laomedon would not resseyue / Than hercules required him / that at the least he
would deliuere him his horses that he had promised him for the victory of the
monstre Laomedon answered that he would none deliuere him / wherefore said
hercules Laomedon answered and said / for as much as hit is my will and pleseth
me so to do / Ha false and untrue king said hercules / thou withholdest me the
prys and reward of my labor / and thou yeldest me evil for good / I swear to
the by the puyssance of all my gods / that as I have deliueryd troy
perpetuelly by my clubbe of the monstre of the sea and consequently fro the
sword of pestelence. Semblably and in like wise by the same clubbe I shall
yield and render unto troy the pestelence of death and of war if the gods
give me the grace / And I have Intencion for to make the troyans say that they
were happy that been ded in the time of the pestelence that is passed etc.

HErcules full of great ire departed with these words and left there the
king laomedon that set litill stoor of that he had said to him / For he
trusted and put all his affiance in the strength of the wallis of his cite /
and him thougthe that no man might noye ner grieve him And than hercules went
again to his ship and mounted in to the sea with his clubbe and his sheep and
his felawe theseus / Philotes held him self well happy for to have been
vaynquysshid of oon so vayllyant a man as hercules was and he enprised the
office for to bear his harnoys in all places where he went. What shall I say
Fro troy unto thebes fill nothing worthy to be put in memory that is of
record In the end he arrived in greece And knew by some certain man there That
king Eristeus was in thebes Whereof he had great Joy For him toughte he saw
his lady megere / which he desired to see by great desire / he went unto
thebes where he was solempnly receyuyd of the king Creon which had him in
great chierte for his vaylliance Oon and other came and welcomed him he sent
his sheep and moutons unto the king Eristeus by philotes Philotes him self
told and recounted how hercules had conquered hem and him also And how he had
slain his geant at the paas Of these tydinges was the king Eristeus passing
Joyous. And so were all they that were there or herd speak of hit / Every man
gloryfied hercules Ladies and damoyselles came and wellcomed him Among all
other megera faylled not / she came to hercules and wel^comed him. And
wel^became her to festoye and make him chyer. For she was wise and of good
manyer And certes her coming gaf more solace unto hercules Than all the
louynges and preysinges that were than given to him / how well All the world
preysed and exalted him by this voyage above all the greeks / and the sheep
were so desired / that kings boughte hem for the weight of gold / wherefore
the historiagraphes and poets put this conquest in perpetuell memory.
Writing among his deeds in this wise / Sustulit mala aurea / that is as much
to say as he bare away the moutons of gold / For as much as they were extymed
at prys of the weight of goold / For mala in greek is as much to say as sheep
in englyssh or moutons in frenshe / and so racounteth bokace in his genelogye
of gods / And so approuyth varro which writes in like wise in his book de
Agricultura.

BY this conqueste the name of hercules began to flee in heyghte and in
excellence The poets have feigned upon this history That the daughters of
Athlas had a gardyne kept night and day of a serpent wakyng Wherein grew
Apples of gold And that hercules slew this serpente And gadred and bare away
the Apples By this gardyn is understand the isle / By the serpent wakyng / the
subtle geant co^mysid to keep hit that allway wook at the paas And by the
Apples of gold ben understand the sheep / Extymed to the valeur of the weight
of fyn goold / After than the presentacion maad to Eristeus of this sheep or
moutons as each man meruaylled of the prowess of hercules Philotes adiousted
and gaf to his vaynqueur hercules preysyng above preysyng and loenge and lo^s
above loos and honor above honor / For heeryng kings and princes. ladies and
damoyselles seeing that hercules held his pees whereof he ought and might
enbrace honor and worship he declayred fro point to point his Adventure not
creable / of the monstre of Troyes. And showed the clubbe wherewith he had put
him to death After that he reherced the honor and grace that he had gotten in
troy And the wrong that laomedon had don to him And said so much thereof
That they enterprised all to goo and war upon the king laomedon for to take
vengeance of the wrong that he had don to hercules etc.

How hercules had battle against the king laomedon And how he vaynquysshid
and destroyed troy the first time etc.
HIt is not possible that my pen can write the grace and excellent renome
that hercules gate in greece at his coming fro troy / The kings and the
princes reputed hem self happy and ewrews for to have their regne in his time
Amphitrion his fader putatyf began to have him in grace / And came in to thebes
to him / His mother Alcumena came also / and certes she failled not to have
largesses of Joy / when she might set her eyes to see her sone / which was
so greatly renomed. The noble lady had not seen him in long time before. she
saw him triumph in honor in vayllyance and in prowess All the Anoyes.
greues. and displaysirs that she had for him / be cause that he was named the
sone of Jupiter / whereof she held her self Innocent were all forgoten and put
in oubliance The feste was great in thebes for the love of hercules Men spack
not but of him and of his prowess Creon Eristeus Egeus Amphitrion and many
other assemblid them to geder And made their mustres and assembles for to goo
unto troy. By space of time their excersite was ready And than they took their
leave. And hercules was maad capytayne of this Armee / he went to the sea
accompanied of the kings abouesayd and ten thousand men all chosen for the
nones At the time couenable the Maryners disankred And went to saylle They
saylled so long by their course with out Adventure or lettyng that yet during
their vitaylles they came on a day in to frygye unto a port of a Cite named
laryse being nyghe to tenadon / This cite was of the demayne of Troy / For
which cause the greeks assayllyd hit and took hit by force of arms / And
after that ryfled hit and took all that was therm And when they had so spoiled
hit They went to tenadon Which was a gentilmanly cite They assaylled hit and
took hit as they did the cite of larise and they put therm the fire and
brenned hit that the air was enflaumed in such wise tht hit was seen in troy
how the cite brende Thassault of tenadon dured not long For as much as the
troyans were not aduertisid of her coming when than they saw the air so
enflamed for to see fro what place the flame came They mounted and went up on
the high edifyces of ylion and seeing toward tenadon saw that the cite was
all on a fire whereof they that saw hit were right sorry and greatly abasshid
Above this they looked in to the sea And aspyed than there the flote of the
greeks whereof they were more abasshid than they were before. And than with out
any more longer taryyng they descended and went down in to the halle of king
laomedon / And said to him / Alas sire what is best to be done / The greeks
come upon us with right a great flote we have seen hem and know hem. The
strong hercules manaceth you for to destroy your cite / Certes I believe hit
is he For for the beginning of the feste he has burnt tenadon / And that is
that causes the Air be full of fire etc.

THe king laomedon heeryng this tydynge / began to sighe and to taste the
punycion and trespaas that he had comysed and don against hercules. This
notwithstondyng for to give courage unto his men and to his sone pryant that
was that time of the cage of.xx. yer. he did do sown to Arms And adoubed him
with arms shewid a right fires and hardy semblant This don he Armed pryant his
sone that never had been in bataylle before and dubbyd him knight After he took
him by the hand and issued out of ylion / In yssuyng out he met many
troyans that told him that at his poort were descended many greeks tht had
destroyed tenadon And but if he hasted him / They should sone take land
Laomedon with out spekyng any word passid forth by them that had brought him
this tydynge And came to a place that was there by ylion where he fond mo
than.xx. thousand trojans ready armed / and seeing them he began to Joy in him
self And called the princypals and said to hem Lords ye ben renomed in all
the world by the hyhe prowesses of your Antecessours before that troy was
wallyd they defended hit with the swerd against their enemies The renomed king
Jupiter of Crete could not get this Cite Ne the thesalonyques by their war
might never subdue this Cite Hit is now happed this day that a new assemble
of enemies come upon this cite as men say They have put the fire in tenadon
Late us goo receive them coragiously And late us make of them like as our
faders have made with other etc.

When the trojans had herd these words of their king They answered all / that
they would live and dye with him for the well of the cite and that they had
Intencion to keep hit in his honor and for to do grow their ancient glory /
with out holdyng of long process / The king laomedon did than do displaye
all his banyers After issued out of troy setting and rengyng his men in good
ordenance And than as he began to conduyte and led hem forth Suddenly he herd
at the poort a passing great noise and bruyt of trompettes clarions and tabours
of the greeks / Anon his blood began to chauffe / than his here of his heed
began to stand up / he knew that they were his enemies / And as soon as they
knew the greeks with out holdyng of any order ne mesure / they meuyd them and
began to run to the poort oon to fore an other / when they approchid the
poort they aspyed the greeks that descended with great puissance / than they
ascryed hem unto the death and ran upon hem asprely / the greeks were furnysshid
of good armures and put hem to deffence / And began to skarmussh tht oon tht
other so desmesurably / that in thabordyng and metynge there were many deed and
hurt / hercules was there among the greeks he began to meddle sharpli among the
trojans / he had his clubbe / certes he fested hem in such wise that the most
strengest of his enemies durst not abide him / he fought fiersly in desir of
vengement in couotise of worship and for to get him a name / In forsing his
hand he shewid to the trojans his clubbe / and made hem to feel the weyghte
thereof / and the strength of his Arm And he wroughte so hyghly and did so
vayllyantly that they that saw him doubtyd him more than the / death And sayden
that oon unto that other / behold hercules. but approach him not / hit were
folly All that he arecheth he sleeth and forfrusshith / we do evil to fight
against him This is the fraunchysar of the terrible seruage and thraldom of
troy / how shulle we resist his clubbe / when the mortal monstres ben by
the same put to vttrance etc.

SVche were the words of the trojans / hercules faught against hem fiersly / he
was ferme and stable / he went before all / the greeks folowid him and took a
playsir to behold him. The Cry was great about him ^ what shall I say he
faughte unto the night and never cessed unto the gooyng down of the son / and
the trojans sowned the retrayt and they departed both parties / laomedon put
his swerd in to his shethe which was all blody with greeks blood. And in like
wise did pryant his son. They reentryd in to their Cite. After the
scarmusshe they concluded that oon the morn they would furnysshe their enemies
of battle And the greeks logged hem in the champayne and made good chiere For
they had lost but litill of her people at her coming a land This night passid
over / when the day appeared the trojans and the greeks each in his manner made
hem ready to the bataylle / many of the trojans would gladly have broken this
bataylle. And prayde unto king laomedon that he would render and deliuere to
hercules the horses that he ought to him / laomedon would not do hit. But
answered that he doubtid no thing his enemies / he had than well fyfty thousand
of fightyng men all ready / of these fyfty thousand he made two batayllis oon of
twenty thousand and that he ladde him self And that other of therty thousand he
made pryant captain / this done he issued out of troyes with his.xx. thousand
fyghtyng men and came upon the feldes entering unto the greeks etc.

When the greeks espied coming king laomedon They were full of Joy As they
that were ready for to resseyue them at the points of their speres and with
hewyng of their swerdes / they had maad of their ooste four bataylles In the
first was hercules And in the second was Amphitrion and Theseus And in the
third was the king Creon / And in the fourth was Eristeus / Hercules than
that had the first bataylle marched when hit was time against the king
laomedon. And he had four ancient knights well adresshid in the feet of
arms that set and conduyted his folk in array and ordenance / They marched
so nyhe that oon tht other with great noise of trompes and tabours / that the
Archers and Arblasters began the battle / After that that hercules had sommend
laomedon to pay him that he had promised him and that laomedon had made
reffuse thereof / The greeks were garnysshed with strenger bows and shot than
the trojans were / by that moyen they slow largely of their enemies / And
soueraynly hercules bare him so well that of.xl. Arowes that he shot oon
After an other he slew.xl. of his enemies such as he would chese with out
fayllyng.

HErcules was at that time the best Archier and the most Just that was in
all greece / and also in all the world / he and his men as said is cast man^ of
the trojans to the ground by their shot / when the shot faylled hercules
deliueryd his bow unto philotes that bare his harnoys and took a glayue strong
and sure / when hit came to glayues and breking and foynyng with speres hercules
that was al^way in the first front Leepe ayenste the king laomedon that was
departid fro his oost before all other / for as much as he rood upon oon of
the horses that he had promised to hercules And rennyng oon against that other
as swyftely as they had flowen in the air / met and smote each other so sore
that their speres brak in pieces which sprange about them. Hercules passid
forth and smote among the trojans And laomedon in like wise entryd in to the
oost of the greeks. They began to handle their swerdes and to hew each upon
his enemies Than aroos there a meruayllous noise. They that had speres and
sheldes enployed them for to Join. The fyghtyng was great. The strokes were
hard The battle was general / for of that oon party and that other many men
were distressid and beten Allway the greeks were most boystous and most hard
in Arms And more vaylliant than the trojans And better held hem to gyder than
they of the bataylle of king laomedon / Hercules wrought and besoyngnerd fast
with the sword that he had conquered philotes. At every struck and every paas.
He deffeted a Trojan And smote of her heedes and Arms in great habondance /
That hit seemed that they that he towchyd had not be Armed. Laomedon was on that
other side That feigned not / but bare him right well upon his horse And ran fro
renge to renge among the greeks. He had no rest / he conduysed his people
knyghtly / his people were great in nombre / he approuched their enemies so asp
rely that they enclosed them And than was the tuysion and slaghter so great
that on all sides a man should not have seen but blood and hedes and arms flee
in the place and the field etc.

THan theseus and amphitrion beheld the battle of hercules so enclosed with
the trojans they meuyd them and came to his help er he had need At their coming
they made a right great bruyt / They thressted and couched their glayues upon
the trojans which were to far auauncyd / and Joined to them with such
prowess that they smote down the most stable and strengest and went so far
among hem and made them that were so fer comen to resort again and go aback by
force and strength In this going a back and recueyllyng the oost of laomedon
was all affrayed and abasshid / The three swerdes of Hercules of Theseus and of
Amphitrion were seen flambousshyng above all other in well doing In short
space they began to vaynquysshe and overcome their enemies / and should have
brought hem to utterance and shame / when that the young Pryant with his.xxx.
thousand apperyd to come to the Journey making so great a noise that all the
ground tremblid / And gaf a meruayllous sown / and they tht were upon the
wallys and edifices of troy made with all a great cry / Hercules theseus and
Amphitrion beholding Pryant coming and the puissance of troy set their people
in array and in renges went with a great suit of greeks against them for to
sousteyne her faytes / Theseus was the first and aspied priant that set and
cowched his speer against him And that he came with a great courage mounted upon
the second horse of king laomedon his fader And seasid with so great might
upon theseus that he bare him to the ground turned up so down brosing him upon
his shield Theseus releuyd him right angry of this fall entryd among the
trojans smytyng and hewyng on hem with his sword in such fureur that he smote
of the heedes of moo than of.xxx. trojans / er he cessed / the bruyt and noise
was great about him / The trojans would have vengid them of his swerd. But there
power was not so great they had work ynowh to save hem self. many greeks came
in to the Aid and help of Theseus. And than they began to renew the bataylle.

AT this time and at this recountre Hercules and Amphitrion were nothing idle
They were on o side / and theseus on an other At metyng there was many a man
hurt and slain. Pryant did meruaylles unto the greeks at the beginning / he
bare him so vayllyantly among his enemies / That he fond no man that did him
any thing that displesid him. He made his swerd for to taste strongly the
blood of his adversaries Than as he was in this point / he herd about
hercules a right hye and a right persing Cry of his people cryyng troy Troy
In despair for to have preuayllyd / and than pryant wenyng to have helped / And
to smite down ded all them that were before him ran unto the rescouse to his
maleauenture For as soon as he was comen to fore hercules / And hercules saw
him so on horse back / He remembrid him that hit was he that had overthrown
theseus to the ground And said that he would avenge him And enhaunced his
sword and smote pryant so rudely upon his helm that he was all astonyed And
that his swerd slode down on the horse nekke and entryd in so far that they
fill down both pryant and the horse.

When Pryant was so overthrown horse and man / And also so estoned that he
wyste not where he was / hercules was aduertysed that hit was pryant sone of
the king laomedon / And had pity of him And took him prysonner And did do
send him out of the battle / The trojans seeing this were sore and strongly
troublid and for the rescousse of him they meuyd them self and encoraged so
terribly that hercules might not sustain all the faytes of the battle. And
that the greeks were constrained to lose place The king Creon than displayed
his banyer and his battle And in like wise did Eristeus and they put hem in
two wings oon on that right side and that other on the lift side / And they
came rennyng in upon the trojans with so great noise and so great tempeste that
all the trojans felt well their coming / For at that time they wyste not
where to entende / They were so smyten before and behind so sore that they
lost the rowte of pryant / and wiste not where he becam etc.

AT this entremetyng and faytes laomedon was out of the prees / And refresshid
him / he herd say that his sone pryant was taken. Wherefore he was passing
sorrowful and had so great pain that the sweet came to his heart and fro thens
in to all his membris / and went him self again to battle half out of his
mind / the battle was than fell and enuenymed / and most hard fightyng / but
for to augmente and encrese the ouergrete sorrow of this laomedon / he fond
that his folk had the worse and loss and less fought On that other side he
saw the horyons and strokes of the greeks so great and so desmesurable that
his men were disrenged And tharayes broken And chargid with so heavy strokes of
the heavy glayues that they went and turned a back and began to flee / And than
when hit came to the disconfiture Laomedon abode not with the last but entrid
again in to his cite as hastily as he might The greeks followed the trojans
asprely and so nyhe that they entryd in with hem with great effusion of blood
Hercules was the first that wan the gate And as for the greeks he was portier
and put in all them that were of his knowleche / many trojans passid by the
cuttyng of his swerd / And many fleed away by the feldes and busshis / what
shall I say when laomedon saw that by force his cite was taken and put in the
hands and governance of the greeks Right sore disconforted and all in despayr
he took his daughters Exione and Antigone And his most precious Jewels and
bagues / and fled away preuely Thenkyng that his enemies should make there a
right great destruction and pyllyng as they did For when hercules had put his
men within the cite he abandonned to rob and pylle Thus the trojans were
persecuted The canellys were tempryd with their blood Tthe howses were beten
down / And the great rychesses were put in to proyes And of all the goods of
the cite There was left nothing hoole but the palace of ylion where the ladies
and the maidens were withdrawn Hercules would in no wise destroy this palace.
For as much as the ladies made to him a request for to spare hit At this
pryse hercules sought long laomedon in the palace of ylion And in all places
of the cite / But he cowde here no tidyngis of him / wherefore he was sore
desplaysant And when he had beten down the walls. that had been made with the
money of the gods / he departed thens and returned in to greece with great
glory And in this wise was Troy destroyed the first time. Wherefore I shall
thus now make an end of this first book / And shall begin the second
book / where shall be showed how troy was reedyfyed / And how hit was
destroyed the second time. And how Pryant areysed hit and made hit again / In
contynuyng the noble labors of hercules now new begone etc.

Thus ends the first book of the re^ueyll or gadryng to geder of the
historyes of Troy.
Hiere begins the second book of the recueill of the historyes of Troy /
that speaks of the prowesses of the strong Hercules and of his death etc::.
How hercules fought against three lions in the foreste of nemee. and how he
slew them and took their skynnys or hides etc::.
IN the first book is begonnen the faytes and prowess of the strong and
puyssau^t geant hercules. And how he destroyed first the cite of Troy upon
king Laomedon after which feet and conqueste he returned in to Greece. where
he held him a certain space of time with out doing of any thing that is
found by writing / But than as the old Juno by her evil and cursid envy gaf
her to ymagyne and think how she might make hercules to be destroyed and dye /
Tidings came i^ to Crete that in the foreste of nemee were comen many lions And
among all other there was oo^n that was sixteen palm of heyght that destroyed
and wasted all the contree. And this Juno had war against eristens. and than
for to have aqueyntance of hercules and under feigned color of good love for to
send him in to the claws of this lion. she maad pees with cristens. and send
for him to come in to Crete for to conferme the pees Eristens that thought no
thing but well went in to Crete and brought with him hercules / the pe^^ was
made. Juno acqueyntid her with hercules / they came to speak of the lions in the
forest of nemee etc:. And so much spoke Juno and accountid of hem. that she
said to hercules that hit were wel^ his faite for to get him honor and
worshipp / as for to go unto the foreste of nemee and for to employe him to
conquer tho lions hercules wenyng that Juno had counceillid him for to goo and
assaylle the lions for his worship and prouffyt / enterprysed for to goo in to
the foreste / Juno required him if that he went that when he had vaynquysshid
the lions he should return unto her / hercules promysid her that he would so do
/ After he departed fro crete / and first he went in to thebes for to see me
gera / and for to make his harnoys and arms to a point When the ladies of
thebes knew that hercules would goo against the lions of nemee / all they
complained his yougth and they thought that he shlod dye there / ffor the
lions were cruel and terrible Megera above all other was passing sorrowful /
and required the ladies that they would pray euristeus that he would keep
hercules fro going unto so dangerous a voyage / The ladies accomplisshid the
request of megera. And had wend to have broken the voyage of hercules by the
mien of curisteus / but they might in no wise let his purpose / For hercules
answered to euristeus and unto the ladies / that hit was the first emprise that
he had taken in hand at request of any lady / and for as much as the queen
Juno had made him to do hit / he had Intenco^n for to accomplissh hit by the
playsir of tho gods and of fortune:.

HErcules was great in heart and in courage exalted in honor he had lever have
dyed than to have don a thing werof should follow any dyshonoure / when his
arms were ready he adowbyd him / after he took leave of king creon. of
euristeus. of amphitrion of the ladies and of the damoiselles accompanied only
of philotes which would never leave him / he depertid fro thebes And so spedde
him in his Journey that he came unto the foreste of nemee which stood not ser
from Arges / In approaching this foreste he went two days with out findyng
bestes or men unto the time that he entryng in to the foreste fond a pastor
or a hierdman named melorcus / this herdeman was mountyd upon a great tree /
when that he saw hercules enter in to the wood. he ascryed him sayng / sire
ye be ded if ye goo any further / return lightly. for the fires lions will ete
you. or ellis come hither up to me upon this tree / hercules heeryng the words
of molorcus looked upon the tree. demanded him what he was. Alas said the
pastor I am the most pour man of all other / the lions of this foreste at
their coming have eten a great herd of bestes that I have nourisshid here by.
above that they have eten all my famyllye and meyne And they have all devoured
save me allone which have by adventure a great while sauyd my self upon this
tree where I ete no thing ellis but leaves and akehornes. And dare not descend
and come down for fere of three lions which ben here by / which will sone
assail you but if ye depart and flee etc::.

THe pastor fynysshyng his words / there came leepyng out of a busshe the three
lions. and marched against hercules roryng and criyng And openyng her eyes by so
great felonnye. that hit seemed that they would have through percyd hercules with
her fell sight. The great lion came first / his here stondyng up. he was as hyhe
as an olyphant and great after the auena^nt And his head was twyes so great as
the head of abool. hercules seeing them come took his glayue and his clobbe
that philotes bare / Philotes notwithstanding his prowess / was so sore aferde
that he went upon the tree unto the herdeman. Hercules set his clobbe unto a
tree / and took his glayue fast between his fystes / the lions at the
approchyng brayed in her throtes / hercules smote oon of them between the eyes
/ and bare him down to the earth that he satte upon his buttokes. The great
lion wend than to have spronge^n upon hercules and to have taken him in his
claws And maad a terryble leep / when hercules saw and knew his entente / he
turned fro him and smote at the third lion which was light and peert / And
conduysed his glayue so right and so fermely in to his throat that he rought
him to the heart what some ever resistance that he made in bytyng the glayue /
and left hit within his body in such wise that he fill down ded / when the
two lions saw her felawe so arrayed / they set her claws on the earth / and
howlid so yrously that hit seemed that the thonder had spronge out of her
stomakes / All the foreste denned thereof / hercules took his swerd. the two
lions approached of new again / and ran upon him with her paws and hurt him
so desmesurably / that they losed his armeurs and her nails entryng in to his
flessh / they drew hem out all dyed with his blood::.

HErcules had the heart sore troublid when he felt his wounds that the lions
had made / he hauncid his swerd and smote on oon and other / but the great lion
had his skyn so hard / that his swerd might no more enter therm than hit might
on a great stedy / Thus began the battle of the lions and of hercules / the
lityll lion was passing aygre and fyers he launched him forth often times against
hercules. And allewey wend to have hurt him with his claws that cutted like
a ra^sour but he launched so often that hit was to his euyl^ health and ease that
hercules among after many strokes / he made to depart from his body the right
leg right nyghe by the sholdre and smote him down by the feet of that other
lion that lay ded etc::

When hercules saw that he was delivered / of the two evil bestes. And that
he had no more to do but with the great lion. he began to have an hope of good
fortune / he had Joy in him self of the bataylle. which was strong to
sustain / ffor the great lion gaf him great strokes with his paws. And put
him often times in parill of death / the swerd of hercules might never enter in
to the skyn of the best hit was so hard. the lion took his swerd between his
teth and his nails that with great pain he pullid and rachid hit from him.
ffynably when he had long foughten with his swerd. And knew well that thereby
he might reyse no blood of the lion. he would assaye if his Clubbe were to him
more prouffytable. than he took hit / And the first struck that the lion came up
on him./ he gaf him a struck with his clubbe so great on his moutthe that all
his teeth braak and fill out to fore him. the lion felyng the stroke maad a
great and meruayllous howling. he haunsed his paws and wend to have pullyd
down hercules / but he fledd the coming of the lion And the lion fill to ground
of the great fiersnes and failyng that he maad And when hercules saw tht he
was fallen. he leep upon him / and beat him and held him with his hands
about the throat so dismesurably that he brought his Jaws out of her places
or out of Ioynte / and made his eyes to flee out of his heed and stranglid him
and so slew him:.

IN doing this feet or work hercules shewid a synguler hardynes and an
Increable force / he estranglid with his hands the lion with the skyn so hard
that no glayue ne swerd might enter ner do any harm / he put him to death by
excessive vailliance / And when he had so done he went to that other that
lived yet / and all to brake and tare him as if hit had been a lityll lamb /
After he called philotes and the pastor or herdman that were meruaillously
Joyous and glad of so high a victory / and hercules fond the manyer for to
fle the lions and take of her skynnes by the help of the herdman / when they
had flayn hem hit was night / hercules demanded the herdeman if there was any
house or loggyng there by where he might have mete and drink / the herdeman
brought him to his house where they fond provision of mete and drink / wherewith
the good man feested hercules to his power / and him seemed that he was in
paradys And thus hercules passid the day and the night / and forgate not to
thenke on his wounds that were fell and smarted that litill or naught he
slepte that night / this notwithstanding when the day apperid he took leave of
the herdeman and so deperted / and took his Journey for to goo in to crete for
to show to the queen Juno the three lion skynnys and for to thank her of her
good aduertisment.

How Juno sent hercules in to egypt for to be slain of the tyrant Busire and
how hercules slew the tyrant against the hoope and will of Juno:.
IN this time reigned in Egipte the king busire the sone of the queen of libie
/ the land of egipte was dry and not fertile but barayne. Busirie for to
remedy this callid his clerks that helden the scence of Zorastes. and axed of
them what he might do for the health of his royame / They counceylled them
with the gods and had answer that they must sacrefye unto hem man's blood.
When busire that naturelly was evil And that had never done good herd this
answer. he began to tyrannyse him self that was a tirau^t before. and began
first on his people. taking and pluckyng fro the moders here little children and
fro the men their wives. and fro the wives her husbondes in brennyng and
fowling the temples of egipte with their blood / For these homysides and
slaughter the droughte sessed not. but augmentid and wax more the clerks
demanded her gooddes the cause why they had no dewes of water ner rain fro
above / they answered that they would not have the Just and true blood of
egypt. but the strange blood which they should take and make sacrefise thereof
/ the gods by this answer would have in sacrefice the blood of busire. For he
was strange in virtuous policye and far fro all good. And the clerks
understood that they would have the blood of strangers / Busire advertised of
this answer cessed to persecute the blood of egipte / and turned his glayue
upon the blood of strangiers / and made an edycte and statute tht no stranger
should enter in to his cite / but he should be sacryfied to his gods. and that
he would do slay all the estrangers that he might get. By this edicte and by
this dampnable custom many estrangers nobles and other were put in sacrefice
and had their blood shed in egipte / among all other oon noble man of crete
of the lignage of Juno perisshed in this Infortune by the swerd of busire / the
tidings came in to crete and there was made for him a great sorrow / As this
sorrow was in his most course hercules and philotes came unto queen Juno / they
fond her charged with teeres of weeping in her cite / At that time there were an
honderd Cytees in Crete / And the king Jupiter held him no more with Juno for
many causes and resons / when than hercules was returned unto this lady Juno
his stepmoder / he made to her the reverence / after he shewid to her the
skynnys of the lions that he had slain / And thanked her of the hyhe adventure
that she had ensigned him etc:.

THe cursid stepmoder for the return of hercules augmentyng her sorrow upon
new sorrow / reseyued and fested hercules / and made to him fayntly the
grettest chiere that she could / hit was upon the point to goo to dinner / she
made him to dyne and ete with her / In etyng after dyuerce deuyces of the lions
she thought and remembrid how she might make hercules for to dye / she might
no better do than to send him in to egypt / at that time she concluded in her
self that she would send him in to egipte if she might / for to so do / she
changed the propose of the lions / and said to hercules / your coming again in
saefte is to me so recomendable that your name shall be put in perpe^uell
loving and preisyng among the most worthy and best of the world / for ye have
done many fair enterprises and fectes / In your young childhod ye made all the
world to wondre and marvel of the victory of the serpents by you
enstranglid After ye have maad your swerd to braundysshe in the occidente in
ffrygie and uow newly in Nemee / Thauentures of these places have given to you
right much honor and worship / whereof I have right great Joy. ffor each
person ought to be glad and enjoy in the well doing of a another And in
especial of a noble man. And specially when that he puts him in pain to
vaylliantnes. every person is holden and bounden to councelle him unto his
worshipp and well / wherefore when hit so is that ye enuertue your self fro day
to day. and seek the peryls of the sea and the false dangers of the earth. to
the end for to surmou^t all them / I aduertyse you that in Egypt is a tyrau^t
that sacrefieth all estrangiers that come in to his contre with out rescruyng
noble man or villayn. so than me seems if fortune will help you for to go and
conquer him. that ye should get great honor and worship to you and yowres.
and health and prouffit to all the nations of the world. Madame answered
hercules I am not ner never shall be in all my live of such recomendacion as
ye say and report. notwithstondyng for as much as I have great desire for to
do works that may be to the plesyr of the people and for their health and well
/ I promette you. and swear that to morn with out any other delay / I shall
put me in deuoyr on the way for to goo in to egypt / And I shall never return
again in to my contree unto the time that I have seen the terau^t And if he
leye or put hand on me for to sacrefyse me / I have entencion that he shall not
do hit with out smytyng of strokes / / Juno heeryng thenterpryse of hercules
had in her heart passing great Joy / that day they passid in many deuyses /
hercules took the skynnes of the lions and delivered to certain werkemen for to
make of them a garment in manner of armor to arm him with all / On the morn he
took leave of his stepmoder and departed fro crete / and so long Iourneyed on
the way with philotes with out fyndyng of any adventure whereof any memoire is
had / that on a day he came to the gate of the cite of menphyn that was in
egypt where the tyrant busire held his residence.

When hercules was comen nyghe unto the gate he took his clobbe that philotes
bare / he left philotes there and entrid him self in to the cite / he had not
ben long there / ner far goon but busire which was aduertysed of his coming
by his espyes came against him with many of his accomplices. and with out spekyng
of any word ran upon him / hercules was all well assured / he knew the tyrant
by his mayntien and by the syngnes that was told him / he lift up his clobbe
when he saw him come / and as the tyrant would have smyten him with his glayue
with out any word spekyng. he smote the tirant with his clobbe upon the right
side so desmesurably that not only he bare him unto the earth / but also he
brake all his rybbys of his body / And so arrayed him that he might never releue
him self after / The Egipciens seeing busire so overthrown / some ran to him
for to releue him which they could not do for he was to heavy / And the other
assailled hercules. Than was the cite all ameuyd Hercules right Joyous that he
had so beten the tyrant began to learn the egypciens to know his clobbe / he
slew many of them. And the remenant he maad to flee. his strookes were so heavy
and peysau^t that the accomplices of busire that were acustomed to shede man's
blood. had their blood shedd and sparkled abrood And could not ner might not
remedy their meschance that was so great / that hercules fillyd all the place
of deed bodies. And after long bataylle he fond him silf allone. ffor their
was none so hardy that durst be seen to fore him. The peples and the comonte
of the egipcyens gaf no charge of the rescous of their king / when they saw
him beten. All they hated him and saw the bataylle fro far by great rowtes
/ when than hercules had so much done. that he fond no man to fight with him.
he set down his clubbe. And adressid him unto a great company of egipcyens
that stood there And assured them that he would no thing don unto them. and
axed what people they were that had assailled him. They answered him knelyng on
their knees that they were manslears hangemen and people of vicious and evil
living. And that their king that he had first beten down was the worste of hem
all. And hadd purposed to have put him to death as a strangier for to make
sacrefice unto the gods. And they prayed him. that he would sacrefyce their
said king / Hercules granted their petycion and accorded hit unto the people.
And anon took this cursid tyrau^t busire that lived yet and bare him upon his
sholdre unto the temple which the egypciens shewid to him the false tyrau^t
cried after help terribly. but his cry auayled him not. The egypciens cried
unto hercules sacrefice sacrefice him / / when hercules came in to the temple he
sacrefised him after tht he had shewid to him his cursid and evil life / And
than when the fire was put unto the sacrefice / hit began to rain / and the
great droughte began to fail / whereof the egypciens were so Joyous that none
could specifye / they song louynges and preisinges to hercules they brought
him unto the palais and philotes also / which had all seen and they ordained
and constituted hercules king over them / which he refused / but he ordained
Iuges for to govern them After he departed and returned unto the queen Juno.
which had great sorrow / And to king Creon which had great Joy for to here
told and recounted his prowesses:

How hercules espowsed megera and how he was made kynghte in thebes etc:.
IN such wise as the young wine by the labor and besynes of the labourer
grows in heighte and his bows spread a brood full of fruit / semblably
hercules by virtue labouryng in him grew in verdur of well doing and in fruit
of noblesse / his works his bows his branches than began to spreed a brood
and to mount and rise fro royame to roiame / the secret conspiraco^ns of Juno
and her cursed enuyes might not hurt ner mynusshe the virtue of hercules / the
more that she wenyd to abasshe and hurt him. the more she was cause of his
enhauncement / if he were puyssant and strong of body / he was yet more
strong of virtue for hit was set in him as the precious stone is in gold /
and as the odor is in the flour / And as the raye or son beme is in the
son / he was beloved of kings. of princes. of ladies. of damoyselles. of
nobles and of villains. en especial^ megera the daughter of kyngt Creon louyd
him / Certes she was not deceived. ffor hercules loved her also. And was never
hour but he thought on her. how well they durst none of them speak to other
of this matyere. they were ashamed to dyscouure that / whereof they had hope to
have honor and worship. they beheld each other / And often they bewailed and
complained to them self. And desired the day that they might take each other
by marriage. And so much they wisshed after that day that at last hit came. For
on a morrow tide as hercules was goon unto the wood for to take a wild best /
he remembrid him of his lady. And began to speak and say to him sylf softely.
Shall I be alleway in pain Shall mine heart never be eased but always
languysshyng in love / I see oon and other In great Joy with her loves and
ladies. And I wot never how to come to the point of oon only that I have
chosen above all other / And how to achyeue my purpoos I wot never how to
begin. I dar not speak to her / ner I have not yet required her of love. ner
I have not assayed if she would condescende. Shall I speak to her / I wot never
/ if I speak to her and than she reffuse me / I shall fall in despair. I shall
dye for sorrow of melancolye and desplaisir I shall never dar come after in
noble assemblee a foot. Alas what pain. all considerid oon time must come that
I speak to her. if all her friends were of oon acorde for to give her to me in
marriage. And she were not content ner pleased all were lost / the most
Ieopardye is to have her good will and grace ffor with out her grace I may
naught do. Than hit is necessite I seek and require if I may have her good
will / syn hit so is / ffor if I sleep thus and speak not I shall never achyue
ner come to my pourpoos:.

HErcules ferme in his purpoos esprised and enflamed of great desire departid
from the wood and abandoned the wild best and gaf hit over for to come unto
megera / thenkyng how and by what words he might come and show to her / that
lay on his heart / he went so far that he came unto the gardyn of the palace
where she was with many ladies and damoyselles / he made to them the reuerences
/ After he espied the time that he might speak to megera. And he wax so pensyf
that hit was meruaille / he entremeted no thing to deuyse with the ladies /
but he drew him a part in to the gardyn / when the ladies beheld him so
pensyf / dyuerce of them came to him and talked with him. to put him from his
thoughts and pensyfnes. but they could not. and at last megera came to him.
As Soon as hercules saw her come to him he began to syghe and came again her /
and she said to him / hercules why are ye so pensif / put away fro you such
melancolye / And tell me of your tidings I pray you / lady answered hercules I
thank you of your good visitacyon. And syn hit pleseth you to here of my
tidings and to know I shall say to you a paart / ^first I aduertyse you that
the cause that I am brought and put in the abisme or swolowe of pensifnes and
sighs that is this day comen unto me / is by your contemplacion / ffor as I
went to the wood to hunte the remembrance of your right noble beauty
contynuelly being in mine ymaginaco^n came in to me / and made me enter in to a
secret debate that is to wete if I should allewey live vnguerdoned and
unrewarded of love. And also if I durst say to you that I have set mine heart
and love in you. Madame this debate was great / but in the end I concluded to
come unto you for to know the conclucion of my fortune whether hit be death or
life / In this deliberacion thynkyng how I might speed unto you. I am in this
point and party / where your coming has put me out of a right great thought
and pensifnes / ffor I wiste never how to come to the point for to speak with
you apart. as I may now do. than for to enploye the time / I say to you for
truth. that syn the time of my olympiade. I have desired you night and day.
And at that time put mine heart in your seruytude. concludyng to love you
pardurably. Madame I know and woot well that I have enterprysed thing that I
am Indygne and not worthy / this notwithstanding I abide your mercy and require
you that hit please you to resseyue me in to your grace in such wise that
shortly I may see the day of our marriage etc::

When megera understood the words of her love hercules she was in her heart
reioysed with great solaas / notwithstanding she was ashamed And all shamefaste
she answered / Helas hercules by what fortune find I me in the grace of so
gentil a man as ye be / your excessive prowes your glorious labors your
resple^dant virtues ben so much of value that ye ar worthy to have to wife the
flour of ladies and the choys. with these words many damoyselles came there
unto them / that caused them to sece their deuyses of love. And sayden to
megera that hit was time to withdraw her for to go dyne Megera sorowful^ of so
hasty departing / and that she had no more space to deuyse with her love / ne
might not achieue her purpoos / by constraynt she took leave of hercules and
went in to the halle / all refeccioned of love / And hercules abood in the
gardin all glad and Ioious of the sweet answer that he had receyuyd etc:.

When the ladies than had left hercules in the gardyn / also sone as they were
goon / hercules assemblid Euristus and amphitrion / and said to hem that he had
great desire and will to be married / and prayed them that they would goo to
king Creon to know if he would give him his daughter megera. They spoke to
king creon of this marriage / the king herd hem speak right gladly / ffor the
matter plesyd him / And answered that he might nowher better bestow his daughter
/ than to the most noble man of the world hercules / whom he louyd as his owen
sone / which was so vailliant and so noble and had no felawe like unto him and
that he was content to give to him his daughter And with her all that he would
demand Euristus and amphitrion thanked the king of his courtoys answer Megra
and hercules were sent fore / the king made hem to trouthplyte each other
with great Joy of both parties / After this in process of time the day of
the espow sailles and marriage was hallowed with glory. tryumphe honor and Joy
/ what shall I say they lay to gider with out more adventure / and liuyd to
gyder right honestly:.

Anon after the solempnyte of this marriage. hercules came to king creon and
prayed him tht he would adubbe and make him knight / for as much as they of the
royame of Ioonie were comen unto him. and had chosen him for to be king of
their Cite for his good renomee. The king Creon Joyous of that / that he was
chosen for to be king of ycome. answered that he would accomplissh his desire.
but he would that this should be don at a certain day assigned / Saying that than
he would make a right noble feste where men should Iouste and tornoye. And that
he would do come theder all the kings and the princes of Greece / hercules
Accorded and agreed the counceyll of the king And than the king sent his
messagers unto all the kings of greece. And prayed hem to be at the chiualerie
and dubbyng knight of a noble man / that shall hold a paas at a day named and
set for to furnysshe all them that shall come to the Ioustes. The Reno^me of
this foresaid ffeste was a none borne and known unto all the regnes of greece /
The apparayll and ordenance was great in thebes Oon and other disposed them for
to be there. The time passed and the day came / many a king and knight were
comen at that time to thebes. Theseus and Jason the sone of king Eson were
there among all other / the kings maad great bruyt and great pompes about
ten of the clock to fore none the king Creon went in to the place that was
ordained and arrayed for the Ioustes. at a corner in the same place was a Tente
/ In this tente was Hercules all alone. that same time the ladies and
damoyselles went and mounted upon the scaffoldes / the Iousters came in to the
place. No man knew ne wiste not who was this new knight. what shall I say
when the king Creon saw that the knights were comen in on all sides and that
the ladies were gone up on the skaffoldes / he sent for hercules and made him
knight after their statutes / and than hercules mountyd upon his horse / took
his spear and his shield / And escryed them that were there to the end that each
man should do his deuoyr / And than oon and other that desired to have worshipp
took her speres and ran ayenste hercules / And began a Ioustes that was right
hoote and sharp / Their speres were strong and brake not lightly / but they
met often times / and some overthrown and smyten down of her horses / They
that might not Just against hercules Assayed each other / like to like / Jason
and theseus Iusted often times against hercules / and pirothus sone of king
yxion in like wise / All they that I name mayntened them right vailliantly /
Notwithstanding above all other hercules abood all men / and no man might abide
his strokes but he bare hem all down / reseruyd Jason / / which encountrid him
dyuerce times and gaf him many great strokes / hercules bare down theseus to
the earth and pirothus and well fyfty strong knights / he did so much that
no man abode on the place but Jason and he And than he left and sessed the
Ioustes for the vailliance that hercules fond in Jason / and ever after he had
a special love to him / / and took acqueyntance of him and fested him and made
him great chere::.

AT the end of this Ioustes / knights ladies and damoyselles went unto the
pallays / there was hercules maad king of yconye / the feste was great and
rich more than I can reherce / the strangers were greatly fested and hyghly
thanked in comune / what shall I make long process / when all the feste was
passid with honor and glory of hercules And was no more to do whereof any
memoire is for to say / Pirothus praid all them that were there to be at his
wedding in thessalonyque at a certain day named each man promysid him to go
theder and be there ate / Every man took leave of hercules when time was come of
departing. And each man returned in to his contre and place / And they could
not ynowhe meruail of the glory habou^dynge and apperynge to habonde. grow
flourysshe. and fructefie in hercules / which was so courtoys and humble. And
that for the grace that he had in temporal honor and worship. he was so
virtuous that he was not the more proud ne enhaunsid him self / but the more
meked and lowed him self::.

How the centaures rauysshed ypodame at the weddyng of Pirothus. And how
Hercules recouerd her again and vaynquysshid in battle the centaures:.
For to continue our matiere / than when hercules saw approach the day of the
weddyng of pirothus. he disposed him to go theder / by space of time he went
forth on his way and took philotes with him / And at alauenture took with him
his Armures of the skyn of the lion. when megera saw him depart. she was sore
troublid for his departing / and for that / tht he took his armours with him /
for she thought if hercules had herd speak of any aue^ture he would goo theder
and put him in deuoir to assaie him self again hit with great sighs she looked
after him as far as she might / praiyng to the gods that they would bring
him shortly again / hercules and phylotes went forth in to the country also
much as they myght^ they exploited so her Journey that they came in to
thessalonycque / where they were resseyued with great Joy of pirothus and of
his ffrendes / they fond there a right great assemble of noble men. Ladies and
damoyselles / Theseus and Jason were there / the friends of Jason would that
Jason should be maad kynght / And for to do that / / they presented him to
hercules which gaf him the order of knyghthode / And hercules said that he had
seen in him a good beginning of a noble man / and if he may live he shall
attain ones to things right hyhe and noble Among other things the day of
weddyng came. the cite was all full of noblesse / the centaures were there /
they were an honderd geantes armed that ran as the wind / which the king
yxion had ordained in these saylle / of whom some dwelled in mollose and the
other in Aphyte a cite of Epire / whereof was queen ypodame the lady and Bryde
of the weddyng / there were many kings and princes of whom I have not the
names. The queen ypodame and pirothus were weddyd to gyder after their law /
When the time of dinner was come they set the lady in the halle / where was
maad a general ffeste / In this ffeste all the world was amply served of all
manyer good wynes and good metes / In especyall the Centaures made passing good
chyere / And drunk so much of the strong wynes / that the pryncypall
capitayn of all named Euricus and some of the other had words to gyder and
troublid the ffeste / In this trouble they fought to geder / and cast each on
other pottes. platers. wynes and metes so terrybly that many of them were hurt
and ded. Than anon was the halle full of noise Euricus and fyfty of his
geautes issued out of the pr^es and went to feche her harnois and armours when
they were armed they entrid in to the halle and not content of the trouble that
they had maad how well that hercules and the other enteudyd to appese them that
slew each other / they took the queen ypodame and bare her out and rauysshid
her and fledd away with her / when the ladies saw this great outrage / they
escried all affraied / thaffraie was so great that hercules. Jason. pirothus
and theseus ran unto them And when they knew that the centaures had rauysshid
the lady / at few words they went and armed them anon etc::.

HErcules did on the skyn of the lion and took his swerd his bow and his
arowes. And than went after the geantes with out abidyng of any other
company or person. the geantes were withdrawn under a tree / and there they
renged them in bataylle^. as they that wiste well and seurly that the first
that should come to them should be hercules. they hatyd hercules secretly. And
they had envy of his glory. they swore all the death of hercules / and than
when they were in these terms and deuyses / Euricus aspied fro far hercules.
and shewid him to his felawshipp hercules was all alone and came not a paas
softely as a man. but he came rennyng as lightly and also swyftely as the heart
rennyth in the valeye And seemed* that he flawe in the air / the swyftenes of
hercules ne abashed ne affrayed not the centaures. they were well four score.
And they were all of great corages They took than their glayues. polha^es.
swerdes and other habyllemens of war / And some of the strengest of them
went against hercules / on that other side as soon as hercules approchid so
nyghe as he might shote at them / he bente his bow and with an arowe he smote
a centaure named gryneus in such wise that the arowe perced the heed entryng
by the visage and nailed and attachid his head unto a tree that stood by hynde
him. with the second arowe he smote another geant named petreus in the breast
through his armor that hit went through his body / with the third he hurt
dorillas a tarrible geant and nailed his hand unto his visage ffor when the
geant saw the struck come he held up his hand to fore his visage / and the
arowe entrid with so great might as before is said and made the hand to be
attachid to his visage of which struck he was ded / he shot many moo arowes
than also long as he had any / and he shot none. but if he hurt or slew oon
of the geantes / when his shot was failled / the geantes strongly esmeuyd of
that they had seen her felawes dye by the shot of hercules / they escried
upon hercules and they enuyronned him on all sides / Cilarus. pheotones. nessus
/ myncus. astilo lodeum. and piseon. were the first that smote upon hercules
with her glayues / hercules took his swerd and came again pheotones that had a
great axe so great that hit was a mannys burthon / Pheotones anon lift up his
great axe and wend to have smyten a mighty struck upon hercules But hercules
that knew ynowhe of the war turned him from the struck / And so the great
axe fylle down to the ground / And than suddenly hercules caught that great axe
and plukkyd hit out of his hands / and forthwith gaf him a struck with all so
great that he smote of his right arm with the sholdre etc::.

SVche was the beginning of the battle of hercules and of the centaures.
Cilarus smote than hercules behind with all his might / piseon and ledeum
smote him also all at oon time. notwithstondyng hercules ast^nyed not ones
therefore / but in retornyng to cilarus he gaf him a struck with the axe so
fermli on his helm that hit entrid in to his body that he confounded the geant
to the earth. And so he served in like wise piseon and ledeum. Jason and
theseus put them than in the battle. And well prouved her yougthe / at their
coming for to give them heart and courage. hercules threstid in to the grettest
pr^es of the geants And so wroughte with the axe. that they cursyd phiotones
that had brought hit theder And all them that had forged hit. In betyng and
smytyng down to fore them. hercules began than to seek ypodame. he fond her
all be wept right beside and nyhe Euricus / Than he spoke to euricus and said
to him. thou evil gloton thou haste this day trowblid the feste and the lady
of my ffrende pirothus. And now anon I shall trowble thyn esperite. with this
word he descharged the axe and smote with all euricus in such wise on the heed
that he fill down deed / unto the great enbassement of the other geantes. ffor
in beholding the Axe dyed with the blood of curicus their captain. they were
all abasshid. Than began hercules to smite more and more upon the geantes /
their was none than so seure. but he was aferde ner none so ferme but he ^e
began to hyde him and tremble for fere / his strookes were not sustenable / he
put his enemies out of array / and unto flight / ffinably with the help of
Jason of theseus and of pirothus that were meruaillousli vaillant they
vaynquysshid and chassed them unto a river / where that.xij. of them sauved them
in passing and swimming over / And all the remenant of them were persecuted
unto the death / reseruyd lyncus that hercules held prisonner / for as much as
at the discomfiture. he praid him of mercy. and yielded him unto him / Thus were
the centaures destroyed more by the strength and hand of hercules than by any
other / when hercules had so done that there were no moo of the centaures upon
the place / he and his felawys returned unto ypodame / And brought her again
unto the cite with great tryumphe / what shall I say the ladies recourid Joy
by the recourance of ypodame / and recomenced and began again the feste that
dured after eight days right great and sumptuous etc::.

How pluto rauysshid proserpyne / And how Orpheus went for her in to hell /
and how the queen Sera came unto the weddyng of pirothus and how theseus and
pyrothus fought with Cerberus porter of the said hell etc::.
IN this time that is to wete a lityll to fore the weddyng of pirothus as pluto
the king of molose sone of Saturn and brother of Jupiter saylyd and went by
See sechyng his adventures / And so long he sailed that he arryuyd in Secyle /
And that he fond there nyghe by the Ryuage a right great assamblee of
Secyliens that hallowed the ffeste of her gods. when pluto saw this feste. he
did do arm.xx. of his felawshypp under their robes and garnementes. And went
in this manner for to see the feste / for to wete if he might find any proie /
this pluto was the grettest thief and the most lecherous man of all the world
And had with him a geant named Cerberus. ynowh ylyke unto pluto of condico^ns
and of courage / but he was much more strenger and puyssant of body. All the
other were great as geantes. and had learned to do no thing ellis but for to do
harm and evil And could none other wise do / When than the secilyens saw
pluto come and his felawes they supposed that hit had be some of their
neighebours that came for to see their plays and esbatementis for as much as
they came clothed in their garnementis and saw none of their armor ne harnoys
And they enforced them to sing and dau^ce / but certes their songs and their
daunces were not pardurable ner dured not long. for in coming unto them there.
The king pluto cast his eyes a side and saw there the queen of that marches
that beheld the feste. And by her / her daughter that made a Chapelet of
flowers. The mother was named Sera And the daughter was callid Proserpyne and
was married unto a noble man named Orpheus that sat beside her and played on the
harp / This proserpyne was passing mervaillous fair. Anon as pluto had seen
her he desired and coueyted her And advertised his folk secretly of her / And
after came nyhe and by her And felt him self so surmounted in coueytise of her
beaulte. that he set hands on her And leyde her on his back and bare her a
way::.

When Orpheus and Sera saw proserpine so rauisshid they escried pietously and
anguisshously upon pluto / with this cry the cecyliens left their feste and
ran after pluto in great nombre men and women hoping to have rescowed
proserpine / but when cerberus and his accomplices saw the murmr / they drew
out their swerdes and shewid their arms and smote upon them that approchid
them and sleyng them largely / recuyellid and went unto the port maulgre the
cecyliens and orpheus / they guyded pluto in to his ship and after they
entrid / and than disancrid and carried a way proserpine / The cecyliens were
than dispourueid of arms / they could not withstand the rauisshement of
proserpine / At the departing fro the port was made the most aspre do^ill and
sorrow that could be / Proserpyne wept sore on that on side and pietously /
and cried right hyhe and loud / Sera on that other side with the cecyliens
made no skarcete of teeres / and certes orpheus faylid not to furnysshe his
teeres with parfound sighs / for he loved proserpine / And she loved him also
/ At the departing their hertes were put in a hard and grievous distress / so
hard anguyssh that proserpine fill down a swone / and orpheus was so rauisshid
with anger / that he returned in to his palais when he had lost the sight of
proserpine / And held him cloos in his chamber with out speech two days:.

AT the end of two days sera came to visit orpheus that would nether ete ne
drink / and said to him that she knew wel^ the rauisshour of her doughteer /
and that hit was pluto the king of melose / and that he dweld ma party of
thessaylle in a low and basse Cite that was callid hell for as much as this
isle. King pluto and his accomplices did so much harm and evil. that they
were compared and lykened unto deuylles and their Cite was named Hell. When
Orpheus understood that proserpyne was in hell he took a lityll hope in him
self and ete and drank. and made a vow that he would never rest in place unto
the time that he had been in hell for to see proserpine. After that he had eten
he sent for his maronners And bad hem to make ready a shipp. when the shypp was
garnysshid of all that hit behouyd. after the leave and congie taken of the
queen sera. In habit disguysed he entrid allone in to his shipp with his
harp. And maad his mariners to sail forth on the sea. in such wise that they
arrived at oon of the poortes of thessayll. Orpheus went there a land. and
after commanded his maryners that they should abide him in the same place. unto a
certain time that he named. After he departed and went fro contre to contre so
long for to speed his matter / that he came to the yate of hell which
Cerberus kept. And there he began to play on his harp right sweth and
melodiously.

When Cerberus herd the sown of the harp. he lift up his head on high. and
came out of the gate. for to know who was he that pleyed so melodiously And by
the son of the harp he fond Orpheus. And thinking that pluto would gladly
here him. for to reioye proserpyne that allewey wept he maad him enter in to
the Cite. And brought him before the king. Orpheus than began to play again
on his harp / when the king pluto had herd him / he took therein great pleasir
/ and so did all they that were there by him / Than pluto sent for to seek
proserpyne / when she was come and herd him play with his harp by his play
she knew wel^ that hit was her husbond she was sore abasshid / and if she had
sore wept to fore / she wept much more after / Pluto was sorry for the sorrow
that proserpine made / and said to orpheus / that if he could so play with his
harp that the lady should sesse of her weeping / that he would give him that he
would axe of him Orpheus promysid and made him seure that he would do hit / And
pluto swear to him that he would hold and keep his promise if he so did / And
than orpheus setted and entuned his harp and played dyuerce songs / ^ so
swetely / that the Infernal^ cerberus and many fill a sleep / and also
proserpine by the mean of certain tokenes and signs that orpheus maad with his
eyes / made her to cesse of her weeping:

When pluto saw proserpine so cessing her weeping he was passing Joyous / he
awoke than cerberus and the other that slepte / After he spack to orpheus and
said to him that he had so well harped that no man could do better / And that
he would that he should demand some thing / And he would give hit him with out
any fault. Orpheus heeryng the words of pluto / had a great debate in him self
for to know what thing he might best demand / In the end he said to him /
Sire I am orpheus the husbond of this lady / that for her love I have
enterprysed to come hither in this adventure / I pray and require you that ye
will give and render her again to me. that I may bring her again unto her
mother that dies for sorrow / when pluto had herd the request that orpheus had
made / he was passing angry / and also esmaied of the hardynesse that orpheus
had don. how be hit / he answered to him. Orpheus ye have demanded of me*
proserpyne / she is the lady that I most love of all the world / Nevertheless
for to accomplissh the promise that I have maad to you / I give her unto you
by condicyon that ye bring her out of this Cite with out lokyng or beholding
after or behind you And if hit happen that ye ones look behynd you ye shall
lose her Of this answer orpheus was content. And him seemed tht his wife was as
good as recoured or won he and proserpyne passid over that night in good hope
/ when the morn was comen / pluto delivered proserpyne unto orpheus by the
condition before reherced orpheus and proserpyne took leave of king pluto and
thanked him / syn they went on their way / but he had not goon half way to
the gate. when orpheus pryuely looked behind him. for to see if any man followed
him And than he fond at his heles Cerberus that took proserpyne away fro him
And yielded and delivered her again unto the king etc:..

ORpheus seeing that by his unhappiness had lost his wif / began to curse the
day that he was born. And came after and followed proserpyne and began again to
harp and to offer great yestes for to recoure her again / but hit was said to
him for conclusion that he should never have her again. And also that if he had
vsyd the feet of Arms as he had the strenges of the harp / he should by arms
have dyed / with this conclusion orpheus departed fro hell full of sorrow and
anguyssh. and returned in to secylle unto the queen sera tellyng to her his
adventure. The queen a certaynd that her daughter was in hell / as she that was
advertised that in thesayll should be hallowed the feste of the weddyng of
pirothus / and that there were many knights of great name / she went to the sea / and came so apoynt to thessalonycque that the feste yet endured In
approaching the cite. on an after none as pirothus and theseus were in the
feldes / they met her / Her exersite was great / Theseus and pirothus salewed
her / And she salewed and greted them again / / and after axed them thestate of
the feste of the weddyng / They told and recounted her all. After she demanded
of them if there were there no knights of great name and hyhe enterpryses when
they understood that she enqueryd so far / they would wete what she was and
demanded her name I am said this lady seres of cecyll / Than spoke theseus and
said madame ye be well come / ffor what occasion demand ye if in the feste ben
any knights of entreprise I can well say to you that there be truly / but not
withstondyng that I so aduertyse you / I pray you and also require that ye
tell and aduertyse unto us the cause why ye have so demanded etc:.

Sire said the lady syn hit pleasith you tenquere of mine estate so far /
know ye for certain that I have maad to you my demand for as much as pluto
the king of hell has rauysshyd my daughter Proserpyne by which I am hurt
unto the death. And so I would fayn find some knight that by his courtosie would
emploie him for to get her again And yield her to me. And for to assaylle the
cursid tyrau^t. which I pray the gods may be dampened and confounded
pardurably for his demerites wherefore I pray you if ye know any that to me be
propice that hit plese you for charity for to adresse me unto him. Madame
Answered Theseus be ye no more besy to find such a knight as ye seek. ffor in
the favor of all ladies I shall be your knight in this work And promise you
upon mine honor / / that I shall transporte me in to hell. And the king pluto
shall never have peace with me unto the time that he has restored your daughter
etc:

When pirothus herd thenterprise of theseus he began to break his words and
said to him. My brother what think ye to do. when ye enterprise for to goo in
to hell. ye know not the terms ner the situacion of that place. hell
stondeth behind the Inner see between montaignes and roches so high that the
Citezeyns that dwell there in ben in contynuell vmbre and shadow. And the
Enter is so strong that hit is Inpossible to come with in the Cite. but if the
porter consent. for here to fore time many have goon theder that been there
left and bleuen / there goth no man theder that ever comes again. hit is right
an hell And each man names hit hell as well for the situacion thereof in so
derke and tenebrous a place / as for the Inhumanyte and terrybilite of the
habitans and Indwellars. that allway wacche and wait to do evil and
desplaysir to all the world / Theseus answered unto pirothus and said / there is
no thing Inpossible unto a vailliant heart / The king pluto is cruel and
strong his folk and people tyrannyse / His cite stands in a contre
enuyronned with mortal parelles / Notwithstondyng certes the dowtance and fere
of these things shall never rebowte ne withdraw my courage / but that I shall
do my deuoyr to achyeue this emprynse / And shall dye in the pain / or shall
have reproach / showing to all manner knights / that a man to keep his honor
and worship ought not to doubt any paryll what that ever hit be / etc:.

When pyrothus had herd the noble answer of theseus / he allowed hit gretely
and said to him that his words were to him right agreeable and so acceptable /
that he would hold him company in this adventure / The queen Seres thanked the
two-knyghtes / they brought her into the Cite and in to the palace / She was
there resseyued and feested as hit apperteyned / thauenture of her daughter was
told / And thenterpryse of the two kynghtes / By the report of this adventure
and of thenterprise that theseus and pyrothus had maad / All the ffeeste was
trowblyd a gayn on a new / Among all other ypodame consyderyng that her
husbond that was so newely married unto her would goo in this paryllous voyage of
hell / / her heart began to give out weeping of teeres / And might give no
soulas ne comfort unto her eyes what shall I say the ffeste ended in great
sorrow / - Jason and hercules would gladly have goon with theseus and pirothus /
and spoke thereof to them / but they would not suffer hem / Than departed
hercules and entrid in to a ship as he would have goon in to his country. Each
man in like wise departed. And also theseus and pirothus took their way for to
goo unto hell / / and than about their departing whereof hercules was
advertised hercules made for to conduyte his ship unto the marches of hell /
And there descended a land allone. Concludyng in him self that he would goo
after pirothus and theseus his loyal and true felawe. And betoke to philotes
the charge for to bring lyncus unto thebes And for to put him there in prison
unto his retornyng and coming again. after he departed / And philotes shipped
in the sea. where he had a dolorous adventure. as hit shall be said here after /
but at this time I must tarry of that matter / And shall recounte of hercules
how he went in to hell etc::.

How hercules fond pirothus ded at the yates of hell And Theseus in danger
and how hercules vaynquysshid Cerberus. And how he conquered proserpyne upon
pluto etc:..
IN this paas hit ought be said that when theseus and pirothus were departed
fro thessalonyque for to goo and assaie if they might recoure the fair
proserpyne they did so much that by their diligence in short time they aryued
in the valeye where was proserpyne / In the valeye full of sins and
cursidnesse. Pirothus that knew the contre fond the strait way that went to
the cite / and entrid first therein / this way was so strayte that there might no
man but oon allone goon neither on the right side neither on the lift side /
the roches were so high. that no man might goo on nether side / / when they
had passed this way they fond a rooche entaillid and cut in to steyers or
grees maad and hewyd out with chyselles / And than they saw benethe low Hell
as a cite strong enuyronned with waters that fill down Inpetueusly and ferd
full fro the roches and maad a terryble noise and rooryng / ffor they fill from
right hyhe in to a low swalowe or abysme in the earth / This Cite was all
enclosid with montaygnes / ffor to speak properly hit was a right hell / And
hit had no more but oon enter and oon yate / ffor than to come down to the yate
pirothus and theseus descended down by the degrees made in the roche / Than in
the descendyng suddenly they saw spring fro the gate a great geant out of
mesure / that had an heed meruayllously mysschapen / fyers black and owggly /
He had his nose hyhe and wide / his Chyn long / his teth great as horse teth /
His eyes great like unto an ox / His eeres hangyng like as an hound / His
sholdres large and brood. His belly swollyn and great bolned. his legs and his
Thyes were passing strongly boned and mighty. This terryble geant was Cerberus.
whereof is touched and rehearsed above. The poettes named him the hound with three
heedes. Concideryng his right grievous and unhappy living which is replied and
lyckende unto three synguler vices. That is to wete to pride. to auaryce. And to
luxurye or lecherye. by pride he gloryfied him self and enhaunced him above all
the men of the world for his force and strength ffor he was so strong that
no man might wystande him: By Auaryce and Couetyse he had an apetyte Insacyable
for to gadre to gyder tresours. And took and bare away all that he might have
or could find By luxurye there was noman living of more foul lyff than he was.
ffor he had never done other thing in all his lif than for to foul and
rauisshe women and maidens. ladies and damoyselles And so by good right the
poettes named him an hownd with three heedes. For he was foul as an hound that
lives in multiplicaco^n of sins and does his felicyte / O grievous felicyte
/ when theseus and pirothus had espied this enemy cerberus come unto them all
armed making the whele in marchyng prowdly unto them. Pirothus said to theseus.
My brother behold what enemy this is / he that puts him in such parillis
for the love of ladies sets but lityll of his life / us behooves now to live
or dye. late us now achieue Ioyously our emprise To the end that ye think not
that I had leuyr dye than to have reproach I shall be the first that shall
begin the bataylle. theseus had no space ne leyzer to answer / ffor Cerberus
came to them and ascryed hem sayng. what seeken these felaws in hell / we come
said theseus for to seche proserpme. whom pluto has taken away fro the queen
Sera. we shall never return in to our country. unto the time we bring her
with us Truly answered Cerberus when ye shall return in to your contre / ye
shall render and yield again proserpyne but I shall deffende you the retourn.
And this day I shall present unto proserpme my glayue died in your blood. And
here ye shall be buried. ye shall never see proserpme. ner come more nerrer
than ye be now / with these words he enhaunsed his glayue And gaf so great a
struck to theseus upon his shield that he bare away thereof an half quarter etc:.

When pirothus saw his felawe smeten he took his glayue and smote cerberus on
that oon side Theseus smote him on that other side / and they gaf him two right
great strokes so great that they made cerberus to be esmeuyd so sore that he
began the bataill so dismesurably that he all to frusshid and brake their
sheldes and their harnoys / and also made his glayue to be died with their
noble blood as he had before said / The bataill was hard and mortal at the
beginning / theseus and pirothus resseyuyd many wounds / by aspre strokes /
their arms were all to hewn and broken / The battle endured long / And
pirothus did right well in auaunsyng him self / / but cerberus smote upon him
so dismesurably / that after many wounds given to him he all to braste his
helm and cleuyd his heed in two pieces unto the stomach etc:.

Than theseus saw his felawe dye / he enhaunced his glayue by great anger and
smote cerberus so fermli that he made him auale and goo a back two paas.
cerberus would avenge him of this struck and smote upon theseus a struck by so
great force. that if the noble knight had not turned a back cerberus had born
and smyten him unto the earth. This struck of cerberus fill upon the earth and
entrid therein / and theseus smote again upon his enemy which had the heart so
great / that he began to rore as an old lion / And smote theseus so fiersly
with his swerd that he all to brakke his shield / and all to ffrusshyd his
helm / that he was all astonyed of the struck / But allewey theseus abood in
his place and than cerberus should have brought him unto utterance following the
euyl^ adventure of pirothus. if that fortune had not brought theder hercules
which came so apoynt to the rescousse that theseus knew not how to save him.
At this point than that theseus was so astonyed / hercules that was departed
fro the sea / as said is came unto the steyres that were cut and made in the
rooche. And beholding theseus all couerd with blood And pirothus ded. he began
to descend down cryeng to theseus that he should not be aferd ner take no dread
/ when cerberus saw ande herd hercules he began to rebruyre and rore and
assaylled theseus asprely for to be quyte of him. Theseus might no more / how
well that he was recomforted with the voys of hercules he began to run now
here and now there to fore cerberus:..

SO much than hasted hercules for to goo down the steyres or degrees In
entryng the place as hastily as he might he escryed to cerberus and said to
him. Tyrant cruel late the kynght run and come to me / Thou have put to death
upon the earth my good friend pirothus. whereof I am sorry certain. And if I may
I shall take vengeance on the for him Cerberus heeryng the sentence of hercules
Ran no more after theseus. but tarried and beheld hercules with afyers look
and answered to him / so weneth he to avenge his shame that so believes / I have
devoured thy ffelaw unto the death And but if thou excede him in ^restier of
arms and in bodily strenght an honderd fold double hit is folly to the to come
hither / ffor I am Cerberus the porter of hell that of record of my name all
the world tremblith. thus endyng his answer / hercules was at the foot of the
roche. he had his clobbe upon his sholdre / cerberus came against him / they
smote each other rudely / and thus they began a right hard battle / And than
theseus that was passing weary satte at oon side by out of the way And rested
him in dreyng and clensing his wounds of the blood that had comen out of them:.

HErcules beheld than on that oon side and seeing theseus purging and clensyng
his parfond and great wounds / he began to employe the excess of his strength
and might by such meruayll / that of a struck that he gaf him upon his helm
upon the right side that he maad him to bow and lowte under his clobbe and to
knele to the ground with his lift knee and at the second struck in poursuyng
him hastily he made his swerd to flee out of his hands and that he made him to
fall on his arms to the ground / ^ and with the third struck as cerberus
wend to have releuyd him and gotten his swerd / hercules smote him upon the
body that he made his head to hurtle again a great stone that was there by /
after that he sprange upon him and bond his legs with the strength and force
of his hands / maulgre the geant / / he tare of the helm of his head and would
have slain him / but theseus praid him that he would not put him to death there /
And that he would bring him in to thessalonycque for to dye by the sentence of
the queen ypodame etc:.

CErberus was not than put to death at the request of theseus /
Notwythstandyng hercules bond his hands behind his back / and after he maad
him arise and took him by the berd and made him goon up an high on the roche
And there he leyde him down And boond his feet his hands and his neck to
geder in such wise that he might not ner durst not remeue / when he had dooon
so / he went down and entrid in to the yate of hell and leuyng there theseus
/ he went so far that he fond the palais of king pluto and that he came in
to the same halle where pluto was with proserpme. All they that were there
meruaylid of him when they saw him entryd. ffor they knew nothing of the
ouercomyng of cerberus. as they that left all the charge and keeping of their
cite with cerberus / with out to have any doubt or suspecion / And also they
were so far from the gate / that they might not here of the bataile. ner
knew no thing what was befalle to their porter / Than when hercules had found
pluto and proserpme. he had great Joy and knew be tokens and enseygnes of
them there being that hit was he he adressid him to pluto and said. Pluto by
thy malice Secille is now all full of weeping of teeres for the rauysshyng of
this lady. which have not willed to yield and render again to her husbond
Orpheus I wot never what pleasir thou haste therein. but I shall say to the /
that thou shall receive great displaisir in following the evil adventure of
Cerberus whom I have vaynquysshid and overcome etc::.

WHyth this word hercules lift up his clobbe and gaf such a struck to pluto
that he ouerthrewe him to the earth / that he ne meued nether hand ne foot.
when he had so beten pluto wenyng that he had be ded. he assailid all them that
were there that made great murmr and put them all to death lightly with his
clobbe in the presence of proserpme which tremblid for fere / Than he
conforted proserpme and said to her / that he was come unto that place for to
deliuere her / and for to bring her again to her mother / and that she should
sewe and follow him herdely / Proserpme assured her and was conforted with the
words of hercules and folowyd him etc:.

HErcules opend the halle and went out and proserpme with him / After he
addressid him unto the yate of the palace / And hit happend him that he fond
there a right great company of Citezeyns that were advertised of this affraie
and they ran upon him dismesurably escrieng him to death / when hercules saw
that / he said to proserpme that she should draw her a part / After that he
enhaunsed and lift up his clobbe / And began to meddle with his enemies right
vertuesly and by so high prowess that he couerid al^ thentre of the palais
with these miserable tirantes that he slew smote down and all fortrusshid them
And put to death more than four honderd / ffinably he wrought so that the
other fled and gaf hit over / and than when he saw his evil willars ded and
disparc^ed he took proserpme by the hand and ladde her out of the gate of the
cite.

THeseus that abode and tarried at this gate as said is / was greatly reioysed
when he saw hercules come again with proserpme he aroos and wait again them /
and salewed the lady / And presented to hercules a chain of ademont iron /
that he had found at the yate and many prisonners bounden that cerberus had
bounden with all / hercules vnbond the prisoners and took the Chain and bond
Creberus with all / And when he had buried pirothus he departed from this hell
And took his way with proserpme. theseus and cerberus. And with out great
adventure for to specify maad so his Iourneyes that he arrived in
thessalonyque And delivered proserpme to the queen Sera / and to ypodane he
presented cerberus. rehersyng to her and the ladies how he had slain pirothus.
ypodane demened so great sorrow for the death of pyrothus that for to recounte
and tell / hit is not possible. All they of thessaylle semblably maad great
morning and sorrow and sore bewailed their lord / what shall I say for to
contreuenge his death / ypodane did do bind cerberus to a stake in the theater
of the Cite. And there young and old noyed and pyned him three days long
contynuelly / drawyng him by the berde and cracchyng him in the visage and
after slew him Inhumaynly and horribly. And than when hercules and theseus.
sera and proserpme had tarried there a certain space of time in comfortyng
ypodane. they took leave to gyder And hercules went acompanyed of theseus
toward the cite of thebes / but of him I will now tarry and shall come to speak
of the auentures of lyncus etc::.

How Andromadas deliuerid lincus of his enemies And how he slew in bataill the
king Creon and took the cite of thebes etc.:.
When philotes had receyuyd in to his guard and keeping lyncus And hercules was
goon to the socours of Theseus and pirothus as before is said. the maronners
took their ship and went to the sea / And saylled all that day with out
fyndyng of any adventure / But on the morn by time in the morning / ffortune
that alleway torneth with out any restyng brought to them a great ship that
drew his course unto the same place that they came fro / Of this ship or
galleye was capitayn and chief Andromadas king of Calcide / This andromadas
was cosyn unto lyncus / when he had espied the ship where lincus was Inn /
he maad to vyre his galeye a board And said that he would know what people were
therein / In approchyng the ship of thebes / lyncus beheld the galeye of
andromadas and knew hit by thensignes and tokenes that hit bare / In this
knowleche andromadas spack and demanded of the maronners to whom the ship
belongs / Anon as lincus saw and herd andromadas / he brake thanswere of
the maronners / And escryed to him all on high / Andromadas lo here thy friend
lyncus. if thou give me no socours and help me thou may lose a great friend
in me. ffor I am a prysonner / And hercules has sent me in to Thebes etc::..

ANdromadas heeryng lyncus had great anger ffor he louyd well lyncus. And
escryed them that brought him and said to him that they were all comen unto
their death. And also that they were under his ward. Philotes and his folk
were garnysshid with their arms and harnoys and made hem all ready for to
defend hem self. And with little langage they of Calcyde assayllyd phylotes.
And philotes and his folk employed them at their defense The battle was great
and hard. but the malehe^^^ and myshappe turned in such wise upon the felawes
of philotes that they were all slain and deed Andromadas had two. C. men in
his company. all robeurs and thieves of the sea / These thieves and robeurs
smote hard and fiersly upon philotes and all to hew his arms. worchynge and
gyuyng to him many wounds and he buried many of them in the sea. but the
strong resistance prouffited them but lityll. ffor in the end he was taken
and bound. and lyncus was delyuerd and vnbounden of the bonds of hercules
etc::.

LIncus had great Joy of his deliverance. he thanked his good friend
andromadas. After this he told him how he was take. and how hercules had
discipate and destroyed the centaures. And among other he named many of his
friends that were ded / whereof Andromadas had so great ire and such desplaisir
that he swear incontinent that he would avenge hit. And that as hercules had
slain his friends in like wise he would destroy his cosyns and kynnesmen /
lincus took great plesir to understand the oath of andromadas which would venge
the death of his kynnesmen. he said to him that hercules was goon in to hell
And after demanded him how he would avenge him upon the friends of hercules. And
there upon they were long thynkyng. In the end when they had long take auys.
Andromadas concluded that he would goo assail the Cite of thebes / and if he
might get hit by assault he would do slay the king Creon and all them of his
blood etc::.

With this conclusion came theder all the galeyes of andromadas which followed
in whom he had eyghte thousand fightyng men / Andromadas maad hem to torn
toward thebes / And also hastily as he might he entrid in to the royame In
wastyng and destroyng the country by fire and by swerd so terribly that the
tidings came unto the king Creon when the king Creon knew the coming of the
king andromadas / And that with out deffiance he maad him war / He sowned to
arms and assembled a great puyssance / And knowing that Andromadas was comen
in to a certain place / he issued out of thebes all armed / and brought his
people upon his enemies / that had great Joy of their coming / And than they
set hem in ordenance again them in such wise that they came to smytyng of
strookes / the Cries and noise was great on both sides / Glayues. swerdes.
darts. guysarmes. arowes and polhaxes were put forth and set awerke / Many
nobles were beten down and ded / Lyncus and Andromadas wrought mortally / the
king Creon and Amphitrion faylled not / there was blood largely shed on that
oon side and on that other / And the bataylle was so felonnous and aspre than:
that in little while after Andromadas and his peuple gate and wan upon them of
thebes And constraynd them to recuyell and for to goo a back whereof the king
Creon had right great sorrow. And wenyng for to have put his men again in
array / Put him self in to the grettest prees of the bataylle where he wrought
mortally / And made so great slaughter and betyng down of his enemies / that
lyncus and Andromadas herd the affraye / And so than they came theder and as
lincus saw the king Creon do meruailles of arms. he gaf him three strokes
with his swerd oon after an other / And with the fourth struck he all to brake
his helm from his head and slew him. whereof they of thebes were so affrayed.
and dispayred. that they were put in descomfiture. and fled / which fleyng
Amphitrion might not remedy. how be hit that he was strong and of great
courage etc.:.

OF this evil adventure thebes was right hastily aduertysed. Megera was goon
up. upon oon of the high toures of the palais / and saw and beheld the
bataylle / from that place she saw them of thebes slain with out remedy. and
also torn their backs. the tokene of the betyng down of the king her fader
And the recougnossances of the slaughter of other maad her to ascrye and said /
ffortune fortune what meschyef / where is hercules. Alas where have thou
brought him / Alas that he is not here for to defend the metes of his natiuyte
and for to keep his wif full of annoye And for to put his hand and sholdres for
to bear the great fetes and deeds of this battle. when she had said this. she
fylle a swonne And so lay a great while. Nevertheless the king Andromadas and
lincus followed hastily them of thebes that they entrid the Cite with them. And
for as much as the thebans were with out heed and put out of array / And that
amphitrion had so many wounds upon him that all his members faylled at this
work. The unhappy lyncus and Adromadas took the Cite / and slew all them
that might bear arms / Reseruyd Amphytrion whom they fond not in the hete.
After they went up in to the palace and there they fond megera and amphitrion
in great desolaco^n with many ladies and damoyselles:

AS sone than as lincus had espied megera / she was so fair and plaisant that
he becam amorous of her / and came to her and said / lady weep no more hercules
the bastard sone of Jupiter is goon in to hell and there he is ded / ye have been
wife of a man gotten in auoultrye / from hens forth ye shall be felawe and wife of
a man legitisme and born in lawful^ marriage / ffor I shall wedde you. And shall
do you more good and pleasir than ever ye had. Megra answered falls traitre
wenest thou that I be so folisshe as to gyfe faith and believe to the words of
the homycide of my fader and to the enemy of my lord hercules know thou that I
am his wife And that I shall never have other husbond but him. he is no bastard /
but sone of my lord amphitrion / and the most noble man that is in all the
world / Lady answered lincus I am king of this cite / ye be now at my
commandment / will ye or will ye not / I shall do my will of you / but I shall
put hit in respyte and in my souffrance till to morn / After these words
lincus sent megera in to a tour / and made her to be kept there / After he
sent philotes in to a low prison / And amphitrion in to a another prison / And
fyndyng there in seruage and myserye pryant the sone of king laomedon / he had
pytye of him and sent him again to Troyes where he was after received with
great Joy of the Troyans etc..

How hercules entrid in to Thebes in unknown habyte / And how he put to death
the geant lyncus and his accomplices and his wife megera etc::.
BY the glayue of lyncus than and of andromadas Thebes was trowblid dolorously.
Lyncus exercised there many tyrannyes and wickednesses In this Infortune
Andromadas departed and went to do his things. leuyng there lincus with
four honderd men of war for to keep the cite and to hold hit in his
obeyssance. Thus was taken the vengeance of the centaures. In the time of this
vengeance. the queen Juno came in to thebes and had great Joy when she fond
hit in desolacion and full of wedowes and orphelins. and in the enemies hands
of hercules / than were great the teeres and lamentacions of megera Amphitrion
was nyghe her that understood all her doleances and comforted her / Lincus came
many times unto her in to the prisonn And required her swetely to have her
love. And in the most fairest manner / Alleway his sweet and fair words
auailed not. ^for he fond her constant and ferme. and alleway keeping in rigor
her chastete. And gaf him many virtuous answers whereof follows oon. which was
the last / Lincus thou have now the hand strong. and have bruised thebes.
ffortune and ill hap have given unto the. the tyranny. whereof thou have
enryched thy self with vices* thou have furthermore the puyssance for to
comette in me murdre / but thy power ne thy sins ben not so strong ne of
myght^t for to make my virtue to bow ne to fold. Megera alleway bewailed
hercules. She bewailed him so much on a day that she becam all rauysshed and
in a trance And that same day hercules that was departed from thessalonyque a
good while to fore made so his Iourneyes that he entryd in to the roiame of
thebes accompanied with many noblemen / And entryng in to these marches he
fond the contre all destroyed / And he had not goon far / when hit was told
him how lincus was lord of thebes / And how he had slain in bataill the king
Creon and how he had enprisoned megera etc:.

WHn hercules had receyuid these tidinges. he was enplenysshid with great anger
/ and said that he would avenge him if he might / Than he cladde him above his
armours with a mantel and disgysed him self as much as he might / when he had
so don. he left there his felawes. And entrid him self in to thebe^ unknown
and passid through the gate and bare him so wel^ that the porters let him pass
forth / and in like wise entrid in to the palais / At the enter of the palais a
soldier came to hercules and demanded him what he sought there / hercules
cast a way his mantell a far and took his swerd that was strong / And with
out any word he gaf so great a struck to the souldyour that was not armed.
that he clefte his heed fro the highest part down to the ground. Many other
soldiers that were there by seeing the struck / Cried and affrayed ran to
their axes and clubbes / And some were of them that auaunced hem self for to
take hercules / but hercules smote of their heedes and beat hem down. And than
began to rise a great bruyt and so great a noise that lincus herd hit / And
wenyng that hit had been his porters that affrayed. he came rennyng down all
unarmed for to make pees / As Soon as hercules aperceyuyd and saw him coming
out of the halle / he drew unto him with his swerd haunced in his hand Cryeng
hercules hercules. and smote him so that he cut of the right arm and with
the struck he fill down to ground. And after he smote upon oon and other that
had no helmes on her heedes ne hauber^s on her backs. and than they knew that
hit was hercules / he slew them so largely that of the blood that ran down was
made a right great russhyng as hit had been a river etc:.

Among these things the damoyselles of megera issued out of the palace And
went in to the str^etes Cryeng with hye and clear wy^ that hercules was comen
again and that he had slain lincus / by these cries all the Cite was meuid. the
good men old and young the wedowes wives and maidens ran unto arms by great
courage. and assailled all aboutes the men of lincus. there was a terrible
battle gaderd to geder of the women against their enemies / In a lityll while
all the Cite was trowblid when hercules had put to death all them that he fond
in the cloos of the palace reseruyd lyncus which he put in the guard and
keeping of the queen Juno and of many damoyselles that came unto him. he sprange
upon the streets And shewid his swerd and smote down right on all sides in
skarmowshyng so mortally the men of lyncus all a boute where he might find
hem. that by the help of them of thebes he made hem all to pass the trenchyng
and cuttyng of his swerd. And than was thebes all reiosed And hercules
returned into the palais unto the place where the ladies kept lyncus. Than
hercules sent for to break up the door of the chamber wh^r megera was in. ffor
as much as they could not find the keys / for they that kept her were ded
Megera than ful^ of gladness came unto her lord / hercules aroos up to her and
would have enbraced her and kyste her / but ^^ncus that thought on no thing but
for to do evil / by the secret Introducco^n of Juno turned him fro hit /
sayyng hercules late be my concubine I have take my flesshly desires with her /
she is of mine acqueyntance And the most luxirious lady that ever I was
acquented with all

When megera herd the right great Iniurye and wrong that the trayttre chargid
her with / she fill bacward for anger furyous with out saing of any word.
hercules was all full of anger and hoot and full of great ire / wenyng that
lincus had said troth / he smote of the heed of lincus. And with the same
swerd that he had slain the trayttre / he put to death megera which was with
child / how be hit the cronycques ^o spain tell that hercules slew not his
wife / but that he put her in to a religion that he ordained in thebes in the
temple of dyane / In renounsyng her company. and that this was the first
religyon that ever was in thebes. These things accomplisshed in that oon
manner or in that other / hercules took out of prison Amphitrion and philotes.
and departed from thens all anoyed and sore gr^uyd at that time and long after
that he spack not. And went his way at all adventure accompanied only of
theseus and philotes with great. bewailing of them of thebes / which than
after his departing crowned upon them Layus the sone of king Agenor of Assirie
for as much as he had wedded the daughter of king Creon named Iocasta etc::::.

How hercules put to death the king laomedon And destroyed Troy the second
time.
HErcules theseus and philotes departed from thebes and went in to many
dyuerce lands sechyng their adventures. And passing by Licie where hercules
was maad king / on a day they came in to myrodonne unto the palace of king
Eson where Jason was. which had than enprised for to sail to the isle of
Colcos / And maad his things ready / When hercules had be fested of Jason and
of duc pelleus and that he knew of thenterpryse that Jason would goo and
conquer the flees of gold / he vowed and promised that he would accompanye him.
And if fortune would be with him he would adventure to bring his empryse unto
an end / what shall I make long process Jason and hercules made ready a right
good ship / and went to the Sea And renewed not her vitayll till they came to
the port of Troyes. But yet they renewid not hem at this poort / ffor the
king Laomedon was than in troy which had fortefied meruayllosly the Cite
again. And knowing that there was descended at his port a shipp full of greeks
/ he sent down a a man that commanded them rudeli that they should depart thens
and that he was enemy unto the greeks / Jason as Capitayn of the Armee answered
courtosli the messanger of king laomedon. and prayed him that he might have
vitayll for his monoye / the messanger answered him that he should none have
there but if they gate hit with the swerd / than hercules might no longer tarry
but swear to the troiane that if he might return from the viage that he had
enprised / that he should yet ones again destroy Troyes and that he should not
leave oon stone upon another / with this conclusion hercules and Jason departed
fro troyes / And by fortune they were brought to the poort of Lennos / whereof
was a woman lady and queen named ysiphyle / which wax amerous of Jason / as
hit is contained in the historye of Jason / In this poort of lennos hercules
was aduertysed that there by was a king named Phyneus which suffrid him to be
governed of an auaricyous woman / Phyneus had been married to a another woman to
fore / and had by her two sons. These two sons were unrightfully by their
stepmoder put in exyle / ffor to say very truth this second wife / was
corrumpid with auaryce / that she took fro the king his richesse and held
gretter astate than he / When than hercules had knowleche hereof / he went and
spack to the king phyneus and to the queen / And shewid unto them their vices
in so good manyer and facion / that the two children were repelled fro their
exyle / and that the king held his astate royal. Than returned hercules in
to lennos And took the sea with Jason and went in to the isle of Colcos. where
Jason by the lernyng and Industry of med^a conquered the sheep with the flees
of gold which he bare with him in to greece / Than hercules recomaunded
strongly Jason among his parents and friends / And told hem of the right
great unkindness of the king laomedon. And how that he had sworn for to
destroy troyes for the ruydenes that the king laomedon had done unto them /
They swore all to gyder with hercules the destruccyon of Troyes and concluded
the day of their departement and after maad ready their shippis and all that
was necessary for them / And than hercules held so well his hand in their
exercyte. that at the day concluded among them. they entered in to the sea /
And did so much that they descended at the port of troyes with so great an
Oost that laomedon durst not deffende hem the port

Jason was at that time in a fer strange contre. Hercules had with him many
noble men And among all other there were with him the king thelamomax the duc
Nestor. Castor. pollux. theseus and many kings and dukes / At the descente of
this port / which was of strong entree. hercules that nothing doubted his
enemies / made to sown and blow up trompes and tabours / and made so great
noys and bruyt / that the walls of troyes and of the pallays redounded thereof
and that laomedon seeing out at oon of his wyndowes the Oost of his enemies.
was right a great while in a thought whether he might goo to battle again them
or non / hit happend him that as he was thus pensyf that he beheld toward the
market place he saw there more than thretty thousand Armed men. which
enflamed his heart in such wise that he went and did him do arm And all his
thoughtis and pens^es put aparte came to his people. whom he warned and desired
them to do her part and deuoyr / And after him self trustyng in fortune /
issued out in to the field in battle arenged by good ordenaunce / And how well
he supposed that hercules was in the Armee descended at the port. whom he
doubtid. he marched unto his enemies which Ioyed of his coming / And than
began the troyance and the greeks a right hot skarmusshe / with so great
occysion and manslaughter / that at the Ioynyng there was many a man ded and
hurt / hercules ne failed not to smite and trowble his enemies / he cast his
eyes on high and saw the banyer royal of troies. he fought and smote down on
the right side and on the lift side And with his clubbe he smote down
desmesurably that he came to the banyer / And fyndyng there laomedon that did
there mervaylles of arms upon the greeks / he smote him with his clubbe often
times upon his helm in such wise that he might not save him And that he
enbarryd his clubbe with in his heed and brayn / that with the struck he slew
him among plente of greeks lyyng ded on the sand ^endyng there the end of his
life / After he smote upon them that bare the banyer and slow them / And all
to rent the banyer / And than were the troyans all discomforted and cried /
Late us fle. late us fle / And with this cry that was Impetuous they began to
recuyelle and goo back unto the cite / Wenyng to save them self / But the
greeks conveyed them with the points of their swerdes and cuttynges of their
sharp glayues so mortally / that in sleyng and kyllyng the most paart like as
the tempest had run among them / They took the Cite so trowblyd with the death
of the king laomedon that there was none or right little defense among them /
In entryng in to the yate of Troyes / Thelamon was the first man / And
hercules was the second / And than hercules fond well that he did right
high Cheualryes / Pryant was not at that time in troyes / But he was goon in
to the Oryente by the comandeme^t of king laomedon after his retourn fro thebes
/ What shall I say. ffortune having cast down the king Laomedon as said is
by the strong hand of hercules / Above that / she put in troyes hercules and
his people which brought hem all to the hewyng of her swerde^ / they entrid
in to ylion and pillyd hit / and after did do Cry h^uok upon all the tresours
of troyes. In like wise they took Exiona the daughter of the king. whom
hercules gaf unto thelamon requyryng him to take her for as much as he was the
first that entrid the Cite / And when they had taken all that they fond good
in troy. ffor fynable vengeance hercules beat down the tours and edyfices /
and put the fire therein in such wise. that there abode not a stone upon an
another etc::.

How hercules and Affer assaillyd by battle the geant Antheon and how they
vaynquysshid him in battle the first time etc:::::.
AFter this general destruction of troy / when the greeks were departed and
hercules had left hem / The greeks returned in to greece with great glory. And
hercules went by the sea sechyng his adventures accompanied of theseus and
philotes And hit happend him. that he arrived at the port of Alexandre / he
fond in this port a right great arme^ / when the Capitayn of tharmee saw him
come to ancre / he knew by the enseyngnes of hercules / that hit was hercules.
And that he had herd him recomanded above all manner men what some ever they
were / And so than he came unto him all full of Joy / and said to him / Lord
of noblesse / and tresour of virtue. among the people most mighty / and among
the kings most resplendant in all glorious virtue / I salewe you / and you
require that I may be your servant and friend / And this sayng he was on his
knees to fore hercules and in sign of humylite he kyssed the earth / when
hercules saw the salutaco^n and the manyer of the doing of this man / he took
him by the hand / And liftyng him up fro the ground salewed him / and after
demanded of him his name / and to whom that armee belonged that he saw there /
he answered him that he was named Affer sone of madyam the sone of habraham /
and that in that armee was none other capytayn ne chief but him self and that
the egipciens had ordeynd him duc and ledar of this Ooste / for to goo in to
libye for to destroy the contre in vengeance of the evil and harms that the
tyrant busire that was of libye had done to them in such wise as he well knew
etc:.

When hercules had receyuyd the name and the affairs of affer / he took him
for his friend. and said to him that he would accompanye him to conquerre lybye
/ Affer thanked him and brought him in to a right rich ship where he feested
him as much as to him was possible / They had not long abyden there / but
they went unto the sea with great gladness / ffor the egypcyens were so
Joyous and so glad to have hercules with hem / that they thought and believed
verily that there might none myshappe ne evil come to them / Hercules fond
in the said ship of Affer / the wife and also the daughter of Affer This
daughter had to name Echee. She was oon the most fair damoysell of all the
world and young and fresshe / By the daily sight of her / hercules becam
amerous of her And required her to be his wife Echee answered that of her self
she might not acorde to his demand / but she said. if fortune give me so
great a grace that I might be your wife / Ischold have more cause to thank the
gods ^ than any wife living hercules was right well content with the damoysell
and by her introduccion called Affer / and required him that he would give to
him his daughter to be his wif Affer thanked hercules of that he vouchidsauf to
demand his daughter he that was the most exellent of noblis / and said to him
that he should take her and do with her his will and pleasir / / hercules
espowsyd and weddid echee. by the consent of affer / and lay to gider payyng
the due debt of marriage in such wise that echee conceyuyd of the seed of
hercules / / what shall I make long process / hercules and affer sayllid so
long that they fond the port of libye. where now stands cartage / and
there they arrived and took land. In a night which was clear / and after they
entrid hasteli in to the country. and beseged the Cite of libye with out
resistance or gaynsayng etc::.

IN this Cite was than a great geant named Antheon great above mesure of other
geantes. the most strong and the most conqueryng that was in all the parties
of europe and libye / Cirene. Trypolyn. Montaigne and all the yles enhabited in
this contres unto the yles fortunate / this king than aduertysed of the coming
of the egipcyens was passing angry and swear that never none of them should
return again in to egipte / As Soon than as he might he did do his men arm
them and issued out of the Cite with a great company of libyens / And had so
great haste to run upon the egypciens that he set no ordenance among his
people whereof he took great harm / ffor when he came to the battle he fond
that hercules had renged his people and set hem in two bataylles / of which
he lad and conduysed the first bataylle / Hit happend so that they of the said
felawshyp of hercules by force of shot mayntenyd hem self so vayllyantly and
with strokes that they brought to death more than fyften honderd libiens. when
the shot fayllid Antheon sprange in to the grettest prees as the most
vaylliant And supposyd well to have scarmeshyd his enemies / but anon as
hercules saw him come. he scasid his clubbe and put him forth before / And gaf
him so great a struck that he made his head to bow on the lift side / Antheon
had his swerd lift up for to have smyten hercules when he resseyuyd the struck
that hercules gaf him by which his struck was broken / Nevertheless he said
between his teth that he would avenge him / he lift up his swerd again and
smote hercules so dysmesurably that with the struck he brake his shield / Than
knew hercules that the geant was a man of great strength / this
notwythstanding he smote him the second time with his clubbe And thus hercules
and Antheon gaf each other great strokes that there came between hem the two
parties. libyens and egipcyens / there was great noise of clynknge of swerdes
and sownyng of the sheldes and helmes that were broken / and hawberks that were
dismaillid sheldes quarterd and glayues broken / there was the blood largely
shedd on both parties / hercules and antheon were departed by force of the
prees / Antheon by great ire smote with out cessyng upon the fires egipcyens /
hercules forfrusshed the helmes largely with his Clubbe and maad of the libyens
all his pleasir / and brought so many to death with his clubbe / that in lityll
space he passid through out the puyssance of king antheon many times / and
that in his way he couerid the earth and the way that he held all with deed
libyens / This first scarmusshe was strong and domaigiable to antheon. ffor
again oon egipcyen that he slew with his glayue / hercules maad dye with his
clubbe ten libyens About hercules was no thing but blood / hercules made the
montaygnes redounde of the Cries / the renges to tremble. the libyens to flee
and goo a back / and win lityll gain / what shall I say more also long as
the day endured he held the bataill in vigueur / and about the even as affer
and theseus came to the medlee. he enuertued him self in such facion against
antheon. that he made him flee all charged with horions and strokes and than
in like wise fled all the libyens::.

How hercules took the king Athlas. and how he began to study the science of
astronomye and the seven sciences lyberall etc::.
WHhan hercules saw the Lybyens torn in to flighte / he did do sown the
retrayte for as much as hit was late / and with great glory returned in to
the place that he had chosen for to hold his siege / his wife Echee came against
him with open arms and beclipped and kyssed him / she halpe to unarm him and
brought him fressh water for to refresshe his visage / And there was maad right
good chiere of all the egipciens / At thopposite of this right good chiere the
libyens were in their Cite and made great sorrow / ffor they had well lost
thretty thousand men. Souerainly Antheon demened simple chiere for he had god^
cause. ffor hercules had so beten him with his clubbe thta he might not
sustain him self / but went with great pain to bed. And with sorrow sent
for his medicynes and surgiens. which came and visited him and fond him all to
brosid And said to him that hit would be well a month or they could hele him.
Antheon considering his caas sent and desired of the egypciens trewes for a
month. Offryng to them for to send hem daily certain nombre of bestiall And a
right great quantyte of vetayll / Hercules agreed and granted him this trewes
be cause of the vetayll / Than he made out his mandementes and (...) unto all
the kings* and princes that were his triburaries / And also unto his
neyghebours prayyng them that they would come and socoure him with all their men
of arms the most hasty wise that they might / This trewes so made hercules
began to remember than / that to fore time he had herd philotes speak of a
king that reigned there by named Athlas / And that he was the most wise man and
connyngest of all the world / And furthermore that he dwelte in a castle
standing on the top of a right hye montaygne named Athlas after the name of
the same king In this remembrance hercules being coueytous of the science of
Athlas callid philotes and said to him / that he would goo in to the royame of
king athlas / And that his entente was to seek there his adventure / Philotes
answered and said that he could well led and bring him in to that Royame ffor
he knew the contre / Than hercules callid affer and theseus and chargid them
that they should allweye make good wacche / And after took leave of them and of
his wife sayng that he would hastily return / this done he and three maryners
with philotes went unto the sea In a galeye subtyle and light / and sailed and
rowed in to the sea medyterane / they had good wind and ready and fortune was
good to them / In lityll while they came unto the strayt of gybaltar / And than
philotes shewid unto hercules the montaigne and Castle where as Athlas was
abidyng::.

When hercules saw the montaigne and the castel^ he went and took land
Ioyously / after he took his Clobbe and commanded philotes and his maryners for
to abide him there / after that he went toward the montaigne. and hit happend
that he met with a man that descended down fro the hill / and he adressid him
toward the said man for to here some tidings / and demanded him fro whens he
came / he said I come from the castle that ye may see yonder a hye / whyder go
ye said hercules. unto the cite of marcely answered the stranger / the king
Athlas to whom I am servant. has sent me theder for to publysshe his
commandment unto the Cytezeyns that within six days they be garnysshid with
their harnoys and arms for to accompanye him to goo unto the war of the
great king of Libye. which has required Instantli to have his socours /
wherefore if ye will serve him in this armee. and be his soldyour / goo up and
ye shall find him in his castle studyyng the science of astronomye The
servant of king Athlas with thise words went forth on his way. and hercules
went up in to the montaigne and came to the gate of the castle / where he
fond four knights that demanded him what he would have hercules answered that
his will was for to speak to the king for certain matters that touched him /
The four knights not thynkyng but good brought hercules within a great halle
where in were all the men of king athlas assayng them with swerdes and axes for
as much as they had herd say that they should go to the war / And they were
all armed etc::.

When these knights had brought theder hercules / they gaf knowledge unto the
king that a strange geant axid after him And would not tell hem the cause why
/ Than Athlas went down and fond hercules armed with his skyn of the lion /
And axid him what he was / Than he answered and said I am hercules that have
conquered philotes and the gardyn with the sheep of thy daughters / I am come
now hither for to conquer the with thy scyences. So behooves the that thou do
to me obeyssance / And give over to help the great Antheon mine enemy and that
thou come with me / And if thou wolte not so do / Arm the hastily and deffende
the with arms of that I demand the / ffor if thou will not assente thereto by
love / I shall make the accord hit by force / Athlas was strongly discouragid
/ when he knew by the mowthe of hercules that it was he that had late conquered
philotes and had slain his geant his felaw. taken his sheep / and also newly
had assaillid by war Antheon to whom he had promisid to give socours / and
also considerd tht he would that he should yield him to him / the heart began in
him to swelle for anger and pride. And by great felonnye said to him O thou
presumptuous hercules how art thou so hardy to come allone to fore me. thou
that I may not love know thou that I have had many a displeasir by thyn
oultrage / ffor philotes was my right great friend. And now thou art come to
renew this dysplaysance and wylt that I should yield me unto the. That is not
mine Intencion etc::..

AThlas with thise words went in to a chamber there fast by and commanded that
every man should arm him. as they did / hercules had allwey his eye upon him.
to the end that he should not escape him. when he was armed he came against
hercules and escryed him to the death / after gaf him a struck with his glayue
fiersly. with the Cry and with the struck all they of the fortress assaylid
hercules / Than hercules put him self to deffense myghtly by the rigor of his
Clobbe / And with.xij. strokes he slew.xij. of his enemies / After he hurted
and wounded many other and spared long the blood of Athlas. but in the end
for as much as athlas gaf great strokes to hercules / Hercules smote him upon
the helm without enployyng of all his strength / and gaf him a wound in the
head that all astonyed he bare him to the earth. from than forth on they of
the fortress durst no more assail hercules / ner they adventured hem not for
to rescowe ne to releue Athlas. but fled thens out of the castle / and
hercules abode there allone with athlas and the deed bodies. So in the end
when hercules saw that they had given hit over / he took Athlas and maad him
to Cry him mercy After he went in to his study and took all his books
which he ladid upon a chamell and after returned unto athlas and constraynd
him to follow him. And when hercules had don in the castle all his plaisir he
departed acompanyed with athlas and with his books And brought him down unto
the sea side to the place where philotes abode him etc:

When philotes saw hercules come with athlas and his books / he had great Joy
/ and made know leche and aqueyntance with athlas which was so sorowful^ that
he might not speak / and than they entrid in to her galeye and went unto the sea / Athlas was sorrowful and woo begone of the wound that he had in the heed
/ hercules required him Instantly that he would teache him his science / Athlas
would in no wise do hit in the beginning of his sorrow / but when he had
conuersid and tarried with hercules / what for the bounte that he saw in him as
for the Introducco^n of philotes / which affermed that hercules was the most
noble and virtuous man that ever had been / he began to teache him all his
sciences / wherein he learned and prouffited by quyk and sharp engyne in such
wise that he comprised all / And that afterward he becam the best philosopher
and the most parfyt astronomyen of all the world / Thus studyyng than hercules
returned with great ho^our in to the oofte of Affer / And fond at his coming
that his wife had brought forth a fair sone / which the egypcyens had crowned
king of egypt where he reigned afterward and was callid dedoum etc:.

THan Affer saw Athlas and knew how hercules had vaynquysshid and conquered
him he meruayllid much of his prowess which was so great / and of his
wysedom that attained to so hye things / hercules put all his engyne and
study to connescyence. / In the menewhile a litill and a lityll the time
passid / and Antheon assamblid a right great Ooste / and was all helyd of his
wounds / And than the triews fayllid and exspyred. whereof the egypciens had
great Joy. ffor yet they hoped to have victory of her enemies. And the
libyens hoped to avenge them of the shame that hercules had made hem resscyue /
when than the triews were exspyred the day following hercules maad ready his
batayllis of that oon side / And antheon ordeynyd his on that other side /
Antheon made three batayllis. the first of.xij. thousand fightyng men the
second of.xx. thousand / and the third battle of.xxx. thousand. he ordained
him self king and chief of the first battle / In the second he ordained the
king of ghetulye. and in the third the king of Cothulye. And than when he had
right well set them in arraye and renged them in a morning he made to march
Ioyously against his enemies / and demandyd no thing but their coming on. and to
see the our when that hercules would charge on hem etc:.

How hercules assemblid his battle against Antheon king of the libyens. the
which he put to flight and slew the king of Cothulie:.
HErcules had made of his folk two bataylles whereof he conduyted and led the
first / Affer and theseus conduytyd and guyded that other when than he saw the
libyens march which made the grettest bruyt and noise of the world / he went
forth before and his company followed / Than began the trompettes to sown and
tabours to make great uoise the cry was great / they began sharply the
battle whereof hercules and antheon made the assaye by a swifte course And with
sharp swerdes smote so sore to geder / that Antheon brake his glayue. And the
iron of the glayue of hercules persyd the sheld of Antheon and his arms on his
right side by which he had a wound whereoute sprange the blood. Antheon wend
to have dyede for sorrow when he felt the struck. and saw that his glayue had
but little done to hercules / he took than his swerd. and hercules took his
also And smote each other so hard that hercules bare antheon unto the earth
with oon struck / And had slain him. ne had the libyens have been which ran
upon hercules on all sides And they delivered to him oon so great assault that
he wyste not to whom he might attend. Than hercules enployed his swerd upon
the lybyens / The egypciens assemblid them aigrely upon their enemies / Antheon
releuyd him self all ashamed of his fall. Applied all his puyssance and
strength for to avenge him not upon hercules but upon them of his party / Thus
Antheon smote on that oon side and hercules on that other / Antheon fought by
great fyerste and anger. And hercules by prowess. The fiersnes of Antheon was
great. but the prowess of hercules was so excessiuely great that the lybyens
fled him as the death / And where they saw him they tremblyd for great feer /
At this bataill to fore the swerd of hercules all blody. Than the great rowtes
of the lybyens were right sore affrayed And kept none array / he smote of
heedes and leyde hem down to the earth / his folk that were disroyed by
antheon he gadrid to geder again. he made such work that the libyens had the
worse and that antheon sent hastily to the king of Cothulye that he should
come to his help etc::.

THe king of Cothulye that at the sendyng of antheon depertid / wenyng to come
to the medlee But when Affer and theseus saw him meue they went against him.
and lettyd him of his way And there began the stour so great and so mortal
that theseus and Affer slew the king of Cothulye beat down his banyers / his
recongnoissances and his cotulyens / And smote so sore the iron upon their
bodies that they went aback and were constrained to cry after help / the
king of ghetulie seeing this evil adventure came unto the rescousse and fond
the Cothulyens all disconfited. At his coming the Cries. the noise. the
tempeste / the strokes began to renew / many vaillance and many a prowess
were showed there / Many showed there their virtue and strength and many were
slain there / Theseus did there meruailles. but allwey the ghetulyens held hem
to gider and fought against theseus by the space of three hours / and loft but
few of their people unto the time that hercules brought them of the bataill of
king Antheon to disconfiture / and made them to flee to save hem self with the
ghetulyens / that than discoraged hem self in such wise that after they had
seen the battle of king antheon disrenged and broken they might not lift up
their arms to dyffend them but were slain a lityll and a lityll / And fynably
they were brought to so strayte metes and bounds that they wiste never where
to save hem. And than they fledd out of the place / sparklid by the feldes and
champayns. with out ledars conduyteurs and capitaynes / And than hercules put
him forth in the prees all before among them that fled first of the libyens
that he came to the gate of the cite with hem / And there he began to smite so
dismesurably that he put to death the libiens fleyng theder and the porters and
them that would resist him Also he made the egypciens to enter in to the town /
And Antheon seeing fortune against him in all points fled not in to his
palace ne accompanied as a king but at large in to the feldes in the conduyte
of four moors only that after brought him in to Moryane:.

How hercules fought again. against king Antheon and put him unto the death
etc:.
By this manyere hercules and the egypcyens entryd in to lybye and subiuged hit
by force of arms / And Antheon was fled in to mauritayne. where he assemblid
new folk hastily / They of lybye put hem all in the mercy of hercules /
when hercules had thus dauntyd them of lybye. And their neyhbours sechyng
Antheon. he made Affer king And named hit after him Affryque. And said that he
fought not for his synguler prouffit and couetyse / but for lyberalite and for
to enhaunce virtue / O most vaillyant and noble hercules. there was never man
born among the paynems more large. more noble ne more virtuous / he would not
be king of all the world He was lyberall and enployed his conquestes right
well and wisely. and also gaf his yeftes aduysedly when he had maad Affer king
/ he inquired what laws they held and establisshid among hem the sacrement
of marriage / ffor at that time the women were there all comune / and when hit
happend that the women had children. they gaf hem to the men after their
phisonomyes / and thus tells Aristotell in his politycques Above this
sacrement hercules ordained unto the affriquans that they should hold the laws
of greece / and by right meure and ripe conduyt maad the affrycquans live
raysonably and virtuously / and above all other things he made hem have the
order of marriage in great reverence / when hercules had ordeynd all this /
tidings came to him that Antheon was come again to Chasse him with many moryans
that followed him. than he returned upon antheon and upon the moryans / and
there smote hem down with his clubbe so mortally that he maad hit reed with
their blood and slew hem all and put hem to flight so cruelly that antheon
abode allone against hercules and fought against him body to body by great
strength and gaf him many strokes hard to bear / But hercules gaf to him so
many and so largely that the geant wyste never how to save him / and wend to
have fled / but hercules tht ran also swiftely as an horse ran after-hym.
and enbraced him in his arms with all his might / and lift him up in the
air and bare him unto the ooste of the mauritanyes / and when he came nyghe hem
/ he cast him down despitously to the earth that all to bruised and forfrushed
abode there deed antheon / and his death turned unto the moors so great
abasshement that they lost all their strength and puyssance / and were slain by
great excess with out remedy / they lost there the king Antheon the king
of moritane. the king of tingye and many other kings and the honor of the
bataill. and in the end they fled / in which flighte was taken and subiuged
to the seignourye of Affricque the cite of mauritaine:.

How hercules and Theseus fought to geder against the two damoyselles of Sythye
etc:.
IN remembrance of this victory / hercules did do make in the field the
statue or image of a man slepyng in the place where he had put to death
antheon And there under he did do burye the body of antheon / And anon as the
image which was made of the boon of an ellephant was set up there / the neck
of the image began to sown like as hit had been a man slepyng wherefore the
mores had afterward the sepulcre in great reverence And worshipid the ydole.
After this statue thus accomplisshid by hercules / he went by tyngie and
ampulesie and by many other contrees and conquered all the country that now is
callid Affricque. and gaf all to affer / and affer returned in to libye. and
there he fond Echee his wife ded by a grievous sekenes / he took and made sorrow
so great that hit was meruaill. Than for to forgete this sorrow. he took leave of
king affer and the egyciens. and had supposid to have departid thens. but as
he was in taking leave. a damoisell strangely arrayed came unto him and said /
lord of libye the quen^^ of fithie ladies of egipte of capadoce and of asye
have sent me unto you / which ladies have late conquered the said contrees in
taking vengeance of the Infortune of their husbondes now late ded: And
abandonnynd their country by cause of the great oultrage that vexoses king of
egipte made in fithee And for as much as ye be of the lygnage of the egypcyens
/ they send to you that ye submette you unto their obeyssance for to do with
you that. that shall plese hem / or else that ye come against hem in batayl^l
or else for to eschew theffusyon of blood they late you wete that they have
good right to subiugue you and that if there be among you two kynghtes that
again two of them wolle do arms at utterance / they shall delyuere to you two
ladies in place couenable by condition / that if the ladies vaynquyssh and
overcome you / ye shall be holden as vaynquysshid / and be at their commandment
/ And if your men overcome the ladies / they shall be reputed as ouercomen. and
shall be sugettis unto you etc:.

HErcules heeryng this mandement and message of the ladies Answered unto the
messanger / Damoysell syn that the ladies of fithee ben so cheuaulerenses that
they have conquerid the great royames of egypt of capadoce and of asye / they
ben sore for to doubt / Neuerthelasse for to eschew theffusion of blood and
for to deffende the affrycans fro their seruage ye shall return unto them and
say / that the battle of the two knights against two ladies is acorded and
agreed unto them for to be don to morn by the condition that ye have said. Than
hercules affer and many other swore and promysid to hold these things / and
did great honor and reverence unto the damoysell::

THe damoisell having don her message as said is / returned unto the ladies /
which were entered a great way in Affrycque / and told to them word for word
the answer of hercules. The ouerest or maistresse of all these ladies was named
Synope And had two susters so expert and strong in arms that they dredde no
knight of the world / that oon was named menalipe and that other ypolite /
Anon as these ladies had receyuid thise tidings of the affrycans they had
great Joy / And holdyng oppynyon that affrycque was won by the strength of
ypolite and menalipe / which did meruailles in arms / they ordeind that they
should fight with the two knyghttes. And so for to do they made ready ypolite
and menalipe. which were on the morn ready upon the feldes:.

AT the our that was ordained / hercules and theseus sittyng on two strong
horses with great siewte of affricans. rood into the place that the ladies had
chosen for to do arms / There were the two ladies abidyng in a fair place
armed and well mounted on good stedes And by them were the ladies in great
nombre / Also sone than as hercules and theseus had aspyed the two damoyselles.
they made them that followed to stand and come no nere / And sent unto the
damyselles to wete what they would do / The damoyselles answered that they abode
the two knights and that they were ready to do arms again them under the
conditions of their querele / And if they were come they should come forth..

HErcules and theseus with this answer took their speres / and spored their
horses and made sign unto the damoiselles / and they garnysshid of sheldes and
of speres ran again them so cheuauloursly that hit seemed that they ne held of
heaven ne of earth And that at the copyng of their sharp speres the strokes were
so huge and great on both sides that ypolyte and theseus bare each other unto
the earth / and in like wise did menalipe and hercules / the affrycans
meruaillid much to see the two princes so born down / and yet the ladies of
Sythea meruaylled much more of the damoyselles etc::.

When the knights of the oon side and the damoyselles of that other fond them
self lyyng oon the earth / Shame and vergoyne smote hem unto their hertes
Nevertheless each of them releuyd hem lightly and by great courage took their
swerdes. and approchid each other / and chargyng and smytyng that oon upon that
other so radely that the arms of the ladies and of the knights felt the
strookes / ypolyte poursiewed her man theseus / And menalype held her unto
hercules / The strookes of ypolite were great and did great gryef unto theseus
/ theseus enforced him self strongly to avenge him. and might not well come to
his purpose / hercules put under and overcome menalype lightly with his swerd
and put her in his mercy but ypolyte mayntenyd her force so myghtely against
theseus / that she had put him to utterance ne had hercules had been that said
to him / Brother what shall this be / where is the prowess of theseus. shall
that be daunted by the chyualerye of a damoysell / if hit be so. certainly all
men shall have shame of your dishonor:.

These words began to quycquen and to wake again the blood of theseus that was
before a sleep / and light the courage in such wise that he recouerd a new
force and strength / and put him forth and began to smite by such prowess
that he maad the damoysell recreante / and took fro here / her swerd / And
surmounted her / whereof the ladies were right doleant and sorouful^ and in
especial the queen Sinophe / which than sent to hercules her arms in token
that she was vaynquisshid / prayng him. that he would yield again and render the
two damoyselles / And hercules took the arms of the queen. and sent to her
menalipe and made the pees with her for the affrycans by condycion that she
should give ypolite in marriage to theseus which was amerous of ypolite / So
than the weddyng was made in affryque with great honor and worship / And than
the ladies heeryng tell the meruaillous feetes and deeds of hercules. prei^id
him all / And held hem happy and ewrous to be vaynquysshid of him:.

How hercules began to wexe amerous of deyanyra And how achelous and hercules
had bataill that oon against that other / and how achelous was vainquisshid.
AFter the conqueste of these ladies. Theseus took leave of hercules and of
affer and returned in to his contre for to bring home his lady / And hercules
went to the sea for to goo in to calcedonye which lies in thoposite of
Achaye and of Archade for to see a fair lady by exellente beawte / that he had
herd greatly recomanded by a calcedonien that was in his company he did so
much what by see and by land / that he came in to calcedoyne / The king of
that place had to name Oeneus and had two daughters that oon named Deyanyra /
And that other Gorge / Deyanyra was the fairest. And that was she that hercules
came for to see. when Oeneus had understanding and knowleche that hercules came
in to his country. he had great Joy / And went against him and resseyued him
in enbrasing so honorably as was to him possible / In entryng in to his
pallays the queen and his two daughters gorge and dyanyra wellcomyd hercules /
Incontinent as hercules cast his eyes upon dyanira that was the most fairest
thing that ever he saw / And that by on desire right deep was enrachyned and
roted in the most hole place of his heart / he felt him self rauysshyd
meruayllously. This desire entrid in to hercules all full of rays of love and
entryd in to his heart also suddenly as the rays of the son pass through the
glass etc::.

DEyanira had so much beauty and was so well accomplisshid / and so relused
and shoon among the ladies that to her / might be maad no comparyson / not
allonly in beaulte / but with tht in wysedom and bounte. She was the most
precious tresour of calcedonye / and there came many ladies and damoyselles and
other / his neighbors were all amerous of her / and soueraynly the king
Achelous that was strong and puyssant / This king had great seygnourye and
marchyd on the royame of calcedonye / when than hercules had been there a space
in passing the time Ioyously and in beholding the conduyt of deyanira / hit
happend on a day that the messanger of king Achelous came to Oeneus and said to
him. that achelous demanded of him if he would give him his daughter / and if he
would not give her to him at this time / he would moleste and grieve his contre
and would make him war Of this mandement Oeneus was strongly troublid and
answered the messanger that on the morn he would give him an answer / All that
day oeneus was pensyf and simple and abode allone / and for to pass his
melancholy he came to hercules / when hercules saw him so pensyf / he coniured
him in such wise that he should tell him the cause of his pensifnes / which
told him and said. Lord hercules syn hit pleseth you to know of mine anoyance
and greef / I shall anon tell you the cause / There is here by a king my
neyghebour named Achelous great and fires and proud / which by many times has
required of me to have to his wife deyanira my daughter / I have not ben in will
to accord the marriage / ffor as much as I know this king a man of right
evil life. And for this cause I have had many menaces of him. And also this day
his messanger is yet comen again to me and has said to me that if I give him
not my daughter at this time. that he will make me war / Certes hercules if
ye see me pensyf / Hit comes to me by this occasion. ffor I have not yet given
him his answer / But I must give hit him to morn / Nevertheless I have
concluded in my self that I will not give unto him my daughter / And than when
I see verily that by the reffuse of my daughter hit must needs be that the
war be open between the foresaid king Achelous and me I know well that I am
dysplesyd. ffor war is the eternal exyllement of the contre / Perdycion and
waaste of the people and of goods etc.

SIre said hercules hit is force unto a man that he take and bear all that
fortune will. As ye say war is not encresyng of people but dymunycion
allewaye by that hole hit behooves to pass / Hit is expedyent that a man
rejoice his right. Right conforteth the courage of a man. And also the courage
of a man conforted brings him often times to glorious victory / A best
rural disgarnysshyd of raysonable engyne fights for his hole and neste with
his claws with his feet teeth and with his beck / what shall a man sensible
and endowed with entendement and rayson do if any assault and namely in his
owen land and terrytorye come / Nature will and enseygneth that where corperall
force faylleth / vygour and virtue of courage werken / and that they fight for
their country Take courage than in yowr right / and late say your entente unto
your enemies* ye have receyuyd me worshipfully / and in my receyuyng thise
tidings ben come I shall help you if hit be need / and I suppose if achelous
assaylle you he shall repent him::.

By these words the king Oeneus conforted him self greatly / the day drew
over / On the morn oeneus called the messanger of achelous and said to him.
that he come no more to demand his daughter / and that he was not auysed to
gyne her to his master / and furthermore if he meuyd war against him for this
cause. he had Intenco^n to defend him unto the death of the last man of all his
people. The messanger returned with these words and told hem to achelous and
all that he fond. Achelous was evil content with king oeneus / and as he
that was over much smyten with the love of deyanira. began to assemble his men
of arms in Intencion to make war on king oeneus. and to take fro him his
daughter / hercules was than in calcedonye and often times he was with deyanira
in gracious deuyses. he fond her so well adressid in all honest manyers. that
all day he was the most part with her And in the night he did not but dreme
and think on her / how be hit he said no thing to her that touched his
amerous desires / willing first to show there his power in arms / hit happend
on a day he opend a wyndowe that was on the gardyn of deiamra And castyng his
eyes a down he saw deyanira that sat upon a grene place acompanyed of many
ladies and damoyselles / Than he set all his entendement to contemplare
thexcessiue beaulte of her / After he desired her / And in coueytyng and
desiryng he said. O deianyra that have not the prerogacion to know the hertes
and the thoughts of the men / if I should say to you the tenthe part of the
love and desires that I have in you / ye might not believe hit / I have goon
many a contre. and seen many a royame. and many a tresour I have desired and
many a thing. But of all for to come to mine above / I was never in so great
thought as I am for to get your grace:.

THe same our that hercules spack by him self / Deyanyra was not ydell. She
that had hercules in her mind and remembrance in her heart than being rich
with the points of love sown between variacions of hope and despayr / was
esprysed in all her veins with the heete of fire that brenneth amerous hertes
/ the fire brennyng was strong and right hard to quench the right percyng
spa^cle / she leyde her down upon the grass / And began to say in her engyne
/ Alas hercules what shall deianira do she may not come and attain unto your
love / I was wont not long syn not dayne to behold the men / and than said.
tht never prince ne king should have my love / now I am all of another nature /
and ne desire other thing but that I might be your wife / I had supposed to
have remained and continued a stable virgin / and only disdaineuse of the men
again the requests and amonycions of the ladies / These ben now well other
tidings / with these words she cesed a litil^ and began to think on many
other things / At this point as she thought on hercules. and hercules on her
Tidinges came theder that Achelous came theder for tassiege the Cite by land and
by see / and that he was right nyghe by / ffor these tidings aroos in the
pallays a right great murmr / that came to the ceres of hercules and of
deyanyra. their spyrites were trauersyd in such facion that hercules left to
behold deyanyra / and the damoysell left to think on hercules. and both two
went unto the king oeneus:.

Anon as hercules came unto the king / and that the king saw him. he went
against him and said to him that his enemies were right nyhe the Cite / hercules
answered Ioyously / that hit behooves to goo feste hem. and that he do put
his people in arms / at the answer of hercules the king did dosowne to arms
/ and with the sown all calcedonye was meuyd and each man adoubed him.
hercu^es and his greeks were ready in a lityll space / The calcedonyens
assemblid by great companyes in the palais / when they were assemblid the king
and hercules brought them in to the ffelde / and hercules put hem in ordenaunce
/ that done he did hem march / and so exployted the calcedonyens and greeks
on an after dinner / that they came and fond their enemies and approchyd them so
nyhe that there was nothing to do but to smite and lay on / hercules had maad
two bataylles / oon and the first of his people / and that other of the
calcedonyens when they came to the point to mete. Hercules went to the
calcedonyens and in the presence of the king said to them / lo here ye may see
your enemies that set lytill by you ffor they ben come in to your lordshypp
to assaill you I pray you that the great oultrage of them abate nemynusshe
your corages / ye ought here to have the fyerste of a lion the puyssance of
an ellephant and appetyte of a gryffon for to delyuere you with out end fro
the enemyte of king Achelous. in keeping your contre. your domynaco^n. your
honor / your tresours. your wives. your children. and that more is your lives
Be ye than enuyous to do well / be ye aglouted with desire of vengeance / be
ye coueytous to get worship and glory / if ye esuertue not your self at this
time / ye may not have but mendicyte or seruytude or death / ffor your enemies
shall do unto you all the evil of the world / if they have victory over you.
Thise words wroughte in the hertes of the calcedonyens and gaf to them courage
merueylously / And all full of oon right good will desired the medles / when
hercules had achieuyd his exortaco^n he went to the bataill / for hit was at
the point to fight. Than were there great cries on that oon side and on that
other / Tabours. trompettes. clarions. horns and busynes began to sown.
knights began to meue at thentree of the bataill. hercules and the greeks
shot and drew largely upon their enemies / And made achelous all abasshid
for as much as he hoped not to have found so great resistance with the
calcedonyens Than they casted her eyes upon the banyer of hercules / and seeing
the great lion that was painted therm / they began to ymagyne that there might
be hercules of whom was spoken through out all the world for his virtues and
his strength::.

When they were thus ymagenyng the shot failled with great occision of them
of the party of Achelous / when the shot was so faylled hercules took his
swerd / and fourroied among them of Achaye. that were in the first front of
the battle of achelous / and there maad an hoole so great that the
calcedonyens and yconyens wan upon them at the first Ioynyng / and ma^e that
other party to recule and go a back. whereof achelous had great sorrow / and
he took to him.xx. knights which were chosen and came and reng^^ ^ ^ith them
there. where hercules defrayed and brake the battle of achayens / There he
approuuyd his courage Amorous this strong geant. and his cheualerye so
vayllyantly that the greeks entryng tarried and abode / and also hercules. ffor
they dyed their swerdes and the earth with their blood. and beat down many
yconyens. And there was the stryff so great that men might see nothing else
but heedes and arms fflee in to the ffelde. hercules smote no struck but hit
cost to achelous the death of a man. Achelous in like wise struck for struck
smote down oon of his enemies The residue of their folk did the best they
cowde / uow before now behind. and yet might never thachayens confound and
put aback their adversaries how be hit they were allwey four against oon and
they chonyens also might not preuaill upon the achayens for as much as they
were in great nombre. And they had alleway fressh people and new / In this
manner the two puissances fought to geder more than four ours / love wrought
sore there in hercules and in achelous. both two made their swerdes to
florisshe couerid with blood / they met often times and smote each other / but
never durst achelous abide to fore the swerd of hercules for the orrible
strookes that he saw hercules give / but he putted him in the prees as soon as
he had smyten him or had greuyd him:.

IN this bataill hercules did wondres and meruailles. Oeneus took a great
playsir to behold him. And thachayens had therein displaisir / ffor they that
seyghe him were no more assewrid to escape the death / than he that feleth the
swerd in his nekke in the hand of a tyrant. There ress^yuid no man a struck of
him but he abood in the place he made so great slaughter that no man can well
write In the end king oeneus with all his calcedoniens came to the bataill /
In his coming the achaiens reseyuid loss upon loss and parill upon parill.
The king oeneus made many of his enemies to dye / hercules shewid his puyssance
more and more / By his well doing he put thachayens all out of array. and
after in to flyghte / And the loss of the field turned greatly unto the dommage
of king Achelous. ffor hercules chassed him hountously in to his shyppy^ and
maad him to lose twelve thousand Achayens etc..

How hercules put to utterance the king Achelous And how he espowsed deyanyra
etc:.
AFter this vitorye when hercules saw that the king Achelous sauyd him self
by the sea / He called the king oeneus and said to him that he would poursiewe
his enemy / and that he would delyuere the world of him. and after took two
honderd of his chosen men. and took leave of the king oeneus and went to the sea / following after Achelous recomandyng him to gorge and to deyanira. In this
night oeneus after the departing of hercules returned in to calcedonye / and
told his wife and his daughters the hyhe prowes that hercules had done in the
battle / and how he had chaced his enemies / and how he was goon after with
two honderd men. The ladies gorge and deyanyra were right Joyous of the
victory / but hit anoyed hem sore that hercules with so little a company
poursyeued achelous / and above all other deyanyra was greatly anoyed and
greuyd of thempryse of hercules so sore that she went in to her chamber and
was constrained to weep and not to have Joy in heart ^^to the return of
hercules / ffor to return unto the purpoos of hercules / when he was put unto
the poursiewt of achelous as said is he entrid in to his royame. and siewed him
so nyhe that he was constraynd to wythdrawe him in a right strong castle
standing by the sea / hercules aseged achelous in this castle / when achelous
saw that hercules poursiewed him with so lityl^ company as with two honderd
men only / he callid his friends and his conduytours / and among other things
told hem that hit was shame to them to suffer to be asseged with so little
nombre of people. They answered that he had said truth / And concluded that the
same our they would issue out and reyse and break the syege / and forthwith
they sowned to arms with short counceyll / hit was not long after that they
issued out of the castle / hercules aspyed hem and knew that they came to the
bataylle / he set his men in array / After he went allone to fore unto his
enemies as he that dowted of no thing / when Achelous saw him come he began
to make a great sighe / And escryed his people upon him / sayyng that hit was he
with the clubbe that had chassed him out of calcedonye / and promised great
yeftes unto them that best furnysshid him with strokes / but when his folk
knew that hit was hercules / they made curtoisie each to other for to go before
And tremblyng as the leef on the tree they durst not abide the weight of the
clubbe / but without smytyng of any struck turned their backs and fled unto
the castle.

AChelous Seeing the pour conduyte of his folk And the dread and feer that
they had of hercules / wend he should have deyd for sorrow / went and entryd
again with them in to the castle. And hercules returned with his people
lawghyng of the pour guydyng of his enemies / Hercules began than to think on
deyanyra. And Achelous began to ymagyne how he might adommage the
calcedonyens. he had there oon of his captayns that said unto him. Sire ye
know well that your strength may not compare unto the strength of your enemies
/ we ben ten against oon but that may no thing help us. ffor allonly the
clubbe of the mighty geant that is with them is ynowh for to burye us all and
also for to destroy your royame. Consydere ye than syn hit is so that open
puissance and plain descouerte strength at eye may not be used at this time.
hit is expedyent to ymagyne some subtylte for to grieve the calcedonyens / and
hit is mine adnys that there shall be maad a great flaming light in the sea
such as I shall well deuyse / that by that moyen they that have beseged us may
ben deceyuyd lightly. This flaming light must be by night / and hit shall be
great and Inpetuous we shall make hit secretly / anon as our enemies shall
see hit they shall lepe out of their tents. and they shall goo unto the sea
for to see that meruaille / parauenture with out any arms / ffor they dread
ne fere us not. And than we shall spryng on them and shall find them
disgarnysshid and unpurveyed of their arms. and consequently hit may ensiewe
that of them all we shall make a notable delyuerance etc:.

When Achelous herd this counceyll / hit seemed to him good / and would that hit
were put in effect in such wise as he had devised. The deuyser did do make
an honderd torches. which were achyeuyd in fyften days / During these fyften
days hercules assaylled many times the castle. where achelous was in / but he
might never do no thing thereto ffor the fortress stood upon the sea and in a
strong^ contree / and might not be gotten by assault / And achelous might have
no socours fro no part / ffor between this castle and Achaye was a great
country / when the fyften days were passid and the torches were maad / on a
night when hit was paisible of wynd and of storm They that conduyted the
torches issued out of the castle four of them unto the haven where as was left
but oon lityl^ boot which was a ground. and had not in long time before be put
to the sea / And if ye demand where the ships were become that Achelous
brought to this poort / I say you that hercules had do take them and sent hem
in to the sea / to thentent that Achelous should not ascape him ner take away
the shippys by night / The Achayens than comen to this lityll boot lyyng on the
ground. did so much that they brought hit a flote on the sea also secretly as
they could. and entrid therein with all / that to them was necessary / And the
king Achelous put him self in a busshement with a thousand of his men In a
place nyghe where as him seemed that the calcedonyens would goo out for to see
the light that should be made. Than when they that were in the s^e knew that
hit was time to light their torches they set them a fire / And set them
round a boute the masre where in were made as many hooles as were torches / And
so as they had ymagyned they did / Anon the knights that kept the wacche of
the Oost of hercules saw hit. And all sore a meruaylled of this light awooke
hercules and his felawes. and showed them the light and clerte etc:.

Anon as hercules saw the resplendissour of the torches / he would know what
hit was / And than he approached the ryue of the sea and his felawship with him.
/ he had not ben long there / when the king Achelous did do light an
honderd torches that he had pourueyed. and after he sprange out of his
enbusshement with his thousand men / and ran upon hercules and assailled him
and all his men fiersly / But when hercules saw them discouere / he set his
people in ordenance the best wise he might. by the light of the sterres / and
receyuid his enemies freely whereof began a right dolorous bataill / ffor that
oon smote on that other right felonsly / and there were many wounded and deed /
the scarmousshe was great / Achelous wend to escarmousshe / but he was
scarmousshid him self unto theffusion of his blood / ffor hercules among all
other smote him on the helm / that he foundrid and gaf him a wound on his
heed that the blood russhed out / and more over he took him. and delivered him
to twelve of his men to keep / there were great Cries and great habondance of
strokes of swerdes / Than were the torches quenched and put out by the
Inpetuosyte of the smytyng on the achayens which desired strongly for to
rescowe their king / they abandoned their lives in the heet / But when their
torches were quenchid lityll and a lityll they began to cool them and
wythdrewe them for they saw not a drope / when they were wythdrawen / hercules
assemblid his folk and said to them that he would goo assaye if he might take
the castle in this trowble / And that they should follow him hardily and
fiersly / and anon after he saw his enemies return unto the castle / he ran
after and retained hem And put him self in the thikkest of them. and smyting
with his clubbe on the right side and on the lift side that he made a right
large place and way / and by thi^ way he ladde his people unto the yate of the
castle / where he entrid with them that fled / and there maad so great
occysion of his enemies that with lityll resistance that same night he put to
death twelfe h^nderd and the other fled in to the cite of patrace fro whens
they were / In this battle and in the battle that had been in calcedonye /
All the men of achaye were slain / Reseruyd about a four honderd which
saved them by fleeyng / ffor Achelous had taken all his men with him / His
contre and his cite of patrace was all destroyed / when hercules had taken the
castle After he went in to the contre and in to the cite of patrace / And
entryng in all places with out any resistance / he translated this roiame in
to the hand of king Oeneus / And he abood not long after that he had subdned
this royame but he departed and returned in to calcedome as hasteli as he might
for to see deyanira / And there he was receyuyd with so great glory. Joy and
tryumphe that noman can reherce ne write. The poets escryue and write this
conquest that hercules made upon achelous / ffaynyng that Achelous fought first
in guyse of a man. and that than he was vaynquysshyd / After he chaungyd him
self in guyse of a serpent / this is to understand in subtyllesse and in
malice as he did in assaillyng hercules by night ffinably he fought in the
guyse of a booll / And that hercules brak his oon horn / That is to understand
that at the last Achelous was fires as a booll / ffor he deyde well nyhe for
pride and sorrow that he was taken / And that hercules brake his horn / that
is to understand that he brak his royame and destroyed hit:.

How Nessus rauysshid deyanira fro hercules when he passid with her over the
river / And how hercules slew Nessus with an Arowe.
Great was the ffeste than. that the king Oeneus maad for the victoryes that
hercules had achyeuyd upon king Achelous / ^for he doubted him passing sore
Hercules at his coming presented to him Achelous and his royame and said to him
that he should have hit with out any reffuse / The king oeneus sent king
achelous in exyle / And held him self greatly bounden and beholden to hercules
whom he honored meruaillously / than hercules took to his heart again the
right amorows regardes. and also in likewise did deyanyra. she had souerayn
Joy to see hercules / and desired none other thing but for to see him / what
shall I make long process / when hercules had been there a space / he required
king Oeneus that he would gyf him his doughtre to wyue / Oeneus with right good
will agreed and acorded to him / and deyanyra consented with better will / The
weddyng was solempnysed pomp^^sly and solempnly. and went to bed and lay to
geder / And sone after when hercules saw that his fader in law had his roiame
in peace he took leave of the king oeneus and departed fro calcedonie with
deyanira and his people for to goo by land in to his royame of yconye /
hercules had allwey in his Journey deyanyra by him. he louyd her sore and had
great solas in her beauty / and if he had not studied with athlas / he could
not have absteyned him for to behold her beauty / In passing the time
plesauntly in the manyer that folk do that been new married. hercules Iourneyed
so far that he came to a quarter of thessaylle / where as the river of hebenus
renneth / and arrived on this river / which was deep and brood rennyng
Inpetuously. and had nether brigge ne plancke to pass over / But there was a
centaure named Nessus that practyqued there his life by the mean of a lityll
boot In the which he sad the people over the river etc:.

When hercules had found this passager Nessus he came to him and demanded him
how he and his folk might pass the River / Nessus that knew hercules syn the
time that he had vaynquysshyd his felawis at the weddyng of pyrothus Answered to
him that he might not pass the river but by his lityll boot And if he would
pass / / he would with a good will do him the pleasir to set him over /
Hercules thanked nessus / And for as much as he saw that the boot was but
lityll And that the time was disposed to rain / he would that deyanyra and her
damoyselles should pass first / Deyanyra and her maidens entryd in to the boot
/ when they were therein / Nessus rowed And in the rowyng he beheld deyanyra /
And he saw her so much that her beawte deceyuid him. ffor as soon as he was
come over on that other side / ^ he took deyanyra / and said that she should be
his wife / / And than in the rauysshyng of her he took her on his sholders and
bare her a way / wherefore deyanyra and her damoyselles made great cries / And
hercules seeing that the old geant bare away deyanira. which he would resist
to his power / bend his bow and shot an arowe upon the geant with so great
might and connyng / that he smote him on the right side unto the heart. And gaf
him the dethes wound: Thee bow of hercules was so great and strong that no
man could bend hit but him self / how be hit that nessus by his wound that
hercules gaf him began to feel thappchyng of the death and to suffer sharp
anguissh / allway he ran a great while after unto a valeye. where he
ouerthrewe. and considering that his life had no rescows / he enploied the end
of his life to ymagine how he might do displaisir to hercules / and remembrid
that he had terryble poysen upon him and mortal / And said to deyanyra by
great malice / Lady the love of you has caused me to resseyue the death /
which me displeseth not so sore / as does that cruel^ hercules shall reioysse
you / which are worthy to have a worthy man / hercules is no true husbonde /
but the vntrewest to his wife that ever was / and for as much as I have
synguler pity of you / and that your beaulte constrayneth me to do you pleasyr
/ I shall give you here a precious thing / and having such virtue / that if ye
boyll hit with oon of the shertes of hercules with the blood that renneth out
of my wound / and if than ye give the sherte to hercules and that he were hit
/ he shall never after love other woman ner lady but you::.

And with thise words the geant took the poison and temprid hit with his blood
and wonde hit in a lynnyn cloth and gaf hit to deyanyra / The folish deyanyra
adioustyng credence to the geant took the poison / the geant charged her that
no man should towche hit bare / sayng that than hit should lose his virtue after
the towchyng. and with that he gaf up his ghost and dyed pytously / And
deyanyra ascapyd fro his hands. pourposyng that she would keep that poison
secrtly at alauenture for to help her self / if hit were need / In the mean
while that these things befell between deyanyra and the geant / hercules was
not at hertes ease for deyanyra / he was in great dystresse when he saw nessus
here away his wife / As Soon as he had smyten him on the right side with his
arowe as said is / he unclothed and despoilled him self / and cast his gown
his harnoys and his clobbe over the water by great strength And after he sterte
in to the water / and swamme over unto that other side / And than as he did on
his arayment again / Deyanira acompanyed with her damoyselles that followed her
came again to the river garnysshid with the cursid poison / when hercules saw
deyanira return / he ymagyned anon that he had slain the geant / And went
against her and demanded where the traytre was / Deyanira answered not at the
first to this demand / but said to him / Alas my lord in what parill have I
ben. what oppression what destruction of Joy has destrayned mine heart / The
traches of mine arms where yet is seen the prynte of the hands of the geant
show in what displaisir I have been. The cursed glouton geant bare me unto the
depthe of a deep valeye. where the death procedyng of the struck of your arowe
made him to fall down. And he would never late me goo unto the last syghe of
death. Certes I have suffrid a great Ieoparde / but thankyng be to the gods /
syn I have found you again. And know ye verily that I am avenged of mine
enemy. whom I have seen deep miserably / whereof I am all reioyed and glad
again:.

How hercules fought against the serpent of palu of learn and slew him etc:.
Deyanira and hercules kyssid each other by right great love / After hercules
went in to the place where the geant lay ded. and for as much as he fond him
priued of his life / he let him lie there to the bestes and to the birds and
took his arowe tht lay by him And this was the arowe that Achilles was slain
with after in the temple of phoebus in troie for the love of polixene / Than
hercules and deiamra came again to the river and / hercules set over his men
and went fro that place in to the Cite of learn / The king of this Cite did
great honor to hercules and receyuyd him as honorably as he might and cowde /
Among dyuerce deuyses hercules demanded him of his tidings / the king
answered and said that he knew none other / but that in a great palus there
dwelled and abood a monstre half man and half serpent that wasted and destroyed
all his royame by comun murdre / ffor he said that all the men women and
Children that this monstre can find he sleeth hem with his tayll that is
enuenymed and with his hand armed / he deuoureth and destroys them with his
teth / and there escapes none And so hit behooves that this contre be deserte /
ffor the laboureurs ne marchans dare not go by the contre less acompanyed than
two honderd men / And if they be less the monstre assaylleth them and
destroys them like as he has done many other etc::.

HErcules was passing glad and Joyous of these tidings and said to the king.
Sire I have labourd yet hederto for the common well of many royames / yet have I
the will to persevere and to do the works of virtue / know ye than syn that I
am here arrived / that I shall do somewhat for the well of this contre / like as
I have done for many other / and I have entencion for to put me in deuoyr to
morn on the way toward the monstre / and for to abide thauenture for to
vaynquysshe him or to be vaynquysshid of him / This monstre was called ydre for
as much as he dwelled in the waters / When deyanyra herd thentreprise of
hercules that he would go allone abandonne him self in so great parill she began
to weep and make so great sorrow / that no man might pease her / ner make her
stynte her weeping / hercules conforted her the best wise he could / Athlas and
philotes conforted her in likewise. and showed to her the right hyhe and
glorious deeds of hercules / ffor to give her hope in his adventure All that
might not help ner auaylle / she louyd hercules with all her heart with all
her might and puyssance She required him with her eyes charged full of teeres
that he would absteyne him fro so hyhe an enterprise / saying tht hit was no
wisdom a man to expose him self to so euydent terryble dangers / And that the
gods had sent the monstre in to the contre for to corryge and chastyce the
people / Alleway how be hit that hercules was sore ardau^t in the love of her /
yet her teres that she wept ne her prayers ne her remonstrances might not
cause hercules to break his purpose for to achyeue his adventure / But on the
morn erly adoubyd him. And departed fro learn and took his way toward the palus
where as was the monstre:.

This palus was long and three mile in compaas as the croniques of spain
reherce And all enuyroned with fontaynes that sprang out of the hyhe montaygnes
/ In myddis of this palus was a great lake or ponde / wherein dwelled the ydre
on dry land / when than hercules was come to this palus / The ydre tht never
slepte with both eyes and that had alewey the nekke stracchid on hihe and the
eeres open. had anon aspied him and sodainl^ came against him rennyng by a great
radeure / hercules abode when he aspyed the meruaillous monstre and had great
playsir to see him / he was ten foot of heyghte / and as long a taylle / he
was foul and couerd with here / he had the body armed / and in his right hand
held a naked glayue / and in the lift hand he bare a shield / hercules thus
beholding him suffryd him to come to him. Than the monstre spack to him and
said Pour geant whyder ghost thou / behold this glayue sharp on both sides
cuttyng / yet was there never man that herd me speak / but he dyed by the point
of this glayue / ffor as much as I am the most wise creature that ever nature
maad / and that I am acustomed to make a questyon to such men as I find / and
them destroy if they can not answer thereto. and for as much as I ne find in
my royame / but people as bestes and / with out entendement / I have therefore
destroyed their blood and so shall I do thyn if thou ^anste not assoylle a
sophyme that I shall make to the. O thou man serpentyne said hercules / thyn
eloquence. thy prudence. thy cruel glayue foul and pollute of infinytes
homycides make me no thing abaisshed ne discorage me / I seek the and am comen
hither for to destroy the. And I shall not assoylle oonly oon of thy sophymes
/ but as many as thou can think / and wole well that thou know that if by
force of thy sophymes and fallacious arguments thou make me Innocent / I shall
do unto the like as thou would do to me / and if hit hap that thy science
may not overcome me / yet woll I well that thou defend the with arms. and
that thou keep thy life as well as thou can etc::.

With these words the monstre maad unto hercules seven sofymes oon after an
other so fallacious and fo subtle / that when hercules had given solucion to
oon / the monstre replied by seven arguments / Allway hercules that was full
of philosophy and expert in all science. Answered so solempnly to all his
fallacious arguments that he surmou^ted him / And for this cause the poets
feign that this ydre had seven heedes as hit appears in the first tragedye of
seneca / / and sayen that when hercules had smiten of oon of his heedes. that
seven other heedes came again in the same place / / In the end than for to
poursiewe this matere when hercules had so desputed against the serpent that he
yielded him to hercules in such wise as he wist not what to say / than
hercules said to him: Serpent Inhumayn we have foughten long ynowh with the
tongue / Take thy glayue I may no longer wythholde my hand for smytyng upon the*
And assaye if thou art as subtle in arms as thou art subtle in langage.
Pour fooll said the serpente which was full of pride / know not thou that
by my party serpentyne I have enfected all this contr^ / and I shall this day
drink thy blood and devour thy body wherefore make good wacche / and keep the
well:

WIth out more words hercules enhaunsed his glayue for to have smyten his
aduersarye. but he could not so sore haste him but the serpent gaf him first
two strokes oon with his glayne and that other with his tayll / wherwyth he had
almost smyten him down to the ground / Alleway hercules abode standing / And
with his swerd that he had enhaunced he smote the monstre upon the helm by
such strenght that he all to frusshed the helm and made him a wound in his
heed of this struck that the serpente felt he was full of furour and with his
glayue smote hercules the second time upon the helm with so great might that
the sparklis and the fire flewe out / And the helm was broken / Hercules that
never to fore had receyuyd so great a stro ok / escryed him that he would avenge
hit / And smote him rightyrously / their strokes were great and mortell / they
smote each other long / and they were both two of great courage / But when
fortune had ynowh cherisshid hem both / she turned against the serpent so
certainly / that after many strokes hercules smote his trenchyng swerd with in
the helm in to his heed and bare him down deed unto the earth.

HErcules had great joy when he saw the monstre put to vttrance / he went
for to fecche the king of learn / deyanira / and his folk / and brought hem
for to see this monstre / when he had shewid hem the monstre / he made a great
fire / and light hit / and made sacrefyse unto the gods. And by the fire he
consumed the monstre ydre / werfore there were given to him great and right
high lonynges and thankynges. And was brought in to the cite of learn with
great glory of ladies and of damoyselles* which conveyed him unto the kings
palace syngyng melodyously. Deyanyra than Ioyed greatly in the tryumphant
victory* of her noble husbonde. when hercules had abiden there a while / he
departed and went to athenes where theseus receyuid him gloriously. Than
hercules and Athlas held skole in athenes / for as much as they of athenes
were quyk of engyne and of wit / and gaf hem all to learn science and there
they were a great while Introdusyng and enformyng them of Athenes in
phylosophie and in astronomye. And singulerly In astronomye hercules prouffited
in such wise / that the estudyents said that he sustained and bare the heaven
on his sholders O noble and virtuous man / when he had vaqued there and studied
so long that his doctrine had given light unto the athenyenses / he departid
fro thens with great bemenyng and brought his wife unto the cite of lycye And
than he was so greatly renomed / that fro all the royames of greece there came
daily to him noble men and other / for to prouffite in virtue. in noblesse / in
honor in arms. in phylosophie. in astronomye and in all other perfeccion
etc:.

How hercules went in to spaigne and how he fought in the sea against king
Gerion and vaynquisshid him and how he took the cite of megeda and entrid
therein:.
IN the time that hercules flourysshed in virtue And that his name was born
from royame to royame by glorious renomee / as rehercen the cronyques of
spaygne. There was a king of the cite of megeda that stands upon the river
of Gawdyane which began to make his name to have great bruyt by so many
malefices and tyrannyes that no man could tell the third part. This tyrant
had to name Geryon / He was king of Andolosye / and Destremadure and also of
the montaygnes of galyce and of portyngale / The poets faygnen of this tyrant
that he had three heedes / ffor as much as he had two brethern great geantes
the which were all of oon nature and of oon complexion. And that they were so
united to geder that all that / that oon would / that other would / And they
were never in discord. Geryon was the worste of hem all / he did do make a
temple in the cite of megida / and ordained there / that all they that were
noble should have her image and sepulture / and that men should make there the
remembrances of all the men of name / that he should slay / to the end that
there should be a memory of them in time coming / what shall I say of his deeds
/ he and his brethern tyrannysed not all only upon the estrangers / but also
upon his neighbors. And had pity on noman In such wise that they gate hem an
evil name. And that the affricquans whom they persecuted more than any other /
went for to complain to hercules by the commandment of affer / as to the
souerayn destroyar of tyrants and of monstres / And prayde and required him
greatly / that he would delyuere hem of this trybulacion.

When hercules understood the complaynte of the affricans / and was aduertysed
of the tyrannyes that geryon and his brethern made / he enterprysed for to go
in esperye / and promised to the affrycans that they should have right shortly
tidings of him And after axed them of the astate of king affer / And when
they had told all that they knew they returned wyht great Joy in to their
country. Hercules fro than forth on disposed him for to goo in to esperye
wherefore his wif deyanira made great sorrow The renomee of this vyage was anon
spredde in all the contre. In short time there came moo men of arms in to
lycye for to serve hercules than he sent fore / he was so good large and wise.
And also so vayllyant and so free that he gaf allway all his conquestes /
wherefore every man would follow him And good cause why / ffor no man followed him
ne served him / but that he rewarded and amendid him in all high manner and
facion. when than his excersite was ready / he took leave of his wife deyanira /
And departed out of the royame of licye. Many a teer was maad at his departing
as well of deyanyra as of his escolyers that learned of him / Theseus and
hispan. Athlas and phylotes were with him. During this vyag^ ^ he studied often
times with Athlas / And was never idle / with out any adventure that ought to
be remembrid / he aryued in Affry^que / where he fond affe / which receyuyd
him worshipfully / fro Affrycque hercules passid by the strayt of gybaltar /
And went in to gades. that now we call gallyce And peplid the contre. for as
much as he fond there good land / and delyueryd this people for to gonerne
unto a noble man named phylistenes This philistenes as bochace reherceth in the
genelagie of gods was sone of phenys king of phenyce / And this phenys was
sone of king Agenor sone of king belus / Philistenes than reigned in galyce.
and was after named the priest of hercules / for as much as when hercules had
vaynquysshid the tyrants of esperye. he founded there a temple which he held
after in great reverence / Alleway as hercules peupled and enhabited this land
/ he did do make pylers or colompnes high and meruayllonsly great. And set
them upon the sea / And upon every pilar or columpne he did do make an image of
hard stoon in the semblance and likeness of a knight like unto hercules all
clad with the skyn of a lion And there was oon of the images that held a table
wherein was wreton with letters of gold / Pass no further for to seek land /
ne goo for to conquer further any Royames in the weste / ffor thou shall find
no more land etc:

TThe noble hercules went than in to the contre / where as stondeth now the
Cite of Seuyle which was not than founded / And fond by his science that
there should be founded a cite of great renome / wherefore in memory thereof he
edefyed in that place a pilar of hard stones / and thereupon set an image
holding in his hand wreton that said / that there should be maad oon of the
grettest cytees of the world / This land of galyse apperteyned to geryon / But
than when hercules had maad this pilar above said and set hit where as now
stendeth Seuyle / he had great will for to begin to bylde the Cite / ffor the
country was passing good and comodious / But Athlas by the science of Astron
omye councellid him contrary / showing him by certain signs that hit was
destyne that another should make the Cite / And therefore nyghe the pylar / he
did do make a columpne of white marble / upon which stood the image of
hercules great and rich / that held oon hand against the Oryent wherein was
wreton here has been hercules / And with the other hand he shewid the writing
that. that other image held:.

THese things accomplisshid hercules departed fro thens / And left to
enhabyte and keep the contre eyghte honderd men of his of the Country of sithye
that were strong and expert in arms / And with good will abood there for
the bounte of the contre. Than went hercules by the ryuage of the sea in to
the last and furthermest party of Europe And saylid so far that he entrid
in to the River of guadiana where as the terant gerion dwelde and abode in the
cite of megida / The same time that hercules entrid in to the ryuere. Geryon
went up in to the top of an high tour where he might see all about the
contre for to see if any person came. upon whom he might excersite his
tyranny. He had not ben long there when he beheld upon the river and saw
the armee of hercules. And seeing this armee / he had great Joy. ffor him
seemed well that in all haste he should subdue and overcome hem. With out other
delay he assemblid his complyces and sowned to arms / In a lityll while all
his men were ready and garnysshid with their arms came unto him for to know
what he would / Gerion was than all armed. and ready for to go and enter in to
the battle He declared to his people his entenco^n. after he entrid in to his
galeyes as hastily as he might / and went fro megida en approchyng the greeks
/ Thus rowyng forth hit happend him that he met a litill boot / And fro as
far as he saw hit come / he went against hit and arested hit. In this boot
were no moo but two maryners and hyspan Gerion than callid hispan and demanded
him whyder he went and what he was / Certes sire answered hispan I am a greek /
and have entenco^n to go unto the king gerion / that is now in his cite of
megida for to accomplissh a ^essage that I am charged with / Messanger said the
king if ye seek gerion / ye need for to go no further forth. ffor I am he to
whom ye speak unto. Sire answered hispan syn tht ye be he to whom my message
apperteyneth / I let you have knowleche and were / in the name of the virtuous
hercules that he is enemy of your vices / And for to correct your great and
right abhomynable trespaces and sins / he is descended in to your domynaco^n
Messanger answered geryon / how is hercules so presumptuous as for to come upon
me for to entende to correct my vices / he wot little with whom he has to
do / Goo to him and tell him / that he shall not so late find me / but that
hit shall be to soon for his health / And that I shall feste him in such wise
er he escape me / as I have been accustomed to feste strangers:.

Hyspan departed with these words. and returned unto hercules also hastily as
he might / and told to him word for word that geryon had said to him / and
more over he said that he should mete with him right soon all pressed and ready
for to begin the battle / when hyspan had furnysshid his message The galeyes
of king geryon apperid and were seen fro far / Hercules and the greeks had
great Joy and began a right great shoutyng in sownyng trompettes. business and
tabours / Geryon and his folk seeing and heeryng their enemies / semblably
they began to shoute and to make a meruaylous bruyt / The Air was than smyten
with a right great and a Joyous noise / In this bruyt and in this noise. The
two Oostes approached each other / At the approchyng were not spared darts ne
round stones ne arowes. They of esperye had abondance of darts which they
used and cast hem on the greeks as hit had been rain / The cries redoublid on
that oon side and on that other / there were many ded and hurt. They were all
men of war. each man bare him vailliantly And among all other hercules
having alleway the bow in hand slew as many of his enemies as he shot
arowes. The shot dured long / When hit failled they fought hand on hand Tho
began the bataill eygre and hard / Gerion shewid him self a man. boystous and
well expert in arms and put to death many greeks but against oon that he slew
hercules slew ten of the esperyens etc:.

AT the Ioynyng that the galeyes made there were many hurt and strokes given /
hercules took his clubbe. and in smytyng one of the galeyes / that wend to
have hurthd and borded his. he smote with so great force. that he made hit to
foundre and that the watre came In suddenly that the most part of them that were
in that galeye were drowned and perisshid with out struck smytyng. After this
hercules came to an ^ther galeye. and there did he meruaylles of arms All
they that he raught with his clubbe were ded or sore hurt / Some he smote the
brains out of the heed. And other he brack legs and arms. hit seemed the
thondre with him / he did so much that each man fled fro him. and there was
no man that withstode him ner durst abide him: When he saw this he put him
forth to search the great affrayes / He leep fro galeye to galeye / And made so
great occisions. that his people by his good ensample habounded in valor of
courage and of puyssance / And the esperyens dymynusshed and lassed And also
they had so much damage. that all thing went against them And than gerion
considering. that he might not but lose and that fortune was enemy unto him He
sowned the retrayte / And so left the battle.

How gerion assailed hercules the second time to fore megida. and how hercules
slew his brethern and vaynquysshid his bataylles / And constraynd geryon to
flee etc:
THan hercules saw his enemies attend to withdwrawe hem / he sowned the
retrayte also for as much as hit was nyghe even And also for as much as he
had enclosed the galeyes of geryon in such wise as they might not return to
his Cite with out passing by him / when the two oostes were withdrawn. Geryon
in the derkest of all the night shipped and went in to the sea / And went to
the cite of valeryte whereof oon of his brethern was king / And put him there
in saeftei in entencion to make the grettest armee that he cowde for to come
upon hercules Hercules after the retrayte he ankred his galeyes upon the river
of gaudiana / And passed there that night / On the morn when he saw that
gerion and his folk were fledd and were not upon the sea with in kennyng he
rowed up unto the Cite of megida. There he took land and assayllid fiersly the
cite / Thassault was aygre and sharp / And deffended hem well the megydains /
but they were so disgarnysshid of men of war that they might not hold hit /
but opend the town to the greeks and yielded hem all in the will of hercules.
Thus was hercules lord and maistre of the pryncipall cite that gerion had / he
entrid in to hit and the greeks with him. There had they good days / the Cite
was well garnysshid with vytayll Syn they departed out of greece. they fond
nowhere so good fortune / What shall I say / hercules held him there a space
of time serching in what place he might find gerion / During this time he
went unto the temple. for to thank the gods / In this temple were many
sepultures garnysshid of right meruayllous historyes. Among all other there
was oon passing rich / ffor the remembrance of gerion was there. as of a king
of fyn gold and was enuyroned with.xxx. kings whose heedes were smyten of.
Hercules abode at this sepulture and demanded of the cytezeyns whereof served
the statues and images so rich A Cytezeyn said to him that there were the
sepultures of the noble men of their royame. And that the king gerion had
brought up that custom to make these sepulcres. for to have remembrance of
them that were vaylliant in arms. fforthermore said that same man as soon as
in this contre a man put any noble man to death / Than he does do make a
remembrance of that deed man on his sepulture: And for as much as king geryon
in his time has slain thretty kings. he has do make this sepulture that ye
see in entencion to be buried here in the end of his days / When hercules had
herd this that the Cytezeyn said / he answered that he held him self happy.
that he had so escaped the swerd of such a tyrant. that had put so many
kings to death / And maad his Orysou^s and his prayers unto the gods After
this he returned to the palace / And there came unto him the messanger of king
geryon / that by the Auctoryte and power of his Maystre commanded him to wide
the cite and the royame. or ellis to make good wacche / Hercules answered that
he was entrid in to the royame and also in to the Cite with strength of Arms.
And that he would not goo out thereof unto the time that oon had taken from him
his swerd and arms by force of Arms / or unto the time that he had put all
the contre in his obeyssance.

THe messanger returned fro megida with this answer unto gerion. And told him
that hercules had answered to him / Geryon was with his two brethern / they took
the words of hercules inpaciently / And swear that they would avenge hem / ffor
to make short work they went to the sea with a right great excersite of men
of arms they rowed and saylled with all the strength they might unto megida /
the wind and fortune suffrid them in few days to come and arryue at the
port of megida / And hercules that was aduertysed of their coming suffrid them
to take land / And let hem rest that day that they came there / they were
well fyfty thousand men / That time that they came a land hit was late / When
they saw that the greeks made no defense at their landing / they said oon to
an other that they durst not come and assaylle hem / And wenyng all to have
won of auantage / And thereupon concluded that on the morn they would assaylle
the cite right erly Upon this conclusion gerion and his brethern pouruered them
of things apperteynyng to the assault / And manassed greatly hercules and the
greeks for to sle them villaynsly / Hercules and his greeks were than in megida
thynkyng on their things / not only in the entenco^n for to deffende them fro
their enemyee / but for to issue out the next day following and for to assaylle
hem by bataill as soon as the night were passed Than a lityll to fore the
sonnerysyng on the morn / hercules made two batailles / In the first he put a
thousand fightyng men And enterprised to conduyte hem. In the second he put
the residue of his armee And made theseus captain of them After this when he
had right well renged his people and set hem in right good orde^nce He
amonested hem to do well her deuoyr / And had entencion to say hem certain
things. but he might not furnysshe hem / ffor that same time gerion and his
brethern and their folk made their Approchis to assaille the cite And maad so
great a bruyt and noise that all about hit redounded etc.

When hercules herd this bruyt / he did do opene the yate. for to behold and
see what new thing was there. And at the issue out he saw his enemies that
hasted hem to come unto the murraill and wallis with ladders and other
habillemes propyce and ne^essarie to make an assault / Than he began to lawhe
in him self And badd his men to follow him / and he went always forth for to
begin the scarmusshe And as soon as the porter had open the yates / Hercules
marched unto the hesperiens bringyng his clubbe with him. Gerion saw hercules
come fro far / / he knew him by his skyn of the lion and by his clubbe / And
shewid him to his brethern. that sore meruailled of him be cause he came allone
upon hem. so here is our mortal adversary said gerion. he is full of over
much pride / and lityll sets by us. Late us assaylle him all three and
destroy him hit is time / all the gold of the world shall not save him /
Hercules with these words came so nyghe the three geantes / that he might well
speak unto them: And escryed them and said / ye evil tyrants. leye down your
engyns apperteynyng to assault / hit is now no time to assaill the cite but hit
behooves you to dispose you to enter in to battle / The bataill is ready /
begin at me and I at you And late us fight to geder till moo come / / with
this words he enhaunsed his clubbe. and discharged the stroke so sore upon oon
of the three brethern that cast his shield to fore the struck / that all
astonyed he bare him to the earth / When gerion and his other brother saw her
brother so born down and beten / they smote with their glayues upon hercules by
great maltalent And so enployed her strength that they brake part of his arms
with these two strokes of the glayues hercules receyuyd more than an honderd
darts upon his body / how be hit the glayues ne the darts were not so hard
temprid that they might perce. enter ne hurt the arms of hercules / Ne
hercules left not to work with his clubbe / but he lift hit up on heghte at
that time And enployed hit upon the second brother of gerion so acertaynly that
coming down fro the coppr of the helm / he all to frusshid and brusid him. and
smote him down to the ground right as an hard and great roche had fall on his
heed etc.

GErion was all affrayed for to see so great a struck / with a wood. yrous and
fires heart he ascryed upon hercules And gaf him so great a struck upon his
helm with his sword. that he maad the fire spring out / but the helm was so
hard that the swerd might not enter / Than was hercules enuyroned with his
enemies / he was smyten in many a place upon his body / the hisperiens desired
sore to see her swerdes and glayues reed with the blood of hercules / but
hercules put him to defense / Joyous of that he might enploye his strength upon
them And when he proved him thu^ upon oon and other / And would suffer none come
nere / than his Arm and Clubbe might areche / And that his enemies more and
more came about him. Ma^on that was neuewe of vlixes issued out of megida with
the thousand men of the battle of hercules / And se^yng so great a people
about hercules and were adcertened that he fought there. He and his people
adressid them thederward in bryngyng so great a bruyt and setting on so
vaylliantly. that in brekyng down all a fore them. came and fond hercules that
he had slain moo than six honderd of his enemies / And that he marched up on
non other thing. They that bare ladders and other engyns were constrained to
cast hem down to the ground and to goo to the bataille. the battle was there
felonnous and hard / And there were knights ynow he slain. Gerion prouyd him
self terribly. his brother that was first beten. after that he was born out of
the prees came unto the field again. And in his coming he maad a great place
among the greeks. he was strong and puyssant / And bare a right heavy guysarme
that the cuttyng was three great foot long. He did meruaylles with this
guysarme. And beat down so many of the greeks. that the noise aroose greatly
about him And this noise flewe to the eeres of hercules. Than left hercules
them that he fought with. And drew unto the noise that proceeded by cause of
the geant / As Soon as he saw the geant / that did with the greeks as he would
/ He was not well content with that guysarme. And he enhaunsed his clubbe and
smote the geant upon the sholdre enployng his strength in such manyere / that
the sholdre and the side he all to brake and bare him down to the ground not
fully ded. but in worse estate than ded / for he might not releue him. And
must needs dye under the feet of the men of arms right myserably:.

AT this time Theseus and hispane with the residue of the greeks came unto the
bataill right Ioyously / they fond their enemies with out araie and without
conduyte / they fourroyed among them plainly / they slew so many that all
the place was convert / Hispan and theseus clefte the heedes of many knyghes
unto the teth / they were right expert in the feet of arms / At their coming
they maad their enemies to recule / And wan upon them with so good fortune /
that by their cause and well doing / Gerion lost moo than thertty thousand
men. In short time the battle was such a boute hercules / that his enemies
wyste never where to save them. And that gerion aduertysed of the death of the
second brother / / turned the back and flewe unto the sea / blowyng his horn /
/ when the hisperyens herd the horn / anon they intended suddenly to put
hem to flight / they that might save them self sauid them with out delay
Hercules theseus and hispan with a boute twelve honderd grekys folowyd them
swyftly they entrid in to some of their ships. and poursiewed gerion. but
they had not maryners so ready as the other had / wherefore they were a lityll
tarried / how be hit as far as they might see hercules poursiewid hem only
with his twelve honderd men.

How hercules poursiewyd geryon. And how he went and vaynquysshid him. and put
him to the death at the poort of the Corongne.
THus ffinysshid the battle for this day to the great damage and dishonor of
gerion And all to the honor and prouffit of hercules. Malion abode in megida
by thordenance of hercules for to keep the greeks that abood there and for to
take the despoill of their enemies / Hercules on that other side saillid and
rowed after gerion. Gerion perceived him and was sore a ferd and fledd all that
ever he might / The flight dured three days / Gerion had good maryners / they
kept hem soueraynly fro the abordyng on the ship of hercules / And they
sayllid by the sea medeterrane fro ryuage to ryuage / fro flood to flood. now
before and now behind But the end was such that on the fourth day. they were
constrained to abide hercules at the bataill upon the sea. or descend to land
at the Couronge in galyce For to flee always the death whereof they were in doubt
they left the sea and took the land at a port ymagenyng that they should well
deffende hem against hercules ffor they were ten against oon. Anon as they had
take land at the poort of the Curongne / they took and renged hem about the
poort for to defend the ryuage / which was strong for to take / And than
gerion warned his men sayyng / lo now is here the our or the day that we
must dye or overcome our enemies. ffortune has don to us the worste she can.
She was wont to make all estrangers to tremble to fore our glayues. Now she
makes us to tremble to fore a right litill nombre of people / Alas what shame
is this / Trewly the shame is great and we ought to have right great repreef so
to do / syn we be in this point there is no way but for to avenge this shame /
if we avenge us at this time / we shall recouure our worship and honor / In
our feet heth right good hoope. for fortune has brought us in to a right good
poort / and me seems that she wole reyse us a gayn and make us vayncuers of
our adversaries / late us now defend the poort. Avenge we our blood. avenge we
our sorrow. avenge we our damage / hit must needs be done etc:.

IN the mean while that gerion encoraged thus his folk. Hercules and his
felawship ro^wed so nyghe the poort. that they were come to strokes smytyng.
The hisperiens cast upon hercules than round stones. darts with sharp yrons
on the end. speres and glayues. Against this the greeks took their sheldes and
couerd them and put hem in deuoyr for to win the poort. But the castyng of
the hisperyens was so mortal. that hit constrained their enemies to abide and
not to aproche the poort. They had at this poort great habondance of stones.
The hisperiens kept well the entree more than three ours that the greeks could
find no way ne facion to remedy hit / At the end of three ours hercules
right sorofull to see his men tarried so / he thought that he would enter in to
a lityll boot. and adventure him self allone to win the poort Than he that
doubted no struck of any mortal man entrid in to the lityll boot. And stered
hit himself with help of the wind that he had at his auantage and pullid up
the sayll / And puttyng all in adventure / as fast as he might he brought the
boot unto the poort where he came by his hardynesse / but this was at such time
as he receyuyd moo than a thousand strokes with stones / And that his sayll
that stood over end by force of the wind / was smyten full of hooles and the
cords broken the maste overthrown. and the boot well nyghe fyld with stones /
Notwithstanding all these things hercules blemysshid not at all fro his
entreprise / he passed by all the strokes of his enemies. He did so much that
he took land And that he put him among the hisperiens. and there he began to
smite with his clubbe on the right side and on the lift side endlonge and
overthwart in such habondance of prowess that all the place was reed of
their blood and of their brains / Theseus and hispan and fifty of the greeks
best armed by the example of hercules took a light boot and adventured hem self
to win the poort / Hercules was right at the mouth of the poort / he saw
theseus come And for to make him have passage he ran hither and theder / And
did so great hurt to the hisperiens / that with out great danger / they
took land and sprange out of the boot. Than was thassault boot and boyllyng.
Geryon came to the descente of theseus and well three honderd of his men that
followed him / All they smote and leyde upon the greeks. of the fyfty they
slew ten. When theseus and hispan saw that their hertes began to swelle /
They encoraged hem self And persid thassamble of geryon: Against oon man that
was slain of theyres they slew fifty of the hesperiens And theer they used so
her prowesses / that they did there the grettest meruaylles of the world by
arms:.

GEryon deyde for sorrow of that he might not come to his above of the greeks
He and his men were Aygre as tygres enfamysshid. The greeks were right ferme
and strong as olyphantes / Their strokes were great they ne doubted death ne
swerd but put all in adventure / The bataill was strong / the greeks resseyuyd
many a wound / Alleway theseus and hispan by their meruayllous prowesses sauyd
them fro the death / And maad hem pass by the great prees where as was
hercules. Hercules that left not to smite / had great gladness in him self
when he saw theseus and hispan and their forty felawis / their coming cost
to gerion the death of a thousand men and more. ffor hercules for to encorage
his men and for to be to hem an ensample of well doing / he adiousted to his
deeds strength upon strength and prowess upon prowess confoundyng his enemies
so dredfully and terribly / drawyng hem toward the sea. that they that saw him
^ would well that they had been in their moders wombes / And that in fleyng they
were in haste destressid they beat each other in the sea / And so they slew
each other them self Than was gerion smyten to the heart with great ire medlid
with Inpacience / he put him self in the prees / And smote not only upon
hercules / but upon the felawis of theseus / he smote the first upon the helm
that he clefte his head unto the teth. After he assaylled another and bare him
to the earth so astonyed that he wyste neur where he was / Consequently he
deliuerid there a right great assault suddenly to the greeks. that he dyed his
swerd with their blood. and that the greeks were constrained to make a right
great cry for to have socours:

AT this point the greeks that were left in the galeyes / entrid in to the
poort and took land lightly / When than hercules and his folk herd the cry
that his men made / he ran theder to the rescousse / and made about hem a new
noise great and anguysshous Gerion knew anon that the noise came be cause of
hercules. ffor he saw him come and smite in the thikkest of the prees / ffor
to save him self than he took his folk and fested hem in encoragyng and had
there so great pain / that for oon struck that hercules gaf him with his
clubbe by adventure / he was constrained to depart fro the prees. and to
withdraw him a part with them that were weary / for to take his breath: Gerion
brought to his extremyte. cast his eyes upon the meddle and fyghtyng and saw
the greeks mount upon the port And expose them unto the battle / After he
saw how they brought many of his men to vttrance. and tht he might not resist
hit / All his losses came to fore his eyes. And than he began to syghe and said
with a dolorous heart alas what is the mutabilite of fortune. and what shall be
the end of my days / flateresse fortune what have thou thought / All the
honors that thou have given unto me here to fore / redou^de now to my shame.
when thou have sent and parted to me so many goods / Wherefore have thou sent
to me hercules this is the enemy of all my glory now all quenchid / and fro a
shynyng name has brought me unto a name all full of derknes At least if thou
have given him suffisance / late him not come after me by his horrible deeds
all my veins be remplisshid with feures. mine heart murdrith in es boilling of
ire / O what great vnhapp syn hit must needs be that I be Infortunat / I shall
verily dye of the clubbe that I have seen my brethern dye of / or I shall take
vengeance / Gerion all out of his wit with these words put him in the
prees cryyng geryon. geryon. for to make his men to courage hem self Thus cryyng
and sekyng hercules he put to death many greeks / he was all furious his glayue
was died with the blood of his enemies / In the end he came unto hercules And
with his swerd so dyed he smote him sore. hercules was all weary. ffor with out
cessing he had hold the battle by the space of four owres And had receyuid
upon his arms so many strokes that no man cowde tell. This notwithstanding he
fled not at all gerion but came to him Ioyously And fought against him with so
great force that all they that saw hit meruaylled / And that after many
strokes smyten of gerion and of hercules / Hercules smote him oon struck so
great that he all to frusshed gerion and smote out the brayn of his heed and
smote the helm upon his sholders that he fill down ded among the ded men in
such wise arrayed that he abood there ded:.

How Hercules founded the Cite of the Coro^igne upon the tomb of gerion:.
SVche was the end of the unhappy life of gerion the tyrant / he deyde in like
wise as the two brethern did by the clubbe of hercules / when the hisperyens
saw him brought to that sorrow as for to taste the bitter morsel of death /
all left their arms All they escried sorofully the death of gerion. And fill
all in desperance / that oon let him to be slain and that other fled by
deserts by montaignes by ryuage of the sea And turned all in disconfyture /
when hercules had espied hem so disrayed / he thanked the gods / And began
for to poursiewe his enemies / The poursuyte dured unto the even. The greeks
fyld the feldes the montaignes / And the ryuage of the sea with the blood of
them that fled / When the night was come hercules and the greeks withdrewe
hem in to their galeyes And ete and drank such as they had and made Joyous
chere The hurt men were remembrid and conforted them in their victory / the
werye men forgate the labor that they had done. They rested hem after their
trauayll. and passed the night over / When hit was day on the morn hercules
issued out of his galeye / And beholding the port. him seemed that a cite should
stand well there And said that he would make oon there / And concluded to
begin hit / He sent unto all places where he wiste that any people were there
aboutes. And gaf to each man in knowleche that he was in will to make a cite
there And that the first person that would come for to put hand thereto should
have the domynaco^n This thing was known in all galyce / Many came theder. but
a woman named coroigne was the first that came And therefore hercules gaf unto
her the domynaco^n and made to begin the cite and named hit coroigne / In
remembrance fo the victory that he had there / upon the body of gerion he
founded a tour / And by his art composed and made a lamp brennyng contynually
day and night with out puttyng of any thing thereto. Which brennyd afterward
by the space of three honderd year / more over upon the somette or top of the
tour / he maad an image of copre lokyng in to the sea and gaf him in his hand a
myrrour having such virtue. that if hit happend that any men of war were on
the sea in entencion to do any harm to the Cite / suddenly their Oost and
their coming should appear in this said myrrour And that dured unto the time of
Nabugodonosor that was aduertysed of the properte of the myrrour / fyllyd his
galeyes with white things and grene bows and leeues / that hit seemed a wode
and that in the myrrour ne apered none other thing but a wood Wherefore the
Coroignyens not knowing but that her myrrour showed to hem garnysshid not them
with men of arms. like as they had been accustomed to do when their enemies
came / And thus Nabugodonosor took the cite in a morenyng and destroyed the
myrrour and the lamp / When than this tour was maad. hercules made than to
come theder all the maidens of the contre And did hem do make a solemn feste
in the remembrance of the death of gerion / And after he departed frothens. and
went unto megida where were presentyd to him an honderd oxen the fairest of
the world.

How hercules assaylled the king Cacus and had bataill against him. and ouercam
him / And how cacus began to tyrannyse in Italye etc:.
AFter this conqueste as hercules intended to people and enhabite this new
country / tidings came to him. that in the cite of Cartagene / A king and
geant reigned named Cacus which was passing evil and full of tyranny / and
had slain by his cursidnes the kings of Aragon and of Nauerre. their wives and
their children And possessid her seignouryes and also held in subieccion all
the country in to ytaly: Hercules receyuyd right Ioyously these tidings / and
said that by the playsir of the gods he shall assaye if he may take vengeance
of the death of the kings of arragon and of nauare / Than he disposed him unto
this works. and having an appetite to correct the king cacus / as soon as
his excersite might be ready. he went unto the royame of castylle. Where as was
the king cacus in the cite of cartagene. that stood beside a montaigne named
monchaio. And passid by many roiames that did him obeyssance. for his virtuous
renomee: but when he came to approach cartagene. the king cacus came against him
with desobeysance. and in arms ffor he had been aduertysed of his coming: And
as he entered in to the frontiers. he sent unto him oon of his knights that
said to him these words that follow Hercules open tyrant that haste the heart
gretter than thy body And that thou would assaille the heuenes for to
conquer: if the gods had given the wings for to flee as the byrddes have:
if thou seek pees and love unto the king cacus thy semblable in complexion and
fortune. I salewe the in his name / and if thou come otherwise unto him as his
enemy / I the deffye in his name. And in no wise be thou so hardy to enter in
to his country. And if thou enter. know thou that thou shall find in cacus
and in the castyllyens oon so hard an encountre that of the evil adventure
shall no man of thy company be quyte etc.

A Night answed hercules what some ever ye be ye show not that ye have the
heart of noblesse / ffor hit is foul to all men. and in especyall to a noble
man to myssaye or speak evil of another man: ye have called me an open and a
tyrant publicque And also ye have compared me unto the tyrant cacus / I answer
you to this Article. that I am no tyrant / But a destroyer of tyrants / And
therefore ye shall return again unto Cacus And sygnefye to him that I have
Intencion for to show what hate we have unto tyrants / And that in few days
he may prove upon us the hard encountre / whereof I have now receyuid the
menaces / With this answer the castylian departed fro the presence of hercules.
and returned unto the king cacus / And told him word for word what hercules
had said to him / When Cacus had herd all this / he was all abaisshid /
Notwithstanding that he was a strong geant and a puyssant / and that he had
never founden a man strenger than he was him self / ffor the renome of hercules
was than so great by the vnyuersel^ world / that the most strong the most
assewryd in arms and most happy / doubtyd him and tremblyd heryng speak of
his deeds / how be hit cacus took courage in him self / And in musyng the
abaisshement In the presence of his nobles he said / Blessid be these next
hasty days that nature and fortune shall bring to us / for to make the proef
of our force and strength So behooves that Castyle and secylle show thexcesse
of their arms for to deffende the king cacus fro the claws of his enemies /
And hit is of necessite semblably that the king cacus for his people desploye
and put forth the abisme of his strength Now forth on my brethern and friends
we ben comen to the wa^rre. The greeks come upon castile with out any quarele
/ late us goo against hem and fight for our contre / the birds fight that oon
against that other for her nestes. and the dombe bestes for her cauernes Nature
entroduceth hem so for to do / if we have the same nature. the time is come
that we ought so to do etc:.

When the castelians and the aragonnoys that were there herd cacus so speak
they preysid greatly his courage And answered all by oon wys / that they were ready
to assaylle their enemies. With this answer the king cacus did dislogge his
Oost that he had there on the feldes / And went forth against hercules the
straytest way that he cowde / The king cacus than put on the way desiryng
sore to find hercules. Hercules on that other side came than against cacus /
they went so long that oon against that other. that sone after they saw each
other nyghe a place where hercules founded after a Cite which was named
Terracene. As Soon as they saw each other they began to make great Joy And to
make showtes and cries / After they renged hem in ordenance of bataill and
marched that oon against that other / hootly and sharply. that they fillid the
air suddenly with shot of arowes cast of stones and of darts. At the
beginning of this bataylle the castelyens bare hem valiantly And there were
money of their party slain. moo by hardynes than for dread. ffor they put hem
to fer forth And they doubted not the shot of the greeks / that shot on hem
so sore and so thykke that all the ground was made reed of their blood. And
that the casteliens which were so far goon and sore chauffid must need
resort back again to their felawis. When the king Cacus saw his folk so
sore bestad and so hard. that they reculed fro the shot of the greeks / he
had great sorrow in his heart And wist never where to entende for to entretene
and hold his bataill / Some fled / and other reculid and went aback And
other fill down to the earth ded or sore hurt / The battle dured long in
this point allway to the sorrow of king cacus / but in the end the shot of
the greeks faylled / And the Castelyens with cacus recouerid new strength in
this manyer / that they came to fight hand of hand with swerdes / And that they
shed and spradde largely the blood of them of tire and of an^one which were
in the first front of the battle of hercules

THe noise aroose great there / there were many sheldes broken and many skynnes
of lyous cut in pieces. There as cacus approchid hit seemed that the tempest
was / he was great. strong and fires and oultragious in smytyng / each of his
strokes was the death of a greek / In the end. he did so much that the cries
of them that were a boute him mountyd so high in the air / that the
casteliens had well wend to have won all. And began to make Joy for their
good fortune in escryyng the greeks to the death. But even in like wise as a
right clear day is otherwhile troblid by an auenturous black cloud / semblably
by the allonli coming of hercules that came than to the rescousse All her Joy
was troblid and turned in to mortal loss. ffor the mortal arm of hercules
enuertued than so terribly that he beat down the casteliens like as a mowar
with a sith beat down the grass in a medowe / when cacus saw hercules so
foundre and beat down his men All the blood in him changed. Than his blood so
meuyd and as a coragious man presentid him self to fore the front of hercules
And smote him with his glayne so sore and hard that he clefte his shield in
two partis The casteliens seeing the shield of hercules flee by pieces thought
anon that cacus had slain and put to death hercules / and than made a cry for
Joy / but hit dured not long / ffor hercules lift up his arms with his
clubbe And smote cacus upon the comble of his helm by such strength / that
hit seemed to cacus that he saw an honderd thousand candellis. or that he had
be smyten down with the gretteste roche of spain. This notwithstanding cacus
abood standing in his place / and escryed hercules unto the death / and smote
him with all his might At this assaillyng the castelyens hopyng in the fortune
of cacus: all they assaillid hercules / Hercules was gone so far among his
enemies. that he was allone from all his company / When he herd that cacus
escryed him to death And saw that the casteliens assayllid him and came to him
fro all sides. He had his heart all fyld with solas / and abandonned the durete
and hardness of his skyn of the lion to the swerdes of them all / without
reuengyng him save only against cacus. Thus began the battle between hercules
and cacus. their strokes were great and ferdfull with out mesure. Cacus
fought in the spryrite of a tyrant chauffid. and desired sore to overcome
hercules for to tyrannyse and tryumphe above him / Hercules fought in a
virtuous heart founded and nourisshid in virtue / and as enemy of vices / he
assayllid this vicyous king / Both two were great and fyers and strong of
great corages / But certes when they had both tasted ynowh each other / at
long the strokes of hercules were so great and so peysant. that the sholdres
of cacus ne his heed might not bear ne had the puyssance to sustain them So
the end was such that after their battle had dured two ours. Cacus left
him for he might no more suffer him but fled and went his way etc.

When hercules saw that cacus fled / he daygned not to follow after / This
notwythstandyng for to have the victory of this Journey he began to hew on
the castelians. aragonnoys and such other as he might find / for he left no
man a live to fore him young ne old. feeble ne strong. Hyspan and the other of
his side made her feetes of arms to floryssh and shine. The battle was sharp
than / the greeks dowblid and redoublid their strokes and slew many of their
enemies / In the end when cacus had take his breath. he put him again in to
medlee at oon side where his folk fledd and maad hem to tarry. smytyng and
betyng the greeks more terribly than he had done to fore whereof the cries aroos
so high there that hercules than fightyng on an other side herd the cry And
than he ran theder at all adventure And anon as he espied cacus he went a
fore him and brake the prees and smote down so sore / that cacus knew hercules
/ but he durst not abide him. but fled again with evil hap And than the
greeks maad a cry and a Joyous noise. that all the castelians fled. some
here and some there to the great hurt and loss of cacus / ffor of all his
people. there left no moo but fifty which sauyd hem self upon the mount of
Monchayo which stood there by. But that was with great effusion of blood of
them of castile. that wend to have mounted up with the other / that seemed that
there had been a great spring of blood. that the cauernes in the valeye were
remplenesshid with blood / how be hit cacus for to flee well / sauyd himself
and fyfty of his men upon the montaigne as the cronicles of spaigne reherce /
when he was above and in sewr place / he returned and saw down to the foot of
the hill / He saw there so many castelyans. that with out nombre were ded or
in danger for to dye / he had great sorrow than at his heart not for pity / but
for dispyte And for the danger that he saw ready where by he must pass.
Anon after he saw fro far in the champaigne and each quarter and place
there all covert of them of his party and of their blood. Also he saw them
that fled taken and brought to the pestelence of the other / These terms
consideryd. the desolaco^n of his domynaco^n and the punyco^n of his tyranny
was to him all euydent ^ he tought than that hercules should lightly conquer
all the country. ffor they obeyed him by tyranny and not by naturell love /
this notwithstanding. he despaired not. how well that he saw all the
puyssance of his men destroyed by the clubbe of hercules And knew that he
might no more regne in that country / for all was ded in the bataill / but than
he returned unto his science And thus as sorrowful as he was he entrid in to a
hows that he had there But first he co^mysed twelve of his men to keep the
passage of this mount which was also strayte and narow that there might goo
up but oon man at ones

When than hercules and his men had put to death all their enemies / Hercules
would assaylle the roche. And began to mount and goo upon the degrees or
steyres / but than suddenly they that kept the paas / cast upon him great
stones / In so great habon dance that of force he was constrained to descend /
When hercules saw that he must withdraw him / he obeyed fortune / but
notwithstanding he made there avowe tht he would never depart fro the foot of
the roche unto the time that he had constrained cacus to descend and come down
by famyne or other wise / This auowe made. hercules came unto the foot of the
hille / where the oc^ision and slaughter had been And made the place to be made
clean and purgid of the ded bodies and of the blood of them that there lay ded
/ After he did do make his tente of bows and leeues And his bed of fressh
grass And commanded that each man should logge there At that time the night came
and the day faillid. The greeks were weary of that that they had all day
labored in arms And would fayn have rest. and maad good chiere of that they
had. And after that they had ordained and set their wacche. as well for to
keep the oost as for to keep the roche. that cacus come not down / they leyde
hem down upon the grass in such wise as they were acustomed when they were in
war / and so slepte and passid that night:.

IN the morn hercules deperted his oste in tweyne And sent hispan with oon of
them in to arragon and navarre / And he abode there with the other / Hispan in
the name of hercules was Ioyously receyuyd of the nauarroys and of the
aragonnoys / And they made to him all obeyssance. knowlechyng hercules to be
their lord and the most virtuous prince that was in the weste / when hispan
had all subdued as said is he returned unto hercules / Hercules lay yet still
to fore monchayo And there held cacus in such subieccion that he myht not
issue / Cacus and his folk were than in great myschief of vytayll And they wist
not what to ete ne to drink / they deferryd as long as they might / hopyng
that hercules should anoye him to be there so long / But in the end when their
vytaill failed / and they saw that they must needs aventure hem self to come
down / Cacus by his science made certain secret things to go down in to their
stomakes And after put thereto the fire and taught all the other to do so And
than suddenly as they felt the fire issue out of their mowthes and the fumee
and smoke in such habondance that hit seemed all on a light fire / Than by the
counceyll of cacus. they adventured hem self to descend a down in rennyng and
castyng fire and fumee so Impetuousement / that hercules and the greeks wend
that hit had been an orage of lyghtnyng of the heaven And had burnt the
montaigne So they made him place / ffor hit was a thing for to make men asore
basshid / And thus they escaped the danger of hercules at that time. ffor
during all that day the roche was full of smoke and fumee that cacus had made /
And the smoke was so materyell. that hit seemed tenebres or derkenes.

When cacus and his folk were thus escaped and passid the oost of hercules and
of the greeks / Hercules was than the most wise Clerk that was in the world.
And that all his passetemps he enployed in study he took his books And began
to practyse how and by what rayson he was descended from the roche / he read
and turned many leeves / But all thing well considerid he fond not that this
fumee came of naturell thing / Whereof he had great meruayll / Than he sent for
Athlas that allway was loggyd behind the ooste for to be solytayre. When
Athlas was come he shewid him the smoke and fumee that yet dured / Than he
told of the lyghtnyng that was passid by the oost / And demanded him his
oppynyon / Athlas knew incontinent the fumee / and answered to hercules /
Certes my sone thou art more sharp in science than I. for mine age may not
atteyne to so high things as thy yongthe / How be hit for as much as I know
the growyng of this thing long time paste. I shall tell the / that I shall
say / thou shall find true as I suppose Thou shall understand that this
fumee is a thing artefysiall and maad by the craft of wlcan that was fader of
cacus / Which was an exellent maystre in this science / And was the Inventour
thereof. He maad certain montaignes in cecylle to brenne* and shall alleway
contynuelly brenne unto the end of the world. Cacus which can the art and
craft of his fader / has maad this fumee: And for to escape fro thy hands.
he is descended with his felawshp in the form of a lyghtnyng or tempest / And
thus thy strength is deceyuyd by his science.

When hercules understood this that Athlas had said to him. He was greatly es
meruailled of the science of cacus / and might not believe hit / Than for to
know the truth / he took his clubbe / And went up through the smoke or
fumee. unto the top of the roche. Sekyng cacus / but he fond there nether
best ne man: Than he returned unto Athlas. And lawghyng confessid to him that
he hadd said troth. And said that he would make no poursiewt after him / for as
much as he was so gentylmanly escaped / This day they pa^^^d over in spekyng
and comynyng of Cacus and of his fader wlcan / The day following when the smoke
and fumee was goon and vanysshd away Hercules began to behold the Contre / And
saw that hit was comodious and ffertyle. And to the end that there should ever
be remembrance and memory of him He founded there a cite / which he named
Teracone / for as much as he gaf this country to the sone of the king of
Ancone / And there he made him dwell with his people and with them of Tire.
Hercules after this foundation went to the Cite of Salamanque / and for as
much as hit was well enhabited and peupled He would make there a solempnell
estudye. And did do make there in the earth a great round hooll in manner of
an estudye And he set there in the vii scyences lyberall with many other
books. After he made them of the contre to come theder for to study / but
they were so rude and dulle. that their wits could not compryse any connyng
of science / And than for as much as hercules would depart on his voyage. And
would also that this study were mayntened. He did do make an image or statue
of gold unto his semblance and lykenes. Which he did do set up on heyght in
the mids of his study upon a pyller. And made so by his craft and Art /
that all they that came to fore this image for to have declaracion of any
science. To all pourposes And of all scyences the image answered and enseygned
and taught the scoliers and estudients / in such wise as hit had been hercules
in his propre person / The renomee of this Study was great in all the
Contree And this estudye dured after unto the time that saint Jacques convertyd
Spain unto the Christian faith. Fro salamanque hercules departed and went in to
cateloygne / And founded there the cite of Barseloyne / which is a right good
cite / And fynably when he had accomplisshid all these things. He sent Athlas
home again in to his country / but he held by him all his writers. ffor he
louyd books above all the Richesse of the world. After he would give leave unto
philotes for to return unto his country. But philotes refused his congie and
leave And said to him that he would serve him all his life / And that he reputed
his felycyte more great to be in his seruyse / than for to govern the contre
that fortune had put in his hand. Hercules after this callid hispan and said
to him. Hispan I know thy wit and thy vaylliance. I have found the alleway
wise and true. Thou art a man of auctoryte and well known in these marches.
I make and constitute the king over all this country / And give unto the none
other charge but to love virtue and to ensiewe honor and worship / When
Hispan herd the gift that hercules made to him He fill down at his feet. and
thankid him And after excused him of so great worshipp / But hercules said to
him that he would that hit should be so / And delivered to him certain nombre of
people of his felawshyp for to scrue him. After he maad him to depart with
great syghys and sorrow / And Hispan went than by all the contrees tht
hercules had conquered there upon geryon and upon cacus. And fro than forthon
the country was named Spaigne after his name Whereof I wole now tarry of this
conqueste of spaigne / And shall come to speak of the arms that hercules did
in lombardye and of the death of Cacus.

How Hercules fought against the enleuen geantes of Cremone And how he
vaynquysshid them.
THere ben now the kings. the Empereurs. the sowdans and the Princes that men
may speak of the virtuous liberalite of them. semblable or like unto that of
hercules / The men at this day fight oon against another And make conquestes
ynowhe / but they attrybue them unto their synguler proffit. They resemble not
unto hercules / ^ that never fought but for the common well of the world / O
noble Hercules / ffor to follow and poursiewe my matter. When he maad hispan
king of all the regyon of hisperye / that now is named espaygne. He sent for
his Oxen his kyen and Calves And after departed fro barselone and took his way
unto Lombardye. He went so long on his Journey that he came nyghe unto the
cite of Cremone / Which is but a day Journey fro Melane. There were than in
this Cite.xi. geantes great out of mesure / These xi. geantes were all brethern
And fones of Neleo the sone of Saturn / And they callid hem self all kings
of this Cite. They held all estate royal / how be hit their renomes were but
small and little / And for that cause they were theuys and robbid their
neyghebours And made hem allday war. When than they knew that hercules
approchid their Cite Anon they assemblyd their counceyll to geder / And
demanded that oon / that other / if they should suffer hercules for to enter in
to their Cite / All were of oon oppynyon that they should not Resseyve him /
And that they would send unto him oon of them which was named Nestor that he
should not enter in to cremone / but if he first had vaynqusshid in b^tayll the
xi brethern / Nestor at the commandment of the geantes departed fro Cremone and
went unto hercules. whom he fond with his little armee but three mile fro
cremone. Than he spoke to hercules and said to him Sire I have ten brethern
kings of cremone / that have sent me unto the for as much as they be
aduertysed that thou entrest in to their domynacion And charge the by me. that
they will give unto the no passage of cremone. but if thou first overcome them
oon after an other in battle / And therefore chese whether thou will have the
battle or ellis to return again and leave this viage / I aduertyse the that
they be all geantes more great and more puyssant than I am / Sire knight
answered hercules I have taken my way for to pass by cremone / Late the geantes
know that hercules has Intencion to speak to them more ner / as he that
dredeth not ne fereth their accustomed tyrannyes / which I must delyuere the
world of by feet of arms And for as much as to the end that they presume not
that I have any doubt or dread of them in any manerlye shall say to them that
I will not fight with them ten. oon after another / but all attones to gyder
and you with hem / if ye will accompanye you with hem. And for to do so they
shall find me ready to morn erly by the morrow:.

HErcules with these words made his people to abide and rest there for that
night / And Nestor returned to his brethern and said to them / My brethern I
have spoken to hercules and have exposed to him your commandment / he has
answered to me of a right high and plain courage that he woll fygte with us to
morn Not oon after another / but with us all attones / And for to speak plainly
of him He has the semblante of a man to be virtuous in Arms and garnysshid
with prowess he is a prince mewre and of great conduyte / Dispose you well hit
behooves to furnyssh him the battle. Certes the battle shall be perylous.
ffor he is myghtely membrid and as great as oon of us / but me thinks that he
may not compare ne preuaylle against us.xi. / and that he may not escape fro our
forces / but that we shall persshe him with our glayues what so^m ever force or
strength is in him. The geantes so heeryng him preyse hercules. had great
meruayll of him And might not believe nestor of that / that he had reported that
he would fight with all to geder attones. ffor there was none of them all. but
he thought him self strong ynowhe for hercules. Than they axed of Nestor. And
demanded him if he were sewer to have well understand that / that hercules
said unto him that he would fight against hem all attones / Nestor answered ye /
And that he had herd him say hit in his propre person. With this answer
they concluded that on the morn they should Arm them all / And that they would
goo to the field for to fight against hercules if he came against hem. Oon of
the geantes said than unto his brethern. To morn shall be the day of our glory
and worshypp / We shall vaynquysshe. the vaynquysshour of the Monstres: Late us
make good chiere / Brother answered Nestor there in is no doubt but that we shall
overcome and bring to utterance him tht ye speak of / but so much shall our
glory be the less that we shall be.xi. against oon. well said that other if in
fightyng against us.xi. we shall have the less honor / late us every man fight
for him self. Brother answered nestor if ye had seen and herd him as I have / ye
should not be so hardy as ye show semblant / he is all anoder man than ye wene
/ Keep you at the offer that he has maad at the left hit is better to have
the most prouffit and less honor in such a caas / In these deuyses they
passed all that day / After they went to rest / When the our was come on the
morn erly / they aroos and adoubed them the best wise they could. After they
sent oon of their men unto hercules for to wete if he would say any thing /
But as soon as the messanger issued out of the gate. the first thing that he
saw. was a geant armed meruayllously. the messanger abode than and auysed him
a lityll After he had auysed him he went unto the geant armed. And axid him
what he was / I am hercules said the geant / what wole ye say or have / said
the messanger / I will say said hercules that the geantes of Cremone have no
cause for to let me the passage of their cite And for as much as they did
me to wete yesterdaye that if I would have passage / hit behooved me to
vaynquissh them oon after another in the field by bataill I am comen hither in
hope to win the paas. And ne demand other thing but for to see them in
arms for to fight with them all to gider attones to the end to have sooner
done. Wherefore I pray you to goo to them / and signefie to hem my coming. And
that they haste them:.

THhe messanger with these words returned unto the geantes And told them what
he had found when the geantes knew that hercules was all ready in the field
they all took their glayues and their habillemens of war / And departed fro
the cite / Adressyng them against hercules. Hercules was than allone in the
place. The men and women of cremone went upon the wallis and towers for to see
the battle And philotes with other noble men of the greeks were upon an hill
far ynowh fro the place where hercules was abidyng the geantes Certes hit was
a fair fight to see the coming of the.xi. geantes. they were all well apoynt
and well garnysshid of helmes enryched with gold and stones They were great and
strong all of oon mesure. they were berded and had fires contenances they came
on and marchid sharply. And by aspre courage when they came nyghe to hercules
upon half a bow shot / they escryed him all to death. and made a cry so
great that the walls of the cite re^ounded After they ran against the assewrid
prince like as they had been ^yons Hercules heeryng these cries and seeing their
course on foot fermly he abode them lyftyng up his clubbe over his heed / When
hit came to thassamble. hit seemed well that the geantes should have all to
frusshid him with their glayues. ffor they smote upon him so desmesurably that
their tronchons and the pieces flewe in to the air / Their strokes were great /
hercules suffered hem and beheld what power they had But when they had made
their assayes upon him / hercules made his assaye upon hem And with his clubbe
smote oon of the geantes upon his helm. that he all to frusshid not only his
helm but also his heed tht he fill down suddenly ded / When the other ten
geantes saw that her brother was so ded of oon struck. they had great sorrow
and their blood was strongly meuyd. Natu^re amonested them to take vengeance.
They did that in hem was / And assayllid eygrely on all sides hercules. And
thus began the battle between hercules and the geantes Hercules ne dredde not
/ struck of glayue / of spear. ne of polaxe. his skyn of the lion was hard and
strong his strength was stable / his clubbe bare all And so hit was need /
great were the strokes that they gaf each other. The geantes did all their
might. and gaf strokes ynowhe to hercules. but they could never perce the skyn
of the lion hit was so hard / But yet was his clubbe more harder / The geantes
meruailled of the constance and puyssance of hercules. As Soon as hercules lift
up his clubbe for to smite on them. his enemies that were subtle lepe a side.
and other while brake his strookes / how be hit he did so much that in less
than an our he slew four of them and the other seven fought afterward by
such vigor / that the more he smote hem with his clubbe / the more mortal he
fond hem and fires etc:.

THe battle was terryble and hard. ffor the geantes were strong and well had
used the mestier of arms And great pain had they to save them. and to avenge
the blood of their brethern and for to have worship of the battle. And they
said that they were Infortunat when they might not over come oon man allone. ne
mate him. In fightyng they helped and conforted each other and they had all
good courage / But what prouffited them the great nombre of brethern. and what
auailled hem their coragious strokes when they were approchyng their death /
Hercules was always hercules. He reioyss^d him in the flote of his enemies / He
conforted him self in fortune / ffortune helped him he did meruaylles on all
sides. Well could he fight / / and well defended he him All that he did was
well done. All that the other did and brassid was naught worth.
Notwithstanding they were mighty and hardy / But the lukke and good hap of
hercules was not to be broken. ne his clubbe could not be destroyed. But he
tryumphed and more was his puyssance to sustain the furcurs of his
adversaries. than their might was to charge him with their strokes. O
meruaill^us strength and might of a man His puyssance was not of a man but of
an ellephant His skyn of the lion seemed that hit had been tempred with quyk and
hard stele / his body seemed more constant against the cuttyng glayues of all
his evil willars / than is an andue^d or a stedy against the strokes of many
hamers or marteaul^ / There was no struck of his enemy that him greuyd / he
took great playsir in the battle seeing him self among so many geantes. He
was greatly reioyssed And there was no thing him greuyng but the declynyng of
the day / which began to faylle / At this our when the son withhelde her
rays and turned in to the weste / hercules would make an end and speed his
battle / The geantes began to cesse for to smite. ffor fro the morning unto
the euenyng they had fought with out any cessyng. And hercules envertued him
self in such wise that smytyng upon oon and other being about him hard and
sharply. Whereof hit befell so that of some he enfoundred and frusshid helmes
and heedes And of the other he brake the Arms and Sides meruayllously and gaf
so many great strokes that fynably he beat down / and all to frusshed hem all /
reseruid nestor which fled away when he saw the disconfiture / and therm
did he wisely. ffor all his brethern were there slain by the hand of
hercules etc.

THan they of Cremone saw their lords ded / they had sone maad an end of
their weeping and sorrow. for they had been to hem hard and troblous At the end
of this bataill they assemblid to counceyll / when they saw that hercules had
won the battle. And concluded to geder / that they would yield hem to
hercules and put them in his mercy / With this conclusion they issued out of
the gates in great nombre. And came unto hercules which was thoo vaynqueur of
his enemies / ffirst they kneled to fore him down to the ground. Secondly they
prayed and required of him mercy: And thirdly they abandonned to him their ^yte
and their goods / and said to him that they would hold him for lord during
their life / hercules that was pietous and gentle unto them that were meke and
humelid them self / receyuyd the Cremonyens in to his grace and maad hem to
rise and stand up. And after sent for them of his ooste / when they were come
he brought hem in to cremone. where great Joy was maad unto them. ffor they
were glad of the death of the geantes. And there ne was man. woman. ne child /
that ne thanked the gods:.

By this manyer was hercules king of cremone and enriched with new title of
victory / The first night that he entrid in to this cite he restid him and his
people: And also were they well refresshid and right well fested and served of
vitayll / On the morn he did do bring in to the cite the bodies of the
geantes that were ded And did do bury them worshipfully / And syn founded
upon them a right great tour and high: And upon the tour he set.xi. images
or statues of metal after the faco^n of the geantes that he had slain in
remembrance of his victory:.

AFter the edifficaco^n of this tour / Hercules left in Cremone folk for to
govern them And departed thens for to goo further forth in to the contre / He
studied always and was never idle / he studied so much that he could make the
fire arteficiall as well as cacus / and fond the remedies against the same What
by arms as by his science he gate a right great loos and p^^y^yng in ytalye.
He went in to many places And ouerall where he came or went / me did him
honor and reverence. What shall I make long process / with out great
adventure. he went so far that he came unto a cite standing nyghe the mount
Auentyn. where reigned a king named Euander / which receyuyd him solempnly.
Hit is to wete that when Cacus fledd fro monchay^ as said is unto this mount.
He came in to ytake all displaisant to have lost his seignourie Than he gaf leave
to deperte fro him to all his servants and all despaired allone he went to
the mount Auentyn in an euenyng / Where he ^as constrained to withdraw him
theder for he doubted much hercules. When he was comen above on this hill / he
fond there a great cave And there he went in with out soper And than he
began to be disconforted greatly and bitterly and said Alas now am I exiled and
banysshid out of all my seignouries and lordshipp is Now have I no socours ne
comfort of person / I dare not name me king. where I was wont by my name
make kings to tremble. Alas all is turned and reuersid I have no thing to ete
/ ner wot not where to logge but if hit be with the bestes. O pour king.
where is any man so unhappy as I / I am so Infortunat and unhappy. that I dare
not be seen ne beknowen. with these words he leyde him down upon the bare
ground. and leyde a stoon under his heed. And with right great pain fill a
sleep which dured not long for his veins were strongly meuyd. his heart was
not quyete And his body was right evil sustained. Anon than he awoke and
went out of the cave for to look if hit were nyhe day. for the nyyht anoyed
him and was him to long / But when he was comen in to the air he saw no day
appear. ne sterres ne moan shine. but he fond hit all derke and tenebres
thikke and great And saw all the region of the air couerid with clouds /
whereof he was greatly anoyed and greuyd. Than he went in to the cave again not
in to the deppest but at the mouth thereof / And there sorofull and pensif a
bood with out any more slepyng till hit was day.

When the day apperid cacus issued again out of the cave. and went up unto the
top of the hill. and began to behold and see the contre about / The contre
seemed to him good and fair for to live there. After great pensifnes and many
thoughts / he concluded in him self that he would abide there unto the time
that his Infortune cessed. and would live there of proyes / rauayn and theft /
After he bethought him. that he would goo to the king pryeus of calidonie /
which was his cosyn. and for to have company to lead his wife with that he had
chosen / he would axe and demand in marriage oon of his daughters / With this
conclusion he departed fro the mount auentyn and took the way unto calidonie
he went so long that he came theder / Some say that calidonie is the contre
that we call now Calabre. When cacus was come to calidome the king Prycus
resseyued him as hit apperteyned to a king / for as much as he knew him and
was of his lignage / And after demanded him of his tidings Cacus began to
syghe. When he saw that he must tell his myshappe. And than told him and
recounted fro the beginning to the end how hercules had taken from him his
royames And how he had been besieged / and how he was escaped / And for as much
as I dar not abide in mine owen country / I am comen hither unto you for refuge
and to tell and count my sorrows / And I have entencion to hold me on the
mount auentyn in a Cauerne that is there unto time that mine enemy hercules
shall depart fro mine heritage And I will keep me there so secret that no man
in the world shall have knowleche thereof / to the end that hercules know hit
not / ffor as much as he has me in great hate / and he has more gretter
hap and fortune in arms than I have / And if he knew that I were in any
place I am certain that he would come theder for to destroy me. This considerid
I have chosen this cauerne for to hyde me as I have said. But for so much as I
have more sorrow in felyng. than my taste requires hit is so that the eyes of
a man being in great troble. Reioyssen in the vysage and sight of a woman: ffor
the woman is the gladness and comfort of a man I require you and pray you that
ye will give me to wife oon of your daughters / And if hit plese you so to do /
certes ye shall do to me a great plaisir and the most case that I may have for
this present time. The king prycus answered and said Cacus ye ben comen and
extrayt of high gentylnes. and have great lordship and seignourye in hisperye
/ if fortune were again you this day. your hyenes ought not therefore be
unknown / At this day I have four daughters. of whom that oon is named yolee.
Take whom hit pleseth you reseruid yolee: ffor I will not yet marye her / And
if ye have any will to make any armee against hercules. tell hit me plainly and
I shall socoure you as a true ffrende. Cacus was right well content with the
answer of the king / and thanked him sayyng that hewold make none armee for
this season. but he would pass his time in the cave like as he had purposid and
concluded. Than the three daughters of king prycus were sent fore. and cacus
chesse oon of them which he wedded and after lay with her / and abode there
two days / At the end of two days / he would depart and took leave of the
king. The king would have delivered to him ten knights and ten squyers for to
have conveyed him. but he reffused hem and would none / Than he would have
deliuerid to him certain ladies and damoyselles / but of all them he took none.
save the two susters of his wife. Which would by force goo with him / Thus than
he departed fro Calidoine. accompanied with three susters / he was all way
sorofull and pensif / And fro than forth on thus being in Inpacyens of his
vnhapp. and castyng out of royallte / he began to run out. And bathed his
Axe in the blood of the men women and Children that he met and put hem all
to death etc.

CAcus began to exercise the works of furour and of tyranny / in going unto
the mount auentyn. Anon as he was come he entered in to the cave the best
wise he could with his wives. And the most secretly And of this place he made
a neste of theft and a pytte of synnys / ffor the first night / that he had
logged his wives / he went him in to the village that stood there fast by. And
beheld the fairest house. Wherein he entered by a wyndowe that was open. And
slew all them that was therein: and after took all the goods as much as he
might bear upon his sholdres and bare hem in to the cave / where as were his
wives.

How Cacus stale away the Oxen and kyen longyng to hercules / And how hercules
fought with him therefore and slew him:.
IN the morn cacus fond a right great stone of marble / / which he took and
bare hit unto his cave / And made therewith his door. The most part of the
time Cacus held him in his cave / And went never out but when he would do
harm or evil. When he went into the feldes as said is. he slew all them
that he met: He robbed every man / he defowlid women / he brent howses and
towns And shortly maad and did so much harm in Italy / that they that
passyd in the contre supposid to be behated of the gods. And could not know
whereof ne fro when^ came these persecusions that Cacus maad unto them. ffor to
return than to our purpose of hercules he came unto the Cite of king Euander
in the time that cacus bedewed ytalye with blood of men. And fyllid his cave of
contynuelle stolen goods. After the coming of hercules and of his men of arms
/ his beefs or Oxen were brought in to the cite be cause the king euander
should seen hem. The king took great plaisir to behold and see hem: for they
were high and passing fair After that the king had seen hem / hercules
demanded him / whether he might send for to pasture them for that night / / In
troth sire said euander / if ye will believe my counceyll ye shall let them
abide in this cite And not to send hem in to the feldes / Wherefore said
hercules. Euander answered and said for as much as when we send out our
bestes / We know not where they become. They ben stolen and driven away And
we can not know who ben the robbours / our servants ben murdrid / the howses
ben brent. the people that should labor in the field ben slain. the women and
maidens ben villonyed and put to shame. And we can not remedy hit. ffor we can
not have knowleche of the Actours ne doars thereof. wherefore some men say and
wole mayntene. that they ben the gods that thus punysshe us for our sins.
wherefore I pray you late your bestes abide in this cite to the end that they ben
not robbed. ^yre said hercules ye recounte and tell to me a great meruayll. I
believe well that tho things that ye say ben veritable. But this
notwithstanding syn that the gods have saved hem unto this day. they shall
keep them yet if hit plese them. ffor if they will have them* also well they
will take them in the cite as in the feldes And if there be a robbeur or thief
in the contre that will take hem away / I suppose I shall find him And shall
make ytalye quyte of him: With these words hercules sent his bestes in to the
pasture / and there left hem with out any kepars / the day passid over the
night came / In this night cacus issued out of his cave / And went in to the
Country for to pylle and rob if he might find any proye. Thus as he that is
unhappy secheth evil / In the end he is paid attones for his trespaces. The
unhappy aventure brought him in to the medowe. where as pastured the oxen and
kyen of hercules / hit was nyghe the morenyng / he had with him his three wives
/ As Soon as he saw the bestes by the light of the moon that shone clear / he
knew hem Anon he was all abasshid. and his blood changed in his visage / and
not with out cause. ffor suddenly all his sorrows began to rise in him and
came to the quyknes of the heart. that he could not speak. His wyuys seeing that
he spoke no word / And that he beheld the bestes / As all awondred. came to him
And demanded him whaat he had / Alas answered Cacus syn hit is so that ye must
needs know / I tell you for certaynte that all the sorrow of the world
aryseth in my stomach: and environneth mine heart. ffor I see here the Oxen of
the Tryumphe of mine Enemy Hercules And in beholding them. so renew in me the
losses that I have had by him. and the honeurs and worshippis that he has maad
me for to lose / And also the royames that he has taken away fro me / And the
great myserye that I am now in / He must needs be here by in some place.
Cursyd be his coming: ffor I wot never what to do but in sign of vengeance
I shall slay his oxen and his kyen.

When the three susters had herd that Cacus so sorowed. they counceyllid him
that he should not slay the bestes. Sayng that if he slew hem. hercules should
lose no thing. for he should ete them hit were better said his wife that ye take
and led away as many as ye may And bring them in to our cave. ffor fie ye do
so. hercules shall have damage and displaysir / And ye shall have plaisir and
prouffit / Cacus believed thatthis wife said to him. yet he looked in the medowe
all aboutes if any man had been there to keep them. but he fond no man ne
woman. And than he came to the bestes. And took eighte of the best that he
could chese four oxen and four kyen After he bond them to geder with a cord
by the taylles / And put the cord about his nekke / and drew hem so in that
manyer unto his cave / how well that the bestes resisted strongly to goo
backward in that manyere / Cacus brought in this many ere reculyng and going
backward all tho bestes that he staall / to the end tht no man should follow him
by the traches of the feet of the bestes:.

When he had put in his cave the bestes of hercules as said is. he shette the
door so well / that a man should never have known ne parceyuyd that there had been any door. Than wenyng that he had been sewer he laid him down and slepte / ^
Anon after the son rising. and that hit was day / hercules that desired
much to here tidings of his bestes arose up / and did so much that the king
Euander brought him unto the place where as his oxen and kyen were When they
were comen in to the medowe / hercules fond that him lacked four oxen and as
many kyen. wherefore he was sore troblid. And for to know if the gods had
taken them. or any theuys had stolen them. He commanded that they should aspye
all about the medowe / And see if the traches or thempryntes of the feet of
the bestes might be seen or known. At his comandeme^t oon and other began to
seche / Some there were that beheld toward the mount auentyn. And fond the
paas and foot of the oxen. but them thought that by that paas that the bestes
were descended fro the mount for to come in to the medowe / When all they had
sought long / And saw that they fond no thing they maad their report unto
hercules and said to him. that they cowde not perceive on no side where these
oxen were issued out / And that on no side they could find none ensigns ne
tokenes of bestes going out of the pasture / But right well said oon I have
found the paas and feet of certain oxen and kyen that been descended from this
mountaigne in to this medowe / When hercules herd say that fro the montaigne
were comen oxen in to the medowe. He called euander / And demanded him what
people dwellid on the montaigne: Euander said to him that there on ne dwellid man
ne best. And that the montaygne was Inhabited / Hercules would goo to see the
paas / and went theder / And him thought well that theder might have passid
eyghte great bestes in that night / For the traces of the feet were great and
new / Than he would wete where they were become / But he fond well that the
foot of the bestes took their end there as they pastured / He was than right
sore esmeruayllid for as much as there were no strange bestes. And began to
thenke / when he had a lityll thought he beheld the mount. he said hit must
needs be that the gods have rauysshed my oxen / or ellis that there is a
thief in this montaigne. that is come and has stolen hem / And has led hem
away reculyng backward. But for as much as I have less suspecion to the
gods than upon the thief / I shall never depart from hens unto the time that
I have serched this montaigne from oon side to an other. ffor my heart Iugeth
me that the bestes ben here etc:.

WIth this conclusion hercules did do take diverse calves that were there and
maad hem to fast till none. This while during he sent for his harnoys and
arms by philotes. and adoubed and made him ready to fight / Anon after mydday
as the calves began to cry and blete for honger he did than them to be
brought about the montaygne. Than as they passid by the place where the cave
was and cried. hit happend that the kyen that were in the cave herd them / And
answered cryyng so loud that the sown passid by the hooks of the cave. and came
to the ceres of the calves and also of hercules and of other / when hercules
herd the cry of his kyen. He abood there. his calves began to cry again. But
his kyen cried no more. for cacus by the force of their cries was awaked. And
as he that allway doubted for to be accused roose up and cut the throtes of
the kyen. The calves than naturelly knowing their moders cried sore loud and
brayed as they that desired the mylk for to live by / how be hit they could not
so loud cry / that her moders answered them. hereof meruaylled much hercules.
Than he approchid the mount and went unto the place where him seemed that he
had herd the kyen. And was there well three owres seechyng if he could find
any hoole or cave or reduyte / But how be hit that he passid many times the
entree of the cave / he could never perceive hit Some said that the bruyt and
brayyng that they had herd of the kyen. Was comen of Illusion / The other said
that hercules lost his labor and pain And prayed him to leave to seek any more
/ for they thought it not recouerable. In the end when hercules had herd oon
and other and saw that he might not come to the end of his desire. In a great
anger he took in both Arms a great tree that grew there / And shoke hit three
times with so great force / that at the third time he ouerthrewe hit rote and
all in such wise that the root that came out of the earth maad a right great
large hoole so parfounde and deep / / that the botom of the cave was s^en
plainly:.

When hercules saw the great hoole that the root of the tree had maad. He was
right Joyous and glad / and said. Trewly hit is here that the great thief
dwellith / I must see if he be here and what marchantes enhabite in this place
/ In sayyng these words hercules bowed down his heed and beheld on the oon
side of the cave where he saw cacus. As Soon as he saw the thief He knew him
anon / whereof he was more Joyous than he was to fere and escryed him / Cacus I
see thee / Thou haste to fore this time troblyd the Royames of hesperye by
Innumerable delyctes and great sins that thou madeste openly and apperte.
This was the cause of the pardicion of thy seignourye / Now thou tro^blest the
ytaliens by tyrannyes hyd and unknown / I know thy life / Thou may not
deny hit ne forsake hit / Hit behooves that thou dye therefore And that I make
the ytalyens frank and free of thyn horrible and odious theftes. O cursid man
if thy Crowns. thy diademes. thy septres. thy bruytes / thy ryall men might
not socoure the / why than and wherefore art thou wrappid in sins And
amendest the not ne correct the for the pugnycion that thou have suffered / but
yet in the stead and place that thou sholdest dispose the to that / that
apperteyneth to a king and a pryuce / thou haste ben a thief / Instead to do
Justice thou haste ben a murdrer / and a putter in of fire to brenne villages
and howses And where thou sholdest have kept and sauyd women. thou have
defowled them and don hem vilonnye. O kaytyf king / with out coniuryng or
pynyng of the / certes I see well that thou art he that the ytalyens know not
that thou have persecuted hem. Thy malice has been great and thy subtylte /
when unto this day thou were never accused. And have done a great thing. But
hit is not so great / ner have not so hid the but thou art right nyghe
peril ffor thou shall yield to me again my oxen. And ffinably thou shall put
me to death / or thou shall deye by my hand. And thou shall not escape by
rennyng ne by thy subtle fyres.

When Cacus understood this sentence / he was strongly affrayed. nevertheless
he lift up his head And seeing that he was found by hercules the man of the
world that he most hatid / he said to him / Alas hercules man all corrumped
with couetyse. what cursid fortune has made the to draw out the tree whereof
the parfonde and deep roots has discouerid the reposayll of king Cacus late
regnyng / But now pryued fro regnyng and bannysshid fro all worldly prosperity.
Suffiseth not to the / that I may have the chierte of my naturell goods. When
thou have taken all away fro me. And that hit is force that I live of robberye
and proye / Whereof the culpe and sin ought to redonde upon the / Why suffrest
thou not me to live and draw forth the residue of my pour life / among the
stones among the rokkes. and among the worms of the earth. Considere now
what thou haste do to this king / And seek him no more. thou haste hurted and
greuyd him ynowhe / Hercules answered / Cacus if thou were in the abysmes of
wrecckidnes and myseryes. thy demerytes wole accuse the / And I am right sorry
and dolant to see a king in so hountous and shameful estate. But when thou
canste not Aourne thy days passid ne these present with one only good deed
What remedy / thou have daily exercysed tyranny as well in prosperyte as in
aduersite. I wot well that thou art the new persecutour of the ytaliens / And
that thy hand is all fowll of their blood. I seek the not / ne the ytalyens can
say no thing of the. And for as much as they complain not of the. to their
preiudyce. This tree has spoken for them. And by his roots he has discouuerd
thyn enbusshe: So behooves hit that thou chese. wheder thou will come and fight
with me here in the Air / at large. or ellis that I come and assaylle the
there with Inn: ffor if hit be to me possible I shall delyuere the world of
thy tyrannyes etc

By this answer cacus knew that there was no respite in his feet / Than he
supposid to save him as he had done before time And maad by his craft so great
a smoke and fumee / that hit seemed come out of the hoole that the tree had
maad / that hit had been a right pytte of hell. And this fumee was larded with
flames brennyng as meruayll. ffor this fumee hercules abandonned never cacus /
but leep in to the cave in the myddell of the flames and fumee as he that was
maistre of this craft / and was anon pourueyed of remedies that thereto
apperteyned / And went him plainly and assaylled Cacus in such wise as he
felt no fumee ne enpesshement. And than he gaf him so great a struck upon the
helm with his clubbe / that he maad him to hurtle his heed against oon of the
wallis of the cave. Cacus with the resseyuyng of this struck. let the fumee
disgorge out of his stomach. Seeing that by that manyer he could not escape.
And took his right great axe that stood by him for to deffende him with /
Hercules suffrid him to take his axe. Cacus smote upon him ffor the cave was
not large. they fought long therm. unto the rescous of cacus came the three
susters that made great sorrow And casted stones upon hercules in great
habondance And wept bitterly. These three damoyselles louyd sore well cacus.
Hercules and cacus fought more than a long our with out cessing At the end
of the our. they were both so sore chauffid that they must rest them Than
cacus took in him a great pride. ffor he was strong of body And him seemed when
he restid that hercules was not so strong as he had been before times. And that
he might never vaynquysshe him / for as much as he had not overcome him at the
beginning / By this presumpsion he demanded of hercules if he would achieue the
battle with out the cave / Hercules answered that he was content. With this
answer cacus took away the stone that shette the cave and went out. And in
going out after him. hercules espied his kyen that were ded in a Corner / And
his oxen that were bounden by the mosels unto a piler / he was sorry when he
saw his kyen in that point. Nevertheless he passid forth and poursiewed cacus /
that racchid out his arms And maad him ready / And said to him. thou cursid
thief thou haste done to me great displaysir to have slain my kyen / ye cursid
thief thou thy self answered cacus / yet haste thou done to me more displaysir /
to have slain my men and taken away my Royames. thou art only culpable of the
evil that I have done and of the death of thy kyen / I would hit plesyd the
gods that I had the as well in my mercy. as I had them. be thou sewer that
thou sholdest never take away Royame fro no ma^n And now late us achieue our
battle: At these words Hercules and Cacus smote each other right sore and by
great felonnye / their strokes cleuyd to their harnoys and sowned. At this
sownyng the king euander and the greeks came to the bataill for to see hit.
which they maad to fore thentre of the Cave: Where as we^ the three susters
passing desolate: Cacus enforced him with all his puyssance. ffor he saw hit
was time thoo or never to show and put forth all that he might He handled his
axe right myghtly And well was him need so to do. He was hard and boystous.
he gaf many a struck to hercules. And him seemed otherwhile that he should
confound him unto the deep abysme of the earth / But hercules on his side
faylled not if he had strong party against him. He was also strong at avenant
and more strong certain than was good for the health of cacus / he smote never
cacus but he turned the eyes in his heed. or made him to stoop or knele on
that oon side or that other or goo aback shamefully / This battle by long
during anoyed the beholdars they sought each other and tasted hard on both
sides Fynably they did so much that hit was need to rest them And that all
their bodies swette all aboutes / than hercules saw that yet was not the pryse
given / And that the night approached he had great shame in himself / that he
had hold so long battle. Than he began to seche cacus so nyghe / and
redowblid his strokes by such vigor upon cacus so fiersly. that at last he
bare him down to the ground all astouyed And made him to lose his axe And syn
took of his helm. The three susters fled than in to a foreste named Octa all
full of teeris and of cries. Many greeks would have gone after. But hercules made
hem to return. After he callid the king Euander and his folk and said to the
king Sire lo here is he that was wont to tro^ble the ytalyens. by secret
murdres / convert theftes / and unknown defowlyng of women. give no more
suspecion to the gods / Lo here is the menyster and doar of thise trespaces /
I have entencion to punysshe him. Not only after his deserte. but unto the
death:.

EVander answered to hercules and said / Prince exellent and worthy above ally
worthy excessiuely And the most best accomplisshid of all men flourysshyng in
arms. What reverence is to the due / that is not only humayne reverence / But
that reverence that is of dyuyne nature / I believe assewridly that thou art a
godde / or the sone of a godde / or ellis a man deyfyed. Thou in especial
haste seen more in a momente. than all the eyes in general of all the ytalyens
have seen. not only in one year. but in an honderd year. O the sone of noble
men and the stock of reluysing and shynyng of glorious feetes and deeds / how
may we thank the and give the lawde for the deserte of this great work / Thou
by bright and shynyng labor have discombred us of derkenes and haste given us
light of clerenes. thou haste more achieuyd than the great tourbes and all the
assemblees and men of arms of ytalyens should have conne do. And haste gooten
more tryumphe in chastysyng of this geant passing terryble. than we the conne
give reward. Truly if thou be not a godde. Thou haste of the gods their
synguler grace / I promise to the in remembrance of this labor / to do ediffie
a solemn temple in my cite where thou shall have an awter / And upon the
awter shall be thy representacion of fyn gold. And the representaco^n of this
tyrant / in showing how thou have vaynquysshid him to the end that our heirs
and successors in time coming may have thereof knowleche:.

DVryng these words Cacus releuyd him that was astonyed of the struck that he
had receyu^d And wend to have fledd. But hercules ran after and retained him
And enbraced him in his arms so hard tht he might not meue And brought him
again And bare him unto a deep pytte that was in the ca^e where he had cast in
all ordures and filthe / hercules came unto this foul pytte that the greeks had
founden And planted cacus there Inn. his heed dounward from on hye unto the
ordure benethe / Than the ytaliens came about the pit and cast so many
stones upon him that he deyde there myserably. Such was the end of the pour
king Cacus. he deyde in an hooll full of ordure and of styngkynge filthe. When
the king Euander saw that he was ded by the consent of hercules he did him
be drawn out of the pytte. And did him be born in to his cite. where as
hercules was receyuyd so tryumphantly that no man can reherce. The feste was
great that night in the palace of king euander / And passid hit with great
Joy / On the morn the king euander made to set forth the body in the common
regard and sight of all the people. And afterward ordained certain folk thereto
propice and necessary to do carye and show this miserable corpse or body in
all the cytees where he had done harm. And for to count and reherce to them
his life: What shall I make long rehersayll / When the body was showed in the
cite of king euander They that had the governance thereof bare hit in to dyuerce
places. And all way they preifid hercules / In the nouelte of this victory the
king Euander maad to begin the temple that he had promised to hercules And
required hercules that he would abide there in that country unto the time / that
his temple should be full maad and performed / hercules beheld that the king
euander did do labor in his temple with all diligence and agreed to his
request / for as much as him seemed that the temple should be shortly maad /
And some books say that long time before the god Mars had promised to
hercules that there should be a temple made unto him and for that cause he was
come in to ytalye / for to wete if his destynee should hap or no And when the
ytaliens herd recounte the birthe of hercules / they believed better that he was
the sone of god Jupiter than of Amphitryon:.

How the queen of laurence enamoured on hercules / And how the king Prycus came
in to ytalye with a great ooste and send to defye hercules.
THe glorious ffectes of hercules were greatly recomanded in ytalye / as well
for that he had vaynquysshid the geantes of Cremone as for the death of cacus /
So great was his renomee that during the edificacion of his temple / all manner
people came theder for to see him. And made to him dyuyne honor Namyng him the
sone of god Jupiter / the kings and the lords came to him for to give him
yeftes and rich presents. Among all other the queen of Laurence came theder
fro her cite with many Chares and charyottis Chargid and laden with many
Iewellis and presentid them to hercules: Hercules resseyuyd in to his grace
this queen and her presents And thankid her greatly / This queen had to name
Facua. And was wife of the king. Fanus sone of the king pricus the sone of
S^turne. She was young fressh. tender and replete of lustynes. She had not seen
king fanus her husbond in four year. ffor he was goon in to a far Contre
And was not in all this time come again / So hit happend syn that she first
began to take heed and behold hercules and auyse him well / she began to
desire his conuersacon And she began to love him so sore and acertaynly / that
she could not torn her eyes ner her thought upon none other thing but upon
hercules / In the beholding and seeing him. she said in her heart / that he was
the most welfaryng man and upright with out comparison that ever she saw.
and that of right me should give him laud and preysing / sayyng more over that
her seemed that all her heart was enuolupid with the fire of his love / many
pensees and thoughtis fill than in her entendement. Now awakyd and quykenyd
with a Joyous spryrite And efte sone all pensyf / she passid the first day that
she came in this manner with hercules / when she was withdrawn for to rest /
she leyde her down on a bed all clothid And there she began to ymagyne the
beaulte of hercules by so ardante desires / that she could not abstain her fro
weeping And sore wisshid after him. whereof the end was such. that after many
an ymagynacion about the gray morenyng / she began to say unto her self / O
ffortune what man / what prince what king have thou brought in to this country
/ It Is is not a king like other / This is an image singular and like as the
gods had made him by nature to excede and tryumphe above all her other
subtle werkis and labors. All glory shyneth in him not only by his proygne
prowess. but by his simple and sacrid perfeccion corporell / to which may be
made no comparison O clear image among the nobles / who is she that seeing his
eyes / that of oon only fight shall not have her heart through pershid / who is
she that shall not coueyte and desire his grace / The most erorcus of all
happy Well fortuned shall she be* that may get his good will / she is humble.
fair / playsant and lawhyng / he is a Tresour / O dear tresour Like as the gold
passith all other manner metallis semblably he passith all other werkis of
nature in all prosperitees. how than shall I not love him. As long as I shall
live his name shall remain wreton in my memory And his beaulte shall not be
forgoten. but remain for a souenance eternell.

Great were than the preysinges that facua said of hercules She forgate anon
the king fanus and put him all in oubliance for the love of hercules / She was
there a certain space of time. and always thought on hercules. Hercules that
thought no thing on her made unto her no semblant ne sign of love How be hit
he deuysid often time with her And with the wife of the king euander named
Carmente / the more he deuysid with hem the more was facua in great pain by
theschauffing of love / Some time she lost her manyere and contena^nce. But
certain she coueryd hit and hid hit so well that no man took head of hit. Than
when she had been there eyghte days in berynge such grievous pain / and she
saw that hercules could not see the love that she had to him. ffor to come to
the end of her desire / she came on a day to hercules. And humbly required him.
that he would come and take the pacyence of her hows for to pass the time.
Whilis the king Euander performed his temple / Hercules acorded and agreed
unto her request / whereof she had right great Joy in her self. They than
disposyd them for to goo unto Laurence / they took leave than of the king
euand^r and of the queen / And took their way / Thus than gooyng hercules was
always by the side of facua they devised of many things by the way. And allway
facua had her amorous eyes fixed on the regard of hercules / that at last
hercules began to take heed / and said to her all soft. Lady ye do me great
worship to bring me in to your house. Alas sire answered facua I do to you no
thing but pain. how well I have not the power to feste you and make you chier
as I fayn would. Lady said hercules the good chiere that ye do to me. is to me
agreeable / that fro hens forth ye bind mine heart for to will fulfill your will
in such wise that there is no thing that ye will / but I shall accomplisshe hit
at your commandment after my power. as to the most best accomplisshid lady
that is in the occident / Facua with these words began to smyle and answered
Sire I have nothing done for you. and ye are not so beholden to me as ye say.
how be hit I thank you for your good word And thereof I hold me right ewrous
and happy. that the most ewrous man of all men daygneth to accompanye oon so
pour a lady as I am. Lady answered hercules I shall not take that to my prouffit
that I am the most ewrous of men. ffor there ben many better addressid than I
am. But certes the more ye speak the more ye make me your subgette. And syn ye
do to me so great honor I require you as much as I may that I may be your
knight And that ye take power over me to comande me to do your will and plaisir
/ Sire said facua wole ye that hit be so. lady answered hercules alas ye / I
shall not comande you said facua / but I shall give you over me as much of
seygnourye and lordshippe as hit shall plese you to take. Hercules with that
same word would fayn have kyssed the lady And had done hit ne had been the
worshipp of her / which he would keep. They had ynowhe of other deuyses / Fro
that day forth hercules intended to plese the lady more than he had don to fore
And shortly he acquentid so with her and she with him. that they lay to geder
secretly. And he begat on her a sone that afterward was named latyne / Which
was afterward of great government.

DVryng these things / Whilis that hercules and facua had this good time in
laurence. Tidings came that the king fanus was coming / facua that than began
first to Joy in the love of hercules / was passing sorry and heavy. when she
herd these tidings. ffor she had strongly fyxed her heart in hercules.
Suddenly the teris mounted up in to her eyes. And all bewepte she came in to a
chamber where as hercules was She took him aparte and said to him. Alas my love
I trow I shall dye for sorrow. Lady said hercules wherefore: for so much said
she as my husbond the king fanus comes home / Hit is four year a goo syn I
herd of him I had supposid he had been ded: but he is not His herbegeours and
fourriers ben comen to fore and say that he shall soope herein this day / Alas
what evil aventure is this / we must needs now depart. And our comynycacion
shall faille. with this word the lady enbraced hercules and fill down a swowne
in his lap / Hercules took her up and comforted her the best wi^e he could
And said to her that syn hit is so that she was married / that hit was reason
that she abode stylle with her husbond / What someuer hercules said unto the
lady she could not keep her from weeping ne bewayling her love / their
bewaylingis were great. In the end she went in to her chamber And dried her
eyes and brake her anoyous courage as much as she could / In arayyng and
apparayllyng her in such wise as she had been Joyous and glad of the coming of
her husbond. that came sone after and entrid in to his cite with great bruyt.

HErcules and facua went against the king fanus. When the king fanus saw
hercules / he did to him as much honor and worshipp as he could do / ffor
as much as he had herd say and was aduertysed of the arms that he had do
against the geantes of cremone. and against cacus. And thankyd him for so much
as he was come in to his cite / ffor conclusion hercules abode there four
days after that fanus was comen home / on the fyfthe day he considered that he
might no more Enjoy in his love / And that he did nothing there but lose his
time / he took leave of the king fanus and of the queen facua. And returned unto
the hows of the king Euander / where he held him and abode unto the time that
his temple was maad and accomplisshid. About the consommacion of this temple
An herould of Calidoine came unto hercules and signefied to him that the king
prycus came against him with a great puyssance of men of arms. for to avenge
the blood of cacus his cosyn. And Inposed to hercules that he had with out
cause and cruelly put to death one so noble a king as cacus was / And yet said
to him more that if he would sustain the contrary. that on the morn erly. he
should find the king prycus in the same place where the blood of king cacus
was shed And there by mortal battle by puyssan^e against puyssance he would
preue hit true that he said.

When hercules had well herd / that the king pricus had signefyed to him / He
had his heart all full of Joy. And answered to the herald that the death that
he had made cacus to deye was a work of Justice. And that upon that quarrel /
he would furnyssh by battle the king pricus at the our and place that he had
said / After this answer thus made Hercules gaf unto the herald his gown that
he ware / And did him to be fested right well sayng tht he had brought him
tidings of plaisance / When the herald had had good chiere and well festyd as
hercules had commanded He returned unto the king prycus And told him that
hercules had answered to him. and that he should have on the morn the battle.
The king pricus that supposid to have all won by auantage for he had in his
Oost moo than thretty thousand men. thanked the gods of these tidings. And
came and loggid him the same night nyghe unto the mount Auentyn / upon the
River of tybre / He maad him ready for to do his battle. And semblably did
hercules / each man on his side thought on his works. The night passid over /
And than on the morn as soon as hit began to dawe the king prycus and hercules
began to sown their great ^abours And with that sown their men put them in
Arms to a point. And after rengid them in bataylle: And so they came both
parties as well that one as that other in the same place where the blood of
king cacus had been shedd etc:.

How hercules fought against the king prycus in battle and how he fled in to
his cite. where hercules allone slew him and many moo with him.
About five of the clock in the morenyng / Hercules and pricus assemblid at
the battle / fro as fer as pricus saw hercules he made a meruayllous cry /
With this cry all the calidoniens began to run against hercules and maad so
great bruyt / that hit seemed that there was not people ynowhe in all the world
for them. But certain like as a small rain abatyth or leyth down a great wind
/ In like wise hercules allone laid down their over great booste and bruyt ffor
as soon as he saw his enemies run against him about a quarter of a mile / he
departed fro his bataill that was well set in ordynance. And after that he
had commanded his folk that they should not haste for no thing / He began to
run against the calidoniens so swyftely not like an horse / but like an heart
that no man might overtake. The king euander was all abasshid for to see in
hercules so great legierte and swiftenes / Pricus and the calidonies when they
saw him meue from the oost. they had supposed that hit had been an horse or some
other best / In the end when hercules was come nyghe to them by the space of
a bow shote / they knew that hit was hercules. where of they were sore
abasshid of his coming. Pricus escryed his men upon him / They shot arowes
and casted darts and speres upon hercules against all the parties of his body
neuerthelasse they could never persshe ne enter in to the skyn of the lion / ne
he never rested till he had parfurnysshid his course And put him among his
enemies so myghtely that confoundyng all to fore him like as a tempeste or
thonder / he went in to the mids of the oost there as was the chief banyere
of the king prycus.

HErcules abood and restid there. and began to smite and leye on upon that one
side and that other And to dye his swerd with the blood of the calidoniens /
his swerd was so hevy that noman might sustain hit Hit forfrusshid all that
hit arought. Hit maad the place reed / where as the blood of cacus was shedd /
of blood upon blood and of ded men upon ded. Than was not the shame and death of
king cacus vengid. but augmentid upon the persons of his friends in
habondance of slaughter and of occision. The cry aroose greatly about hercules
/ he brake and all to rent the banyers and the recognyssances of the
calidoniens and of her conductours / there was there none so hardy but he
withdrewe. And there was there none so well ass^wryd but he was aferd and
tremblid / All the best and hardiest fled a fore him. Than he made as he
would with his enemies. Theseus Euander and other came than unto the bataylle. At
the recountre there was many a spear broken many an hawber^ and many an helm
broken and many a knight smyten in pieces. The calidoniens were in great nombre
/ And there were many of them strong and mighty / The bataylle was right
strong and mighty and fyers / The king Pricus put him surth a fore upon the
greeks / And wrought with his hand right cheuauserously: And hercules and
theseus did worthyly and digne of memory / they ran fro renge to renge /
And they disrengyd their enemies / They hardyed and encoraged their men. And
showed to them how they should do. their feetes and deeds were so great that
hit is Inpossible to recounte and tell. And that in lityll time they put their
enemies in dispayr / What shall I say all the discomfiture was in the
calydoniens / ffor by force of arms they abode upon the field the most part.
And than when the king pricus saw that his people might no more fight. And
that he lost on all sides And that fortune was against him in all points.
After that he had sore labourid and that he had need of rest / he withdrwe him
out of the prees And sowned the retrayte / And with the sown all the
calidoniens tornyd the back and fled after the king prycus:.

When hercules saw that the calidonyens withdrewe them. He maad in semblable
wise his greeks to withdraw them. Not for any need that they had / but for to
show to their enemies that they would well that they rest them. In this wise
the bataill cessed wenyng to hercules that the calidoniens should reassemble on
the morn when they had restid hem They withdrewe hem some here and some there.
the day passid the night came on / Than the king prycus assemblad his folk And
shewid unto them their loss And the strength and might of the greeks and in
especial of hercules / After he said to them. that they might no thing
conquer upon them. And that they could no wyselier do than to withdraw hem
and to return in to their country. The calidonyens that dredd hercules more
than the death or tempest or thonder of the heaven had great Joy when they
understood the will of king pricus / And answered all with one acorde that they
were ready to put them on the way / With this answer they were concluded that
they should leave their tents their carts and Armours. for to goo lightly and
more secretly / After this they took their way after their conclusion. paas by
paas they went their way with out making bruyt or noise / And did so much
this night that on the morn they were far fro hercules After this on the
morn when hercules had espied that they were fled. He and his men poursiewid
after swyftly / how be hit they could not overtake them / ffor to speed the
matere. the king pricus returned in to calidonie / Hercules poursiewid him in
to his Cite which was strong of wallis And assiegid him. During this siege
there was never calidonien that durst come out Hercules often time assaultid the
cite. but he lost his time / ffinably when he saw that he could get ne win
upon his enemies He callid his greeks and said to them. That man that ne
aduentureth wynneth no thing / We soiourne here with out doing any thing
digne of memory / Our enemies comen not out upon us / but if we fecche hem we
shall never have end. Sortly we must all win or lose / Wherefore I am
aduysed that I shall disguyse me / And that I will go unto the gate And late
the porters understand that I have an erand unto the king / And here upon if I
may enter / I will goo unto the king / and I shall so do if hit be to me
possible that he shall never assault me more in bataill. And if hit happen that
I may so do as I have devised to you / I will tht ye assaill the cite as soon
as I shall be with Inn^ ^ to the end that the calidoniens may have to do with
you as well as with me / And that I have hem not all ationes upon me.

THeseus and Euander understood well what that hercules would do / they answered
that they were ready to obey all his comandementis And that they would assault
the Cite after his sayyng / Than hercules arrayed him like as he had been an
enbassatour. Theseus and the greeks dysposid them for to make the assault /
When all was ready hercules departed and came and knokkyd on the gate of
calidonie / The porters looked out at a litill wyndowe to see who knokkyd there
/ and seeing that there was but oon man in a long gown / they opend to him
the gate and axid him what he would have / hercules answered that he sought the
king / and what would ye with him said oon of the porters / certes said
hercules I would fayn speak unto his person / And sayyng these words the
porters saw that hercules was armed under his gown / and than at few words
they escryed up on him. and tasted him before and behind sayyng that he was a
traytre and that he was comen to espy the cite / When hercules saw him so
scasid of the portiers / He was there he would be and had great Joy Which he
couerd under simple contenance / and made at the beginning semblant that he
would have fled a way and escaped / But he employed so lityll of his strength.
that the portiers brought him unto the king pricus / Which satte in the halle
with his daughters and his princes. And maad to him the present. Sayyng Sire
lo here is a trayttre. that is entrid in to your cite for to espy your
puyssance / We have taken him. he said that he would speak unto your person /
how well he is armed under this mantell as ye may see. hit is a right evil
tokene. ffor a man desiryng to speak to a king. should in no wise be armed
pryuely ner a covert /

When the king understood thaccusaco^n of the portiers. Whilis they spoke he
beheld hercules / and knew him. He was so sore aferd that he wist not what to
say. Hercules than esvertued him self And put him self out of the holdyng of
the portiers. castyng them down to the ground so hard and so grievously that
they never after might releue hem self / When the calidoniens that were in the
halle saw him so evil entrete the portiers they escryed hercules unto the
death and assaillid him on all sides. His gown was than anon rent of* In
coming on he receyuyd many a struck / And allway he defendid him without
disployng of his puyssance and of his strength / as he that aweyted the
tidings of the assault that was nyghe / The affraye was great in the halle
and in the cite on all parties / the calidoniens ran unto the palais for to
assayll hercules The king pricus adoubed him and came with other unto this
affraye / Than was hercules assayllid fiersly. But certes this assault cost
dear ynowh unto the king ffor to his bien venue hercules approchid unto the
tabernacle / that stood upon four great bars of iron. whereof he took that
one And beat down the tabernacle / After he lift up his Arm with the bar /
And smote the king pricus so dismesurably upon the coppe of his helm that not
withstandyng his strong harnoys and armures: He all to frusshid him down to
the earth. And smote him so sore frusshid and brusid that he fill dounded
between his two portiers.

AT this time the Cry aroose great among the calidoniens. Not alonly there
but also in the cite ffor he that made the wacche sowned to arms for as much
as the greeks assaillid hastily the wallis Calidonie was than terribly troblid.
The calidonyens wiste not where to entende / whether to hercules or to the
assault. All was full of heedes armed as well in the palais as upon the wallis.
After this that hercules had slain the king pricus. he began to smite upon his
enemies. his strokes were great At each struck he slew two or three / shortly
he bare him there so knighly that in lityll while he couerid all the pament of
the palais with ded bodies of the calidoniens / lyyng oon up on an other / with
out that any man might adomage his armoure / The calidonyens were of great
courage / and had great shame of that / they might not overcome hercules. that
allone had done upon them so great an empryse. They assaillid him by great
appetyte And cast upon him darts and sharp glayues. His arms and his
sholdres bare all / And he did so great things with his bar And gaf so
great strokes that none of hem might resist his strength. The pour calidonyes
came theder by great courage and desire for to venge the death of their king /
Hercules put so many to death. that he wiste nowher to set his foot but upon
calidonyens. Tofore the gate of the palais was a pyteous noise of wepyngs and
of cries that women and children maad / In the end when the calidonyens knew
and perceived the virtue and strength of hercules and that they labouryd in
^ayn / they cessid to assaill him and fled / Than hercules issued out of the
palais with his bar all couerd with blood: As Soon as the calidonyens saw him
they escryed upon him passing anguyss hously / they assaylyd him on an new /
they cast stones and darts upon him. they shot Arowes on him habondantly /
as they that were pourueyed and awayted on his passage / In this assault
hercules hadd much to suffer. Alleway in receyuyng moo strokes than can be
nombred He passid the wacche that awayted for to have slain him. And restid
never till he came unto the gate..

THe calidoniens ran than after him as men with out dread of death. And
strongly swollen with pride and ire / began on an new to smite upon his
sholdres and upon his back. When hercules saw that / he turned his fface unto
his evil willars And smote upon hem with his bar on the right side and on
the lift side so radely / that he dyed his bar with new blood / and maulgre
his enemy he beat hem down and all to frusshid hem to fore him. He made hem to
recule and goo aback more than forty paas. And after came to the gate And the
calidonyens siewed him again. but er they came upon him he all to brack and
brussid and to frusshid the lokkys and the wekettis and doors of the gate that
the greeks assayllyd with all their puyssance. and beat down the draw brygge /
After he called the assayllans and they came unto him And with lityll resistance
they entryd the cite / which was at that time with great occysion of the
calydonyens that would not yield hem ne put hem to mercy unto the time that
they saw their streets and howses full of ded bodies etc.

How hercules was anamoured on yole the daughter of king pricus / and how he
required her of love and how she acorded unto him:.
BY this manner was the king pricus slain and his Cite taken by hercules after
the tucion and slaughter / When the calidonyens had humelied them. hercules and
theseus went unto the palace / And they came theder so a point / that they
fond the daughters of king pricus with their ladies and damoyselles sechyne
the king among the ded bodies / There were so many ded bodies that they could
not find ne know him tht they sought. Hercules at his coming began to
behold one and other / And soueraynly among all other he cast his eyes upon
yole the daughter of the king / ffor as much as she was excellently
resplendissant in beaulte that in all the world was none like unto her / When
he had a little seen her by a secret commandment of love He drew him unto her
/ wenyng for to have conforted her / Anon as the right desolate damoysell saw
hercules approchyng unto her / she tremblid for dread and fled unto her
chamber. The ladies and the damoyselles folowid her And among them so did
hercules. What shall I say. he entrid in to the chamber where she was And
satte down by her ^ she wend for to have risen for to have goon out of the way
but he held her by her clothis and said unto her / Lady ye may not flee my
company / yole spoke than and said O miserable tyrant what sekeste thou me now
for to troble me more. Thou have slain my fader / late that suffice the. Madame
answered hercules if the king pricus be deed. hit is reason tht he be not much
bewaylid ne bewept. ffor he wenyng for to avenge the death of the tyrant cacus.
came not long syn for to assayll me in ytalye. Sayyng that I had unrightfully
and with out cause slain him / In susteynyng the contrary I fought with him
upon this quarrel. the battle was not ended ne put to vttrance at that time:
ffor he withdrewe him with his people and came in to this cite. and I have
poursiewid him hastily / how well I could not overtake him. When I saw that /
I leyde my siege about this cite He would not come to achyeue the battle
during my siege / I have this day willid to have an end. ffortune has been on
my side and has put you in my puyssance Certes hit must needs be that with
out any remede ye be my lady and my love. ffor in seeing your synguler
beaulte. Love has constrained me to be yours / Than I pray you as afectuously
as I may or can / that ye cesse your sorrow and that ye receive me as your
friend and love. the more ye weep the less ye get and win Contynuell teeris
or wepynges ne pardurable sighs may never reyse your fader again.

THe fair yole with these words was so oppressid of hoot and contrary
ymagynacions that her heart failled her / Hit was a pietous thing to behold /
her friend hercules would have taken her up and sustained between his arms. But
a wise lady that had alleway governed her / came to him and said to him knelyng
on her knees / Sire I pray you in the name of all the gods. that ye will
cesse to speak to this pour damoyselle for this time: She has this day lost
her fader / Hit must needs be that nature acquyte her / ye may do with her
your owen playsyr / late her a lityll abide in her malyncolye / All shall be
well if hit plese the gods as well for you as for her / At the request of
the lady Hercules was content to late her goo for that time / he recomanded
yole unto the gods and went unto theseus for to pass his time. But to the
end that yole should not goo away ne / escape / he ordained twelve greeks to
keep her and commanded upon pain of death that they should suffer no woman issue
out of the chamber with out wetyng whether they went. In this night hercules
did the deed bodies to be had out of the palais and the place to be made
clean. And also he ordained that the body of the king pricus should be put in
sepulture. When these things were accomplisshid / hercules and theseus with
their men of arms made good chiere of such as they there fond / And yole was
never out of the remembrance of hercules / yole certainly at this time was so
disconforted that hit can not be recountid. The lady that had her in governance
traueyllid right sore for to comfort and chyere her / Than when hercules had
left her in the chamber as said is And she had many words to her / and among
all other she said to her My daughter ye weep to much. Ha madame said yole.
how may I less do / when shall I have cause to weep and to wayle if I have
none now. My fader is ded. I have lost him that most louyd me of all the
world / I may lose no more ne no gretter thing. Ought not than my heart to be
angry and sorrowful. My daughter said the lady I know well that ye have the
most apparent occacion of sorrow that any woman may have. But when hit must
needs be that ye pass by this Infortune what proffiten you your grievous
wepynges. There may no thing proceed of them but augmentacion of melancolye /
And hurtyng and appayryng of your preysid beaulte / ye be now fallen in the
hand of this prince. This is a man worthy and noble above all other / he
loves you / ye ought to thank the gods and to give hem prcisyngis of this
grace. ffor this is to you an ewre and an hap in your myshappe if ye will
believe me. ye should put all this suffrance. Better it is to suffer one evil
than two. Me thinks ye ought considere your estate. And if ye considere hit
well ye should pain you for to forgete hit: Madame said yole / Alas and how may
that be. that I should have love. or affinyte or hauntyse unto him that has
done to me so much harm / He has uot taken only fro me a knight ne an
unclean cosyn / but mine owen propre fader Late none speak to me more thereof. He
is and shall be my mortal enemy as long as I live. and as long as he shall
live he shall have no morr of me for prayer promise ne for manace..

MI daughter said the lady make ye not your self bond / where as ye be free.
The faytes and deeds of love ben subtle and sudden: Love is alleway in his
secret trone. that can do none other thing / but humelye and meke the hard
hertes. And bow the strong: So hard ne so strong an heart is not among the
humayne Creatures. But that hit is right sone humelyed and meked when that hit
is his plaisir There is no tour so high. but hit may be beten down by subtle
mine / Nether is no wind so great ne so rygorous but hit attemperid / there is
no night so derke but that hit is furmounted with the day. ye hate hercules
now. if ye have a while hauntid him and have had comynycaco^n with him.
parauenture ye shall love him better / than ever ye louyd your fader your mother
or any other of your lignage / And that I may prove by my self. ffor I had my
husbond in so great hate first er we assemblid / that I would fayn have seen him
dye a shameful death. Suddenly when we had begone to converse oon with another /
I louyd him so certainly that if he had not ben with me day and night / I had
went I should have deyed for sorrow and anoye / My daughter such ben the
toures of love. often times me seyth / that after great hate comes great love.
The glory of hercules is so clear / that your heart ought to be enlumyned /
the conqueste that he has made in this Cite shall be for you a synguler
preparacion of all good / would ye attain to a more gretter well / than for to
be felawe or love of him that is the dompter of kings the most best well
faryng man. and the most tryumphant in arms. ffor to him is no thing
Inpossible / he has conquerid the most part of the universal world O my
daughter reioysse you in fortune. Shette not the door to prosperity that comes
to you / hit is to be believed that the desolacion of this cite has been devised
and ordained by the parliament of the gods. in faueur of you. that are the
parement and none like unto you of all the daughters of the kings for to give
you in marriage unto this man.

BY these words the fair yole had her stomach enterprised of large
ymaginacions. She rose up fro that part. And entrid in to her gardero be / /
where as was the presentacion of the goddess dyane / When she was comen theder
/ / she knelid down in great humylyte to fore the image. And in haboundyng of
syghes and weeping as sore as she had done any time of the day to fore she said:
Goddess of virgynes what shall do thy right simple Ancylle and hand maid.
Alas enlumyne my hope. behold mine affliccion. poyse mine vnhapp. Send thyn
eyes in to the secret of mine heart / and see the sorrow that I bear. And in
the faveur of virgyns keep my body and preserve from the hand of him that would
that I should be his wife. After that he has engendrid in me the Rote of mortal
hate. which is not possible to be anullyd as nature Iugith in me. ^for hit is
not possible that I may love mine enemy. Consequently and it is troth that the
hate that I have against this tyrant hercules shall be pardurable etc.

IN t^yse prayers and lamentacions yolle abode unto the perfoundeur of the
night. cursyng hercules sayyng that she hadd lever to deye than to have any
love in him. Thus desdaynyng the love of hercules. with out mete or drink she
passid the night. The day following hercules returned unto her / And on a new
prayed her that she would be his wife / Sayyng with out respyte that she must
needs agree thereto She was right sore displaysan^t of this request and excused
her in many facions that were to long to reherce at this time / But at the
end of the prayers and requests of hercules / Love ^nspyred in such wise the
damoyselle / that she understood well that hercules was issued of the Rote of
noble fader and mother / that she acorded to do his plaisir. What shall I more
say yole comynicqued than with hercules as his wife they lay to geder and
acqueyntid each with other / Love than enroted in their hertes. her two wyllis
were lockyd and put in one will / Hercules forgate deyanyra And yole forgate
the death of her fader / And so much she enamoured on hercules. that she might
rest in no place but that she must be allway him. O meruaylous thing. the
rancour and the hate that yole had yesterday unto hercules. is now suddenly
turned in to love Infallible. ffor to speed the matter during yet the first
days of the love of hercules and yole. At the prayer of yole / hercules gaf
her susters in marriage to certain knights of the greeks / and left them there
to govern the contre and the royame of calidonie / After he deperted from
thens and brought his oxen and his kyen with him. And sent ageyn the king
Euander in to his domynacion / Thankyng him of his company. and of the honor
that he had done to him.

EWander had gladli conveyed hercules in to greece But hercules would in no wise
that he should have the trauayll. At last than euander with great thankyngs of
hercules and of his armee departid And hercules with his excersite went unto
the sea / He forgate not behind him the fair yole / he louyd her soueraynly.
All day he was with her / And she plesyd him as much as she might / doubtyng
more to lose his love than she dredde the death: As they than thus went by the sea mayntenyng to their power the amerous life / Hercules rencountrid on a day /
nyghe by an haven and a good cite / a galeye of merchants / Hercules made the
galeye to tarry and after called the patron. And axid of him of what contre he
was and fro whens he came Certes sire answered the patron of the galeye / I
departed late fro the port of trace that is here by / I see well that ye be
estranger and that ye know not the peril that ye be Inn. Wherefore I have
pity of you and of your company And therefore I aduertyse you and pray you
that at the next haven ye shall find that in no wise ye tarry there / for no
thing that may befall you / ffor also truly as ye be here. if ye goo theder ye
shall take harm / ffor there is a king a tyrant the most cruel that is in all
the world named Diomedes that holds under him ten thousand theuys. And that
he makyth war a^enst all them that he may find and has a custom that he
puts men to raunson such as hit plesith him And if they that he puts to
such myserye / pay their raunson. he lateth hem go quyte. And with that money
and substance he nourysshith his theuys and his horses. And if they may not
furnysshe their raunson He him self smyteth hem in to morsellis and gives hem
to his horses for to ete and devour / But there is one thing good for you.
ffor this morning he is goon to the Chasse for to hunte in a foreste which is
a four mile from trace. And with him there ben an honderd of the strongest
theuys that he has. And this know I verytably for I have seen hem depart not
passing three ours a goo etc:

How hercules fought against Dyomedes in the forest of trace and how he maad
his horse to ete him.
HErcules heeryng the words that the patron of the galeye said to him and
rehercyng the life of diomedes. / was passing Joyous in his heart / more than he
had syn the death of the thief cacus. he had in him that virtue / that where he
might know monstre or tyrant or any men enpesshyng the common well / thither he
went And such tyrans he destroyed And to the end that men should not say that
he did such works for couetyse. he would never hold ne reteyne to his propre
use no thing of their goods / But all that he conquerid in such wise he gave
hit unto noble men And pre^sid no thing but virtue / He would not make his
seignourye to grow ne to amasse and take to him self royame upon royame. He
was cont^nte of that / that nature had given him. And allway he would labor
for the common well / O noble heart / O right wel^ adressid courage / O
tresuertuous paynem there was none like to him of all them / that were before him
ne after him. ffor to hold on and entretieue my matter / When the patron had
advertised him as before is said. that the tyrant dyomedes was goon an huntyng
in to the foreste. with his honderd theuys. He did so much that the patron
showed him the sytuacion of the foreste And by what way and manner he might
sonnest come theder / After this he gaf leave to the patron to goo his way.
That done he callid his maryners / and made them to seche the place. After he
assemblid the greeks and told them that he would that they should abide him
there. And that he him self with out delay would goo in to the foreste. that
the patron had enseigned him to seek diomedes Sayyng tht he would never return
in to greece unto the time that he had delivered the country of this tyrant /
yole began than to weep / when she herd thentrepryse of hercules and prayed him
tenderly weeping. that he would leave and depart him of the aventure in so great
paryll / Hercules took no reward ne head to her prayers. He delivered to
philotes his bow and his clubbe. And entrid in to a lytill galeye subtle and
light / Which he conduyted by the help of phylotes right nyhe the place
where he would be / And took land a two bow shot fer fro the foreste. And
in setting foot a land / he herd the bruyt and noise of the Chasse. He had
thereof great Joy / And said that he was well adressid / He took his clubbe /
and left his bow with philotes. After he entryd in to the foreste / He had
not far rengid in the foreste. When he fond diomedes and his honderd theuys.
Dyomedes was the first that fro far espied hercules / he knew that he was
an estrau^ger / And escryed him and said. Geant what is that thou sechest in
this foreste. Hercules answered what art thou. Diomedes said I am the king of
trace / thou art entrid in to my domynaco^n with out my leave / hit displeseth
me / thou must be my prysonner / where fore yield the to me / Hercules said
than. king syn thou art diomedes the king of trace. thou art sauns fault ^
the tyrant that I seek. And therefore I am not of thentencion to yield me with
out struck smytyng / And also to an evil thief / know thou that I shall
defend me with this clubbe. with which I have been accustomed to destroy the
monstres / And am in hope this day to make thy horses ete and devour thy body
like as thou haste taught and vsid them to ete thy prysonners:.

When diomedes herd the answer of hercules / he took a right great axe that oon
of his theuys bare after him. And he lift hit up escryyng hercules unto the
death and dischargid so hard. that if hereules had not turned the struck with
his clubbe / he had been in great peril: Diomedes was of the gretenes and
stature of hercules. And had largely strenght and puyss^nce / When hercules had
receyuyd the struck / he enhaunced his clubbe and faillid not to smite
diomedes. ffor he gaf him such a struck upon the stomach and so heavy. that he
turned him up so down from his horse. and lay all astonyed in the field / Than
his honderd theuys meuyd them and assayllid hercules on all sides. Some of them
there were that redressid diomedes and set him again upon his horse / the
other late flee upon hercules largely arowes and darts And some brake their
glayues upon him. All thise things enpayred no thing the arms of hercules.
His hawbere and his helm were of fyn steell forged and temprid hard. The frode
there among them like a montaygne / When he had suffrid the first enuaye and
assault of the theuys. for to show to them to whom they fought He meuyd upon
them and smote down right on all sides by such virtue. that suddenly he maad
the pieces of them flee in to the wode And smote them down of their horses.
Diomedes was at that time reysid. and with great fureur and maletalent / with
many of his accomplices came unto the rescows of his theuys that hercules gouernyd
as he would. And whi^s that some assayllid him be for^ / he came behind and
smote him with his axe upon his helm / the struck was great the fire sprange
out. Diomedes had well wend to have murdrid hercules / / how well hercules
meuyd not for the struck but a lytill bowed his heed. After this than he lift
up his clubbe and smote among the theuys. And maulgre them all in less than
an our he had so holden the yren to their backs / that of the honderd he
slew syxty / And the other all to brussyd and frusshyd and put hem to
flight with diomedes / But hercules rennyng more swyftely than an horse among
all other he pour^iewid diomedes so nyghe / that he raught him by the leg and
pullyd him down of his horse And cast him donn against a tree unto the earth.
After he took him by the body. and by vyue force bare him unto the place where
the battle had been. There he dyshelmyd him and unarmed with little resistance.
For dyomedes was than all to brussyd. And might not help him self / And when
he had him thus at his will / He bond him by the feet and by the hands /
After this he assemblid to geder twenty horses of the theuys / that ran
spark^^d in the wood / and came to diomedes and said to him. O thou cursid
enemy that all thy time haste enployed in tyranny: And did never oon good
deed. But all thy days have lynyd in multeplyyng of sins and vices / And
that thou have troublid the people by theft and proyes irreparable / And that
thou have nourysshid thy horses with mannys flessh / And by this cruelte thou
had supposid to have made me to dye / Certes I shall do Justice upon the
And shall do to thyn evil person. like as thou would have done to mine.
Than hercules leyde the tyrant in the mids of the horses / which had great
honger / And they anon deuowred him / for they louyd mannys flessh And thus
when hercules had put the tyrant to death / he took his arms in syngne of
victory. and returned unto philotes that abode him.

PHilotes had great Joy when he saw hercules return. he inquired of him how
he had done and how he had born him And hercules hid ne concelid no thing
from him. What shall I say with great Joy and gladness. they returned unto the
greeks And did do disancre their ships And saillyd for to aryue at the port
or haven of trace. Than would hercules do hit be known / hit was late And trace
was full of the death of the king diomedes / This notwithstanding. hercules
took to philotes the Arms of dyomedes And sent him in to the cite for to
somone them that governed hit / and for to yield hit in to his hands Philotes
went in to the palais of trace And made to be assemblid them that than were
pryncipall in the cite. When they were assemblid philotes did than open to
them his charge and message. and somoned the tracyens / / that they should put
their cite in the hands of hercules / Sayng that hercules was he that had
put to death diomedes for his evil living. and for the love of the common
well. And that the cite cowde do no better / but to resseyue him at his coming.
ffor he would not pylle hit. but he would only reduy schit to good polycye /
When he had done this so^macion. to the end that they should believe him / he
discouerd and shewid unto them the arms of diomedes.

When the tracyens had herd philotes / and saw the arms of diomedes Some of
the accomplices and semblable of the vocaco^n of diomedes and theuys / / were
full of great fureur And would have taken the arms fro philotes. The other that
were wise and notable men. and that many years had desired the end of their
king. seeing his arms knew assuridly that dyomedes was ded. And full of Joy
answered to philotes. ffor as much as hercules is a king of great renomee and
wysedom. And that he had done a work of great merit in the death of diomedes /
that they would receive him with good heart in to the cite / With our plente of
langage / the tracyens went unto the gate and opend hit / Philotes returned
than unto hercules / And told to him these tidings. Hercules and the greeks
went out of their galeyes. and entrid in to trace by space of time. The
tracyens brought hem unto the palace where were yet many theuys. Hercules put
all the theuys to death. not in the same night / but during the space of ten
days that he soiournyd there / He set the cite in good nature of polycye. He
delyueryd hit from the evil theuys. He maad Iuges by elecco^n at the playsir
of the peuple / And than when he had done all these things / He departed fro
trace with great thankynges as well of the old as of the young. He mounted
upon the sea. And after by succession of time with out any aventure to speak
of. he did so much that he came unto his royame of Lycye in to his palais
where he was receyuyd with great Joy of the Inhabitau^s and also of the
neighbors. And there he abode with the fair yole whom he louyd above all
temporell goodys..

How deyanira was full of sorrow for as much as hercules louyd yole etc.
THeseus than after the return of hercules seeing that he would abide there And
that there was no memory / that in all the world was any monstre ne tyrant.
took leave of his felawe hercules / of yole of philotes and of other / And went
to Athenes and to thebes. Semblably the greeks took leave. and every man
returned in to his contre. and to his house recountynge and tellyng in all the
places where they went the great auentures and the glorious works of
hercules. Than the renomee that renneth and flees by royames and empyres as
lightly as the wind / Also lightly came hit and flewe unto ycome where as
deyanyra soiourned / And was said to deyanira that hercules was returned fro
spaigne. With great glory and tryumphe And that he was descendid in lycye.
Dame deianyra for this renomee was glad. and also subget of a great and
synguler playsir / and concluded that she would go unto him. How well she was
abasshid of that he had not signyfied to her his coming. and that he had not
sent for her / Sore pensyf and dowtyng that she should be fallen out of the
grace of hercules. She made ready her excersite And in right noble astate she
departid fro ycome on a day for to goo in to lycye. In process of time she came
nyghe unto lycye. Than she tarried there for to attire and array her the best
and most fairest wise she cowde or might / And callid her squire named lycas.
and commanded him that he should goo in to lycye. and signefye to hercules her
coming. At the commandment of deyanyra. Lycas went in to the cite And happend
him right at the gate he encountrid and met a man of his knowleche a squire
of hercules / Lycas and the squire grette and salned each other / After this
lycas axed of the squire and demanded him where the king was. and if he were
in his palace / ye verily said the squire / / he is there I wot well and
passith the time with his lady yole the most best adressid. and out of mesure
most resplendissaunt lady that is in all the world as great as hit is. Each
man aloweth her. And preyseth a thousand time more than deyanyra / Hercules
has her in so much grace. that contynuelly they ben to geder / And what some
ever the lady does. hit is agreeable unto hercules / And there is no man that can
say or tell the great love that they have to gyder

Lycas heeryng these tidings of the squire. took leave of him / and maad
semblau^t to have late fall or left behind him some of his bagues or Jewels
/ For as much as he was of advise / ymagynyng in him self. that hit was not
good that he signefyed to hercules the coming of deyanyra / unto the time that
he had aduertysed her of his astate. Pensyf and simple than he came to deyanira.
where as she was attyryng her self precyously and said to her Madame what do
ye here / Wherefore answered deyanyra. therefore said lycas. Why is there any
thing said deyanira what tidings. Lycas answered hard tidings: I have herd
say and tell of hercules things ^ull of such hardynesse. that certes hit is
right grievous to me to say them unto you. How be hit syn that ye be come thus
far / And that ye must needs know and understand them. I tell and say to
you certainly that your lord hercules is in his palace right Ioyously And that
he has with him a lady. fair by excellence Whom he loves above all thyngis
for her beauty which is so high and great that each man meruaylleth / and
that she is the most sovereign in beauty / that ever was seen with man's eye.
Behold and auyse you what ye will do er ye goo any forther / this day hit is
force to abide and take counceyll and advise.

Off the heryng of these tidings Deyanira was passing angry and was all
bespradd with a right great sorrow in all her veins / She began to quake and
tremble. Her fair here that was adressid on her heed. she all to drew hit with
her hands in so fell manner / that she disatyred her / and smote her self with
her fyste so great a struck upon her breast / that she fill down backward in a
swowne. The ladies and the damoyselles that accompanied her / shryked and cried
dolorously / and were sore meuyd in her blood By space of time deyanyra came to
her self again / all pale and destaynte and thinking on the sorrow that
engendrid in her / And also on the sorrow that was coming to her / she spoke
and said with a feeble and low wys. Pour deyanyra what shall thou do. or
whyther shall thou goo. Thou that fyndest thy self recuylid and put a back fro
the love of thy lord hercules. Alas alas is hit possible that the renoueleme^t
of a lady may take away my husbond / the heart late Joined unto deyanyra /
shall hit be disioyned by the findyng of a woman of folly / shall she make the
separacion. by my^^auyse hit may not be. ffor hercules is noble of heart and
loves virtue And if he abandonne and give me over / he shall do against vert^e
and noblesse / I have affiance in him that he shall be true to me. Madame say
^ lycas ye faylle no thing to say that hercules is noble and full of virtue.
ffor he has employed all his time in virtuous things. how be hit. he is a
man. And has taken in love this new woman for her beawte / Ne affie you so
much in his virtue. that your affiance begyle and deceive you / ye know well
that fortune ne entertieneth long princes or pryncesses on the top above of
her whele / there is none yet so high. but that he ne makes hem sometime lie
benethe among them that suffer. Behold and see well what ye have to do / if
ye go unto hercules And he receive you not. as he has been accustomed / that
shall be to you a title of despair Men say that he loves soueraynly this new
lady / Hit is aparau^t that he shall set but little stoor of your coming /
And if ye goo the lady shall be evil content / She has the bruyt. And every
man is fayn to do her playsir. there shall be no man so hardy to welcome you.
for the love of her / goo not theder thanne / the paryll is to great / I
counceyll you for the better that ye return in to y come / And that ye put
this things in to your suffrance / / In attendyng and abydyng that the fire
and the bruyt of this lady pass / ffor where as hercules is all other / than
the most part of the men be / so shall he leave this lady a little and a little
etc.

DEyanira considering that licas counceyllyd her truly / believed well this
counceyll / And right sore weeping she returned in to y come / When she was in
the howsse of ycome / Than she pryuyd her of all worldly playsir / and held
her solitaryly with out going to festes or to plays. Thus abidyng in this
solitude / her grievous annoye grew more and more by so ample anoyance that she
was constrained to make Infynyte bewayllyngis and sighs. The contynuell
confort of her ladies might give to her no solace The Innumerable deuyses that
they made unto her eeres for to make her pass the time. might never take away
hercules out of her mind She vsid and lyuyd many days this life. Having
alleway her eere open for to know if hercules sent for her / In the end when
she had suffrid ynowhe and saw that no thing came / and that neither man ne
woman was coming to bring her tidings fro the person of hercules. She made a
lettre which she delivered to lycas for to bear unto hercules And chargid him
to delyuere hit to no person but to the propre hand of him that she sent hit
unto / Lycas took the lettre and went unto lycye. And two mile nyghe the cite
/ he encountrid hercules in a crosseway Hercules came from Archade where he had
newly slain a wild boor so great / that there was never none seen like to him.
When than lycas saw hercules. he made to him reverence And presentyd his
lettre to him in salewyng him from deyanyra. Hercules wax reed and changed
color when he herd speak of deyanyra. He receyuyd the lettre amyable / and
read hit and fond therein contained as here folowetth:.

HErcules my lord the man of the world that I most desire / I you supplye that
ye have recomanded your true seruante and Indigne deyanyra Alas hercules alas /
Where is become the love of the time paste / / ye have now soiourned many days
in lycye And ye have let me have no knowleche thereof / Certes that is to me a
right dolorouse Auoye to suffer and bear. For I desire not to be deyfyed ne
mount in the celestyall manoyrs with the son / with the moon ne with the
sterrys / But with out rompure or brekyng of free heart I desire your solemn
comynycacion / / I may fro hens forth no more feign / Hit is said to me that ye
have another wife than me / Alas hercules have I made any fault against your
reverence. Wherefore give ye me over and abandou^ne me / How may ye do so / Men
name you the man virtuous / ye abandou^e me and forsake me / That is against
virtue / how well ye do hit / I have seen the time that ye were my husbond In
enbrasyng us to gyder and kyssyng / ye showed than to me semblaunce of solas
and of Joy. Now late ye her that ye louyd as a pour femelette / Alas where
ben the wittenesses of our marriage / Where be the eternal serements and oaths
that we made that oon to that other / The men ben deef and blind. but the
gods here and see. wherefore I pray you that ye considere that ye ought to
consydere. And that ye hold your glory more derer than ye do for the love
of your new aqueyntyd that makes you to err ayenste virtue whereof ye have
so great a Renomee / And I pray you right hertely to send to me your playsir
etc:.

When hercules hadd read from the beginning to the end the lettre of
deyanira. As he yet beheld and saw hit / yole came upon him with a three
honderd damoyselles for to feste and make chiere to hercules. Hercules than
closid the lettre and returned in to lycye holdyng yole by the hand. how be
hit when he was in his palais / he forgate not deyanira. but fond manner for to
goo in to his study And there wrote a lettre / And when hit was achieuyd he
took hit to lycas for to present hit to deyanira. Lycas took the lettre and
returned home again to deyanira. ffirst he told her the tidings and of the
state of yole. After he delivered to her the lettre / conteynyng that he
recomandid him unto her / And that he had none other wife but her And that he
prayed her that she should not give her to none evil thinking. but leave in
hope and in pacyence / as a wise lady and noble ought and is bound to do for
her honor and worship / This lettre lityll or naught conforted deyanira. she
was strongly attaynte of Ialousye / Her sorrow redowblid and grew In this
redoublyng she wrote yet a another lettre which she sent to hercules and
contained these words that follow.

HErcules alas and what auaylleth me to be the wife of so noble a husbonde as ye
be / your noblesse is to me more dampnable than profitable. O fortune I was
wont to resioye. ffor all day / I herd none other things but loanges and
preysynges of yowr prowesses and right gloryouse deeds and feetes whereof the
world was enlumyned and shoon. now I must be angry and take displaisir in
your works that been foul and full of vices. All greece murmureth upon you And
the people say that ye were wont to be the vaynquysshour of all things. and
wno ye ben vaynquysshid of the folyssh love of yole Alas hercules and how shall
I be departid from you / and be holden the chambryere of the caytyf yole. She
is your kaytyf. ffor ye have slain her fader / ^and have taken her in the pryse
of Calidonie / how be hit she has the place of your lawful wife ^ Alas have I
be said wel^ married for to be named the fair daughter of Jupiter king of the
heaven and of the earth. Now shall I no more be callid so / Hit is not alleway
happy to monte unto the most high astate / ffor fro as much as I have
mounted in heyghte and was your felawe / fro so far I feel me fall in to the
more great peril / O hercules if for my beauty ye took me to your wife / I may
well curse that beauty. ffor that is cause of the grievous shame / that is to me
all euydente. ffor to prenostyque mine harm and evil future and that is to
come can not your astronomyens see that / I would I knew that / I wot well
your beauty and my beauty have brought my heart in to the strayt prysone of
sorrow with out end. And I may not count them but for enemies / When by them
all sorrows comen to me / The ladies have Joy in the preemynence of their
husbondes: But I have maleure and myshappe. I ne see but displaysir in my
marriage / O hercules I think all day on you / that ye goo in great paryls of
Arms and of fyers bestes and tempests of the sea: And in the falsenesse of
the world Mine heart tremblyth and has right great feer of that I ought to have
believe and hoope of welthe / All that I remember in my mind and think on the
day Idreme on the night / And than me thinks verily that I see the cuttyng
sharpp swerdes enter in me and the heedes of the sperys. and after me thinks
I see issue out of the caves of the forestes and deserts / lions and wild
monstres that ete my flessh. Syn the beginning of our alyance unto this day I
have had all the days and nyghtes such pains for you. and borne and suffrid
them. But alas all these things are but lityll in comparacion of the pain.
that I now suffer and endure / ffor as much as ye mayntene strange women and a
woman of all folly / May she be callid the mother of your children / of whom
the sparklis of foul renomee shall abide of you. Of this tache or vice is my
pain redowblid. hit percid my soul / I am troblid of the dishonor of your
ample hyenes. The people say that ye ar made a woman. and live after the gyse
and manner of a woman. And spynne on the rock: where ye were wont to estrangle
lions with your hands ye leave the hantysse of arms / and to be known in
far contrees and royames in showing your virtue like as ye were wont to do.
for the only hauntyse of the caytyf yole that holds and abuses you: O
cursid hauntyse and foul abusion Sspeke to me hercules. if the right high and
mighty men that thou have vaynquysshyd ^ as diomedes of trace. Antheon of
lybye. Busire of egypt. Geryon of spaigne. And cacus the great thief saw the
thus holden to do naught / for the beauty of a daughter that sone shall pass.
What should they say / Certes they should not repute them worthy to be
vaynquysshid of the And should show and point the with their finger / as a man
shamed and maad woman living in the lap of a woman / O how is yole strong /
When her hands that been not worthy ne dygne to threde an nedle. has taken thy
clubbe. and brandisshyd thy swerd where with thou haste put in fere all the
earth / Alas hercules have not ye souenance that in your chyldehode syyng in
your cradell ye slew the two serpents / ye being a child were a man And now
when ye have been a man. ye are becomen a woman or a child / This is the work
of a woman to hold him alleway with a woman / / or hit is the fayte of a
child / for to enamoure him self on a woman of folly / the truth must be
said ye began better than ye end / your last deeds answer not to the first /
your labors shall never be dygne ne worthy of preysyng ne of loos. For all the
loange and preysynge is in the end. Who that begins a work where of the
beginning is fair. and the end foul / all is lost / Certes hercules when I
behold the glorious beginning that virtue maad in you. And see that ye now be
vicyous. All my strength faylleth and mine armies fall down as a woman in
aspasme or a swowne and with out spyryte. And hit may not seem to me true that
tho arms that bare away by force the sheep fro the gardyn langyng to the
daughters of athlas may fall in to so great a fawte. as for to enbrace and
beclyppe flesshly an other wife than his own: This not withstandyng I am
acertayned for trowth. that ye hold not kaytyf yole as a kaytyf / but as your
own wife: not in prison: But at her playsir in Chamber parced And in bed
courteyned and hangyd. not disguysed and secretly as many hold her concubynes:
But ^penly and with visage open showing her right glorious to the people / And
she may so do lafully / ffor she haldeth you prysonner and caytyf / And she
has put the gorreau about your nekke by her ytalyan subtle Iogelynges and
Iapes / whereof I have great shame in my self / But as for the amendment / I
discoulpe me and can not better hit. but pray to the gods that they will
pourueye for remedy.

How deyanira sent to hercules a sherte enuenymed And how hercules burnt him
self in the fire of his sacrefyse / And how deyanyra slew her self when she
knew that hercules was ded by the cause of her ygnorance etc.
When hercules had read this lettre / he understood well what hit contained
And was smyten with remors of conscience / By this remors he understood that
virtue was fowlid in him. He was than all peusyf And so much pryuyd from
plesance that none durst come to him in a great while and space Save only
they that brought to him mete and drink Neither yole durst not go to him.
Lycas that had brought this bettre was there awaytyng and attendyng the answer
long. No man could know whereof proceeded the solitude of hercules ne the cause
why he withdrewe him fro the people. In the end when hercules had been long
pensif. and had thought upon all his affairs and that he had to do ffor to
withdraw him and to eslonge him fro yole he departid fro his chamber on a day
sayng that he would goo and make sacrefyce to the god appollo upon the mount
named oethea / And commanded and defended upon pain of death that no man should
follow him res^ruyd philotes. Of adventure as he issued out of his palace
accompanied only of philotes for to goo upon the mount / / he met lycas /
Lycas maad to him reverence. and demanded him / if hit plesid him any thing to
send to deyanira / Hercules answered to lycas that he would go make his
sacrefyse to the god Appollo. And that at his return and coming again he would
goo unto her or ellis he would send unto her etc

WIth this word hercules and philotes passyd forth and went on their
pilgremage. And lycas returned unto deyanira. and told to her the Joyous
tidings that he had receyuyd of hercules / And also what life that hercules had
led syn the day and the our that he had presentyd to him her lettre /
Deyanyra all conforted of these good tidings went in to her chamber and
thanked the gods and fortune Anon after she began to think on her astate.
And thus thinking she remembrid her on the poison / that Nessus had given her
in the Article of his death. And how she had shytte hit in one of her coffres.
And furthwyth incontinent she opend the coffre and took the cursid poison and
one of the shertes of hercules / And as she that ymagyned by the virtue of the
poison to draw again to her the love of hercules like as Nessus had said unto
her. She maad the sherte to be boyllyd with the poison. And gaf the charge
thereof to one of her women When the sherte was boyllyd ynowh the woman took of
the vassayle and set hit to kele. After she took out the sherte appertly And
wrong hit. But she could not so sone have wrong hit but the fire sprange in
her hands so anguysshously. that as she cast hit upon a perch to dry / she
fill down ded:.

IN process of time deyanyra desyryng to have the sherte / and seeing that the
woman that had charge thereof. brought hit not / she went in to the chamber
where the sherte had be boillid And fond the woman ded / whereof she had great
meruayll. Nevertheless she passid the death lightly. And by oon of her
damoyselles she made take the sherte that henge on the perch and was dry. and
commanded her that she should fold hit and wind hit in a kerchief / At the
commandment of deyanyra the damoysell folded and enuoluped the sherte. But so
doing she was served of the poison in such wise that she lost her speech and
deyde anon after / This notwithstanding deyanira that thought on no thing but
for to come to her Intencion took the sherte and delivered hit to lycas And
chargid him that he should bear hit to hercules. prayng him in her name that he
would were hit. Lycas that was ready to accomplissh the will of his maystresse
took the charge of the dolorous sherte And departid fro thens and went unto
the montaigne where as hercules was And there he fond him in a foreste where
as was the temple of diane / Hercules had no man with him but philotes / which
made ready for him a great fire for to sacrefye an heart that hercules had taken
rennyng at a course. Lycas than fyndyng hercules in the temple / He knelid down
low to him and said. Sire here is a sherte that your Ancylle and servant
deyanira sends unto you / She recomandeth her humbly unto your good grace /
and prays you that ye wole receive this present in gr^e / as fro your wife.
Hercules was Joyous of these words And anon vnclothyd him. for to do on this
cursid sherte. Sayng that verily she was his wife / And that he would for her
sake were this sherte In doing on this sherte he felt a right great dolor and
pain in his body / This notwithstanding he did on his other clothes above as
he that thought none evil / When he was clothyd And the sherte was chauffid
his pain and sorrow grew more and more Than he began to think. and knew
anon that his maledye came of his sherte / And felyng the prykkyng of the
venyme / with out long taryyng he took of his robe And suppo^id to have take
of his sherte fro his back. And to have rent hit and diffete hit. But he was
not strong ynowh for to do so. For the sherte held so sore and cleuyd so
fast and terrybly to his flessh and was so fastyd to his skyn. by the vigor
of the aspre poison In such wise that he tare out his flessh and bare a way
certain pieces thereof when he would have taken of his sherte etc.

HErcules knew than. that he was hurt and woundyd to the death / the death
began to fight against him. He began to resist by drawyng of / of his sherte
from his body by pieces of his flessh and of his blood all might not auaylle /
He all to ren^e and dischired his back his thyes. his body unto his entraylles
and guttis / his arms his sholdres unto the boones / His dolor and pain
grew and enlargid to the utterance / Thus as he returned by the force of his
great dolorous pain / He beheld lycas and another felawe that he had brought
with him. that were all abasshid of this adventure / Than he went to them and
said unto lycas / Thou cursyd and unhappy man / Wat thing has meuyd the to
come hither under the pryuy habitude of deyanyra to bring me in to the chance
of fortune What wenyst thou. that thou have done. Thou haste served me with a
sherte entoxicat of mortal venyme / who has Introduced the to do this. thou
must needs receive thy deserte / And sayng these words hercules caughte by
the heed pour licas. that wiste never what to say and threw him against a
roche so fyersly that he to frusshid and all to brake his boones. and so slew
him. The felawe of lycas fled and hyd him in a busshe / Philotes was so
affrayed that he wiste not what to do At the our that hercules was in this
point much people came in to the temple. The entrailles of hercules broyllid.
His blood boyllyd in all his veins the poison percid unto his heart. his
synewis shronke and withdrewe them. When he felt him in this myserye And that
the death hasted him by terryble battle as he that could not take away the
repugnance of his virtuous force stryuyng against the malice of venyme He began
to run over hill and over valey up and down in the foreste. and pullyd up the
great trees and ouerthrewe them. After he began to rent of his sherte with the
flessh than soden and bruylid / When he had long ladde this life. he returned
unto the temple / all a certayned of the death. and lift up his hands and his
eyes unto the heaven and said / Alas Alas must hit be that fortune lawghe at me
for this miserable desstyne coming of the acusacion of wood Ialousie and
sorcerye of that woman that in the world I held and reputyd most wise and
most virtuous. O deyanyra disnaturall woman / with out wit. with out
shame and with out honor / with an heart of a tyrant all affamed of Ialousie
/ how haste thou might contryue against me this furour and trayson envenymed
false femenyn will disnaturall out of rewle and out of order Thou had
never so much honor and worship as thou now have deseruyd blame / not only
for the allone. but for all the women that been or shall be ever in the world /
ffor if hit happen that the kings or princes acquente them with ladies or
damoselles for the humayne multepliance. they shall never have credence ne
affiance in their propre wives / O deyanira what haste thou done. The women
present and they that been in the wombes of the wombes of their moders / all
shall cracche them in the face and shall curse the with out end. ffor the
reproach by the tornyng upon them is Infynyte And the men shall have dread for
to be served of the sherte etc.

ALas deyanyra what shall Calcedome now do that gloryfied her in thy glory.
And put and setted the in the front of their honor as a Charbou^cle for the
parcement of her precious things / Instead to set the in the front / they
shall cast the under feet / And instead to have glory of the. they shall
have shame / hereof they may not faylle / For by Im^itye and diverse engyns And
by conspyred and swollen cruelte / thou haste conspyred my death / And haste
desloyed and vnbounden one not recourable Infortune / for the and me / and for
our friends and kynnesmen. O deyanyra right remauldyt unhappy and most c^rsid
serpente / to malicyous and reprochab^e murdryer^ Thy false Ialousye has more
power to extermyne my life than have had all the monstres of the world / By
thyn offense and by thy machynacion hyd and couerte Wherefro I could not keep
me. I must dye and pass out of this world. Syn hit so is I thank fortune /
And axe of the goddis no vengeance of the. But certes to the end that hit be
not said / that the vaynquysshour of men. be not vaynquysshid by a woman. I
shall not pass the bitter passage of death by thy mortal sorceries full of
abhomynaco^n. But by the fire that is net and clear. and the most excellent
of the elements.

THese dolorouse and sorrowful words accomplisshyd. Hercules took his clubbe
and cast hit in the fire that was made ready for to make his sacrefyce / After
he gaf to philotes his bow and his arowes. And syn he prayed him that he would
recomande him to yole and to his friends / And than feling that his life had no
more for to soiourne. He took leave of philotes And than as all burnt and soden
he leyde him down in the fire. lyftyng his hands and his eyes unto the heaven
And there consommed the course of his glorious life. When philotes saw the end
of his maistre hercules. He burnt his body in to asshen And kept thise ashes
in Intencion to bear them to the temple that the king euander had do make.
After he departid fro thens and returned in to lycye greatly disconforted And
with great sours of teeris he recounted to yole and to his friends the pietous
death of hercules No man could recounte the great sorrow that yole maad / And
they of licye as well the estudyents as the rural people. All the world fill in
teeris in sighs and in bewayllyngis for his death So much habounded yole in
teeris and wepyngis: that her heart was drowned And departid her soul from the
body the bitter water of her weeping / Each body cursid and spoke shame of
deyanyra / Fynably deyanyra advertysid by the felawe of lycas of the myschyef
that was comen by the sherte / She fill in despayer and maad many pytouse
bewayllynges / And among all other she said / What have I do alas / Alas what
have I do. The most solemn man of men shynyng among the clerks / He that
traversid the strong marches the fondementes terrestre / that bodyly conuersid
among the men / And spirytuelly among the son the moon and the therris And
that sustained the circomference of the heuenes is ded. by my cause and by my
coulpe And with out my culpe / He is ded by my culpe ffor I have send to him
the sherte that has give to him the bytte of death / But this is with out my
culpe. for I knew no thing of the poison / O mortal poison / By me is he
pryved of his lyffe. of whom I louyd the life as much as I did mine own. He
that bodyly dwellid among the men here in earth And spyrituelly above with the
son the moon and celestial secretis. He that was fontayne of science / by
whom the Athenyens arrowsid and bedewyd their wits and engyns. He that made
the monstres of the sea to tremble in their abismes and swalowis. and destroyed
the monstres of hell. He confonded the monstres of the earth. the tyrants he
correctid. the orguyllous and proud he humelyed and meked The humble and meke
he enhauncyd and exaltyd. He that maad no tresour but of virtue. He that all
the nations of the world subiuged and subdued with his clubbe / And he that if
he had would by ambicion of seygnourye might have atteyned to be king of the
est / of the west. of the sowth and of the north / of the sees and of the
montaynes. of all thise he might have named him king and lord by good right.
if he had would. Alas alas what am I born in an unhappy time When so hyhe and so
mighty a prince is ded by my symplesse He was the glory of the men. There was
never to him none like. ne never shall be / ought I to live after him Nay
certes that shall I never do. ffor to the end that among the ladies I be not
shewid ne poyntyd with the finger / And that I fall not in to strange hand
for to be punysshid of as much as I have of coulpe and blame in this death / I
shall do the vengeance to my self / And with that she took a knyf. and sayng I
feel my self and know that I am Innocente of the death of my lord hercules. And
with the point of the knyf she ended her dispayred life / Whereof philotes was
all abasshid / and so were all they of greece / that long bewepte and bewaylid
hercules: and his death And they of athenes bewayllid him strongly some for his
science and other for his virtues where of I will now tarry. Besechyng her that
is cause of this translaco^n out of frenshe in to this simple and rude englissh
/ that is to wete my right redoubtyd lady Margrete by the grace of god suster
of my souerayn lord the king of england and of ffrance etc Duchess of
bourgoyne and of Brabynt etc that she wole resseyue my Rude labor in thank
and in gree:.

THus ends the second book of the recule of the historyes of Troyes / Which
books were late translated in to frenshe out of latin / by the labor of the
venerable person raoul le feure priest as a fore is said / And by me Indigne
and unworthy translated in to this rude englissh / by the commandment of my
said redoubtid lady duches of Bourgone: And for as much as I suppose the said
two books ben not had to fore this time in our englissh langage / therefore I
had the better will to accomplisshe this said work / which work was begone
in Brugis / and continued in gaunt And finysshid in Coleyn In the time of the
troublous world / and of the great deuysions being and reygnyng as well in the
royames of england and france as in all other places universally through the
world that is to wete the year of our lord athousand four honderd lxxi. And as
for the third book which treteth of the general and last destrucco^n of
Troy Hit needs not to translate hit in to englissh ffor as much as that
worshifull and religyous man dan John lidgate monk of Burye did translate hit
but late / after whose work I fere to take upon me that am not worthy to bear
his penner and ynke horn after him. to meddle me in that work. But yet for as
much as I am bound to contemplare my said ladies good grace and also that his
work is in ryme / And as far as I know hit is not had in prose in our tongue
/ And also paraventure / he translated after some other Auctor than this is /
And yet for as much as dyuerce men ben of dyuerce desires. Some to read in
Ryme and meter. and some in prose And also be cause that I have now good leyzer
being in Coleyn And have none other thing to do at this time In eschewyng of
ydlenes mother of all vices. I have delibered in my self for the contemplacion
of my said redoubtid lady to take this labor in hand by the suffrance and
help of almighty god / whom I mekely supplye to give me grace to accomplysshe
hit to the playsir of her that is causer thereof and that she resseyue hit in
gre of me her faithful true and most humble servant etc.

Thus ends the second book.
In these two books precedente. we have by the help of god tretyd of the two
first destruccyons of Troy with the noble faytes and deeds of the strong and
puissant Hercules. that made and did so many mervayllis that the engyne humayn
of all men ought to meruaylle. And also how he slew the king Laomedon beat
down and put his cite of troy to ruin Now in the third and last book god to
fo^^. we shall say how the said cite was by Priamus sone of the said king
laomedon reediffied and repaired more strong and more puyssante than ever hit
was before. And afterward how for the rauysshement of dame helayne wife of king
Menelaus of greece. the said cite was totally destroyed Priamus hector and all
his sons slain with noblesse with out nombre. as hit shall appear in the
process of the chapitres..

How the king Priant reediffied the cite of troy more strong than ever hit
was before and of his sons and daughters. And how after many counceyllis he
sent Anthenor and Polydamas in to greece for to remande his suster e^ione. that
Aya^ mayntenyd..
FOR to enter than in to the matere. ye have herd here to fore at the second
destruction of Troy how hercules had taken prysonner Priamus the sone of king
Laomedon. And had put him in prison. how be hit dares of frigie says tht his
fader had sent him to meue war in a strange country where he had been right
long / wherefore he was not at that disconfiture: This pryamus had espowsid and
weddyd a much noble lady daughter of Egypseus king of Trace / of whom he had
five sons and three daughters of great beau^te. The first of the sons was
named Hector the most worthy and best knight of the world the second sone was
named Paris and to surname Alixandre / the which was the fairest knight of the
world. and the best shoter and drawer of a bow. The third was called
deyphebus right hardy and discrete / The fourth was named Helenus a man of
great science And knew all the Arts lyberall. The fif^h and the last was
callid Troyllus that was one of the best knights and aspre that was in his
time.

UIrgile recounteth that he had two other sons by his wife / of whom that one
was named polidorus / This poliderus was sent by king pryamus with a great
foyson of gold / unto a king his friend for to have aid against the greeks /
But this king sceyng that the king pryamus was at myschief against the greeks /
And also he being meuyd with couetise / slew polidorus / And buried him man
ysle of the sea. That other sone was named gaminedes / Whom Jupiter rauysshid
and maad him his botyller / In the stead of hebe the daughter of Juno whom he
put out of that said office. The eldest of the daughters of king pryamus
was named Cheusa which was wife unto Eneas. And this Encas was sone of Anchises
and of venus of munidie / The second daughter was named Cassandra / And was a
right noble vyrgyne / Aourned and learned with scyences. And knew things that
were for to come. And the third was named Polixena that was the fairest
daughter And the best fourmed that was known in all the world. yet above
thise children here to fore rehercid. King Pryant had thretty bastard sons by
dyuerce women. that were valyant knights noble and hardy.

When than king pryant was in a strange country occupied in the fete of war
the queen and her children were with him The tidings came to him that the king
Laomedon his fader was slain his Cite destroyed. his noble men put to death
their daughters brought in servitude. and also his suster Exiona. Of thise
tidings he had great sorrow. And wept largely and made many lamentacions. And
anon incontinent he left his fiege and finysshid his war. and returned
hastily unto troyes. And when he fond hit so destroyed / he began to make the
most sorrow of the world and that dured long. And after he had council to make
again the cite / than he began to reedyffye the cite so great and so strong.
that he ought never to doubt his enemies. And did do close hit with right
hye wallis and with great towers of marble. the Cite was so great that the
circuyte was three iourneyes. and at the time in all the world was none so great
ne none so fair ne so gentilly quodpassed.

IN this Cite were six pryncipall gates. of whom that one was named dardane.
the second tymbria. the third helyas. the fourth chetas. the fifthe troyenne
and the sixthe antenorides. These gates were right great and fair / and of
strong deffence. And there were in the cite rich palayces with out nombre the
fairest that ever were. And the fairest houses / rich and well compassed. Also
there were in many parties of the cite. diverse fair places and playsau^t for
the Cytezeyns to esbatre and play. In this cite were men of all Crafts / And
merchants that went and came fro all the parties of the world / In the
myddell of the cite ran a great River named Paucus which bare shyppis and
did great prouffit and solace unto the habitau^s. When this cite was thus made
The king pryant did do come all the people and habytau^s of the contre there
aboutes. And maad them dwell in the cite And there come so many / that there
was never cite better ^ourned with people and with noble men and Cytezeyns than
hit was. There were founden many games and plays / as the Chesse play the
tables and the dyse and other diverse games. In the most apparau^t place of
the cite upon a roche / the king pryant did do make his rich palace that was
named ylyon / that was one of the rycheste palace and strong that ever was in
the world. And hit was of heyght five honderd paas with out the heyghte of the
towers / whereof was great plente and so high that hit seemed to them that saw
hem fro far that they rought unto the heuene And in this rich palace the
king pryant did do make the Rychest halle that was at that time in all the
world / wythinne which was his rich Trone And the table where upon he ete and
held his astate among his lords and barons And all that longed thereto was
of gold and of silver of precious stones and of yuorye / In this halle at oon
corner was an awter of gold and precious stones. Which was consecrate in the
name and worship of Jupiter their god to which awter went men up twenty
degrees or stappes. And upon the awter was the image of Jupiter of ffyfteen
foot of heyght. All besette and arrayed with precious stones. For in that god
Jupiter was all the esperance and trust of the king Pryant for to hold his
regne long and in prosperyte etc:

When he saw that he had so fair a Cite so strong and so well peplid and
with that so rich of all goods. he began to take displesir of the wrongs
that the greeks had don unto him And thought long how he might avenge him
Than he assemblid on a certain day all his barons and held a rich Court. At
this court Hector his eldest sone was not / ffor he was in the parties of
Pannonye on the affairs and certain works of his fader ffor as much as
pannonye was subgette unto king pryant / When the king Pryant saw all his
folk assemblid and gadred to fore him / he began to speak sayng in this
maniere wise / O my men and true friends that been parteners of the great
iniuryes to me don by the greeks for so lytyl a cause or trespass as ye know
how the greeks by their orguyell ben comen in to this contre / and have slain
cruelly your parentis and friends and also the mine. And how they have taken
and ladde a way and hold in seruytude Exyone my suster / that is so fayer and
noble And yet they hold her as a common woman ye know well how they have beten
down And destroyed this cite overthrown the wallys the palace and howses unto
the fondementis And borne away the great Rychessis whereof the cite was full.
And for these things me seems that hit should be well rayson that by the help
of the gods that resyste the orguyllous and proud that we all to gyder by a
common accord should take vengeance of thise Iniuryes / ^ye know what Cite we
have. And how hit is peuplid with good men of Arms and fyghtars / and
garnysshid of all goods and rychesses Also ye know well the Allyau^ces that
we have with many right great lords / that with good will. will help us if
hit be need / wherefore me seems that hit should be good for us to avenge us of
this shame / But allewaye for as much as the auentures of the wars ben right
doubteuses and dangerous / and that no man knows what may come thereof / how
well that the Iniurye be great And that they hold my suster in so great
dishonor / yet wole I not begin the war. But first if ye think good / I
shall send of the most sage and prudent men that I have / to pray and
require them that they render and yield again my suster exione And I shall be
content to pardone all the other Iniuryes etc:.

When the king had thus fynysshid his words All the assystents allowed and
preysyd his advise and seemed to them good. And than the king pryant callid one
of his princes named Anthenor. And prayed him swetely that he would empryse this
legaco^n in to greece / And Anthenor answered to him humbly / that he was all
ready to do his good playsir / than was a ship made ready And all that
belonged and was conuenyent to bring Anthenor in to greece: he entrid in to the
ship and his meyne. and saillid so long / tht they arrived at the port of
the ssaylle / where as was than of adventure the king Peleus. that receyuyd
Ioyously ynowh anthenor / And demanded him wherefore he was come in to tho
parties Anthenor answered to him in this manner / Sire said he I am a messanger
of the king Pryant that has senteme to you. and has commanded me to say to
you and other / that he is well remembrid of the great Iniuryes that ye and
other have don to him / that for so lityl cause or occasion. have slain his
fader / destroyed his cite and his people some ded and some ladd in seruytude.
And yet that worse is to hold his suster fowlly in concubynage by him that
holds her. And yet at least he ought to have wedded her / And for as much as
ye be a man of so great wit and dyscresion / the king my lord prays you
and warns. that from hens forth ye sesse the rage and the great sklaundres
that may come for this cause that all good men ought to eschew to their power.
And that his suster only be delyueryd again to him / And he shall pardone the
overplus / And shall holden hit as thing that never had happend etc::..

When the king Peleus had herd Anthenor so speak. he Chauffyd him anon in
great anger and ire. And began to blame the king Pryant and say that his
wit was to light. And after menaced Anthenor / and commanded him that he
should goo anon out of his land. for if he tarried long there / he would do slay
him by great tormente. Anthenor tarried not long after / but entrid in to his
ship with out taking leave. of the king Peleus. And sayllyd soferre by the sea / that he arryuyd at Salamyne where the king Thelamon soiourned. Than
Anthenor went unto him / and exposid to him the cause of his coming in this
manyer. Sire said he the king Pryant requires effectueusly your noblesse /
that his suster exione whom ye hold in your service so fowlly that ye would
restore unto him. For hit is not syttyng ne torneth unto you no glory ne
worship to trete so the daughter and suster of a king and that is issued of
a more noble ligne than ye be. And in caas that ye will restore to him his
suster. He shall hold all things as not done as well the domaiges as the
dishonours that by you and other have been done to him.

When the king Thelamon had herd Anthenor so speak / He began to wexe passing
angry And answered to him right fiersly sayng. My friend said he what some ever
thou be / I have much meruaylle of the symplenes of thy king / to whom I
have none Amytye / neither he to me. And therefore I ought not obtempre to his
prayer ne request. Thy king ought to know that I and other have been there
for to venge an Iniurye / that his fader Laomedon did late to some of our
friends. And for as much as I than entryd first in to the cite of troyes with
great trauayll and effusion of my blood. Exione of whom thou spekest which is
right fair was given unto me for the guerdoun of my victory / for to do with
her my will / And for as much as she is so well to my play sir as she that is
of great beawte and remplisshid with all scyences / hit is not to me so light a
thing to render and delyuere again thing that is so fair and auenau^t. which
I have conquerid with so great pain and danger / but thou shall say to thy
king that he may never recouere her but by the point of the swerd And as for
me I repute the for a fooll that ever would enpryse this legacion wherein
lies thy great peril for thou art comen among people that strongly hate the
and thy semblables / therefore go thy way hastily out of this contre. ffor if
thou abide more here I shall make the dye by cruel death etc::.

When Anthenor herd Thelamon so speak / he entryd right hastily in to his
ship. And saylyd so far that he arryuyd in Achaye where the king Castor
and the king Polux his brother soiourned / he descended lightly from his ship
and exposed to them his legacyon like as he had made to the other / And the
king Castor answered to him in ^rete yr and said to him thus. ffrende who that
thou a^te I will that thou know / that we wene not to have Iniuryed the king
Pryant with out cause / as hit is so that the king Laomedon his fader began
the folly wherefore he was slain. ffor he wronged first certain of the most
nobles of greece / / And therefore we desire more the evil will of thy king
Pryau^t than his good love or pees. And certes hit seems well that he had not
the in chierte when he sent the hither to do this message in this contre
wherefore I read see well to that thou abide not here long / ^or if thou goo
not ^ncontynent thou shalt dye vylaynsly. T^an Anthenor parted with out leave
/ and entryd in to his ship. And saillyd till he came to pyllon where the duc
Nestor soiourned with a great company of noble men. Anthenor went unto him
and said that he was messanger of king Pryant. And said and accountyd to him
his legacion in such wise as he had said to the other before / And if the
other were angry This Nestor angryd him self more against Anthenor and said to
him / Ha. ha. ylle varlet / who maad the so hardy for to say such things to
fore me. Certes if hit were not / that my noblesse refrayned me / I should anon
do arasche thy tongue out of thy head And in despyte of thy king I should by
force of horse do all to draw thy members one from an other. Goo thy way
hastily out of my sight. or by my gods I shall do to be done all that I
have said etc.

THan Anthenor was all abasshid of the horrible words of du^ Nestor And
doubtyng^ the furour of his tyranny. returned unto the sea / and put him on
his repair to troy ward: And he had not ben long on the sea. when a great
tempeste aroose And the air began to wexe derke and to rain and to thonder
right meruayllously. And to make great wyndes contrary / and to wexe thykke
myste horrible And his ship was born on the wawes one time high and a another
time low in great peril. And there was not a man in the said ship / that ne
suppsid to dye And that ne maad special promesses and vows to her gods And
in thise parillis were they three days / and on the fourth day the tempeste
cessid And the air wexe all clear and becam paysyble. than they conforted hem
self. and sayllid so far that they came to the port of Troyes / And went hem
strayte to their temples. to give thankynges to their gods of that they had
escaped so many paryllis as they had been Inn. And after Anthenor went with a
great company of noble men to fore the king Pryant / And when all the barons
were assemblid And all the sons of the king present. Than Anthenor told
all by order. that he had founden in greece. like as hit is contained here to
fore. Of thise tidings was king Pryant sore troubd^ and sorry of the obprobrye
and repreuys that they had done to his messanger in greece. And than he had no
more hope ne trust to recouure his suster etc::..

How the king pryant assemblid all his barons for to know whom he might
send in to greece for to get again his suster exione. And how hector answered
and of his good counceyll / And how Paris exposed to his fader the vysion and
the promise of the goddess Venus etc::..
When the king priau^t was thus adcertayned of the hate of the greeks. and by
no fair mean he could recouere his suster / he was meuyd with great ire / and
thought that he would send a great Nauye in to greece for to hurt and damage
the greeks / / Alas king pryant tell me what mysauenture is this that has
given to the so great hardynes of courage. for to cast out thy self of thy
welthe and rest / and why maiste not refrain the first meuynges of thy
courage / how well that hit was not in thy puyssance / yet thou ought to have
take good counceyll and meure / And to have in thy mind that men say comunely
/ Some man weneth to avenge his sorrow / And he encresyth hit. Hit had been more
sewre thing to the / to have remembrid the proverb that says / that he that
sytteth well / late him not meue. or ellis. he that is well at his es^ late him
keep him there in. All thing may be suffryd. sau^ welthe / a man that goth
upon plain ground has no thing to stomble at. In this manner than aforesaid
king pryant thought long. And after he assemblid on a day all his noble men
in his palace of ylyon: And said unto them / ye know how by your council
Anthenor was sent in to greece for to recouere my suster exione. And that by
fair manyere / ye know also how he is returned / And what wrongs and
obprobres he has found: And me seems that the greeks make little count of
the Iniuryes that they have done to us / At the least if they by their words
repent hem not / but yet they menasse us more strongly than ever they did.
God forbede that ever hit should come unto us / like as they menasse us. But I
pray the gods to give us puyssance ^venge us after their trespaas / And as
for me / Me seems that we be more puyssau^t and strong than they are / And
also we have the most sewreste Cite And the best garnysshid of the world / And
also we have of great lords right great plente alyed to us for to help and
aid us at our need. And me seems for conclusion that we have well the
puyssance for to damage and hurt our enemies in many manners / And us to
defend from them. And so should hit be good for to begin to show to them.
what puyssance we have to grieve them with all / if ye think hit good we shall
send our men secretli that shall do to them great damage er that they shall be
ready for to defend them. And for that ye ought all to employe you to take
vengence of thise Iniuryes / and that ye have no doubt for any thing. in as
much as they had first victory / ffor hit happeth often times that the
vaynquers ben vaynquysshid of them that were vaynquysshid etc:.

THan all they that were present allowed the advise of the king. and offryd
every man by him self to employe them to the same with all their power / whereof
the king Priant had great Ioy^ And after that he had thanked hem / he let
every man depart and go home to their own howses / reseruyd only his sons
legytisme and the bastardis whom he held in his palace. And said to them the
complaynte of the greeks with weeping teres in this manner. My sons ye have
well in your memory the death of your grantfader / the seruytude of your Aunte
Exione. that me holds by your living in manner of a common woman / And ye be
so puyssant ^me seems that rayson should enseygne you. for to employe you to
avenge this great Iniurye and shame. And if this meue you not thereto / yet ye
ought to do hit to satysfye my will and pleasyr / ffor I dye for sorrow and
anguyssh to which ye ought and ben bound for to remedy to your power that
have do you so well be nourysshyd and brought forth. And thou hector my right
dear sone / that art the oldeste of thy bretherin the most wise and the most
strong: I pray the first that thou empryse to put in execucion this my
will. And that thou be duc and prince of thy bretherin in this work. And all
the other shall obey gladly unto the. And in like wise shall do all they of
this royame for the great prowess that they know in the. And know that from
this day forth I dispoylle me of all this work and put hit upon the that
art the most strong and aspre to mayntene the bataylles And I am Ancient
and old / And may not forth on help my self so well as I was wont to do etc.

TO these words answered Hector right sobrely and swetely sayng my fader / and
my right dear and souerayn lord. There is none of all your sons / but that hit
seems to him thing humayne to desire vengeance of these Iniuryes. And also to
us that been of high noblesse a little Iniurye ought to be great / as hit is so
that the qualyte of the person grows and mynnyssheth so ought the qualyte
of the Iniurye / And if we desire and have appetite to take vengeance of our
Iniuryes / we forsake not ne leave the nature humayne. ffor in like wise do and
vsen the dombe bestes in the same manyere / and nature enseigneth and gives
hem thereto. My right dear lord and fader there is none of all your sons that
ought more to desire the vengeance of the Iniurye and death of our Aye^l or
granfader than I. that am the oldeste / But y will if hit plese you that ye
considere in this empryse not only the beginning / but also the myddell and
the end / to what thing we may come here after / ffor otherwhyle lityll
prouffyten some things well begone that come unto an evil end. Than me
thinks that hit is much more alowable to a man to abstain him for to
begin things whereof the ends ben dangerous / And whereof may come more
evil than good ffor the thing is not said ewrous or happy unto the time that
hit come unto a good end I say not these things for any evil or cowardyse.
But only to the end that ye begin not a thing. And specially that thing
that ye have on your heart to put hit lightly in ewre. But that ye first be
well counceyllyd / ye know well that all Affricque and Europe ben subgettys
unto the greeks. How ben they garnysshid of knights worthy. hardy / and rich
right meruayllously. Cretes at this day the force and strenhth of us here. is
not to be compared unto them in force ne in vayllyance. Wherefore if we begin
the war against them. we might lightly come to a mescheuous and shameful end
/ we that been in so great rest and ease amongs our silf. what wole we seek for
to trouble our prosperyte and welfare. Exyone is not of so high pryse. that
hit behooves all us to put us in peril and doubt of death for her She has been now long time there. where she is yet. hit were better that she parforme
forth her time that y trow has but lityl^ time to live. than we should put us
all in such peryllys And mekely y beseech you not to suppose in no manner /
that y say these things for cowardyse But I doubt the tournes of fortune /
And that under the shadow of this thing she not beat ne destroy your great
seignourye / And that we ne begin thing that we ought to leave for to eschew
more great myschyef etc:.

When Hector had maad an end of his ansswer. Paris was no thing well content
therwyth. He stood up on his feet and said in this wise. My right dear lord I
beseech you to here me say to what end ye may come if ye begin the war
against the greeks / How be not we garnysshid of so many and noble Chyualrye as
they ben. Certes that be we / which in all the world is none that may
disconfyte. And therefore begin ye hardely that empryse that ye have thought
/ And send of your shyppis and of your people to run in greece / And to take
the people and damage the contre. And if hit plese you to send me / I shall do
hit with a good will ^ and heart: For I am certain that if ye send me / that
I shall do great damage unto the greeks. And I shall take some noble lady of
greece and bring her with me in to this Royame. And by the comutacion of her /
ye may recouere your suster exione / And if ye will understand and know how I
am certain of this thing I shall say hit to you how the gods have promysid
hit to me. Hit happend to me late said paris in the time that by your
commandment I was in the less ynde at the beginning of the So^mer / And that
upon a friday. I went me to hunte in a foreste right erly And so that
morenynge I fond no thing that turned me to any playsyr / And than after
myddaye y fond a great heart that y put to the chasse so swyftely that y left
all my felawshyp behind and followed the heart in to the most deserte place
of all the foreste / which foreste was named yda. And so long y followed him
that y came unto a place tht was passing obscure and derke. And than y saw
no more the heart that y chassyd. y felt me sore weary and my horse also that
might no further go and swette on all sides. y light a down to the ground.
and teyde my horse to a tree And leyde me down upon the grass and laid under
my heed my bow torquoys in the stead of a pelowe. and anon y fylle a sleep.
Than came to me in a visyon the god Mercurye. and in his compayne three goddesses
That is to wete Venus Pallas and Juno he left the goddesses a lityl fro me.
and after he approached and said to me in this wise Paris y have brought here
thise three goddesses unto the. for a great strif or tenchon that is fallen
between them / They have all chosen the to be juge and determyne after thy will
Their tenchon or stryf is such / that they ete that other day to geder in a
place. and than suddenly was cast among hem an apple of so meruayllous form
of fayrenes and beaulte that never was seen non such a forne amongs them. And
there was wreton about this foresaid apple in grekysh langage be hit given to
the fayreste. And so anon each of them would have hit for any thing in the
world Sayng each her self to be most fair: and fayrer than the other And so
they might not accord. Wherefore they ben submysed to thy jugement. And each of
hem promytteth the sertaynly a yefte for thy reward tht thou shall have
without faylle for the Judgment of the Apple / if thou Judge that Juno be the
fayreste / she shall make the the most noble man of the world in magnyficence
/ if thou Judge for pallas she shall make the the most wysest man of all the
world in all scyences / if thou Judge that venus be the fayreste she shall give
unto the the most noble lady of greece. When I herd Mercuryus thus speak to me
/ I said to him / that I cowde not give true Judgment / but if I saw hem all
naked to fore me for to see the better the facions of their bodies / for to
give a true Judgment. And than Incontinent / mercurius did them do unclothe
all naked. and than I beheld hem long: And me thought all three passing
fair. But yet me seemed that Venus exceded the beaulte of the other / And
therefore I Iuged that the Apple apperteyned to her / And than venus greatly
reioyssid of my Judgment confermed to me the promise that mercurye had maad to
me in the favor of her / And after I awoke anon / Vene ye than my right dear
fader that the gods faylle of thing that they promysse / nay verily So than
I say you this to the end that ye send me in to greece. And that ye may have
Joy of that I shall do there etc.

AFter Paris spacke Deyph^bus in this manyere. My right dear lord if in all
the werkys that men should begin / men should auyse in all the particularytres
and synguler things that might hap or fall / there should never enterprise
ner no feet be done ner maad by hardynes / if the laborers should leave to ere
and sow the land. for the seed that the birds recuyelle and gadre. they
should never labor And for so much right dear fader late make ready for to
send in to greece of your shippis ye may not believe better counceyll than that
council that Paris has given to you ffor if he bring any noble lady. ye may
lightly for to yield her again. have again your suster exione for whom we all
suffer vilonye ynowhe. After this spoke helenus the fourth sone of king Pryant
that said thus. ha. ha. right puissant king and right souerayn domynatour upon
us your humble subgettes. and obeyssant sons. beware that coueytise of
vengance put not you in such danger as lies herein. ye know well how y know
and can the science to know the things future and to come. as ye have prouyd
many times with out fyndyng fawte. the gods forbede that hit never come that
paris be sent in to greece. ffor know ye for certain that if he goo to make
any assault / ye shall see this noble and worshipful Cite destroyed by the
greeks The troyans slain and we all that been your Children. And therefore
deporte you of these things. whereof the end shall be sorrow and great
execucion of right byttre death. And that ye your self and your wife and we. we
that been your sons may not escape. For trewly if paris goo in to greece all
these euyllis shall come thereof..

When the king herd Helenus thus speak he was all abasshid and began to
countrepeyse and think And held his peace and spoke not of a great while And
so did all the other / Than arose up on his feet Troylus the youngest sone of
king pryant And began to speak in this manyere / O noble men and hardy / how
be ye abasshid for the words of this Coward priest here / is hit not the
custom of prestes for to dread the bataylles by pusillanymyte / And for to
love the delyces and to fat and encrasse hem and fylle their belyes with good
wynes and with good metys / Who is he tht beleuyth that any man may know the
things to come / but if the gods show hit hem by reuelacion. Hit is but
folly for to tarry upon this or to believe such things / if helenus be a ferd
late him goo in to the temple And sing the dyuyne service. And late the other
take vengeance of their Iniuryes by force of arms. O right dear fader and lord
wherefore art thou so troublid for these words / send thy shippis in to greece
and thy knights wise and hardy / that may render to the greeks their Iniuryes
that they have done to us / All they that herd troylus thus speak / they
allowed him sayng that he had well spoken / And thus they fynysshid their
parliament and went to dinner.

AFter dinner the king pryant callid Paris and Deyphebus / And commanded them
expressly that they should goo unto the parties of Panonye hastily to fecche and
assemble knights wise and hardye for to take with hem in to greece. And than
that same day paris and deyphebus departid from the cite of Troy for to
accomplisshe the will of their fader The day following the king assemblid to
counceyll. All the cytezeyns of the cite of troy and said to them O my
friends and true bourgoys / ye know all notoriely / how the greeks by their
pride have don to us great wrongs. And Innumerable domayges as hit is well
known in all the world / And ye know also how they hold exione my suster in
servitude / wherefore I live in great sorrow / and also ye be remembryd how I
have sent Anthenour in to greece that has nothing done / wherefore my sorrow is
dowblid. And for as much as by iron ben cured the wounds Insanable / I have
purposid to send paris my sone with men of Arms and puissance in to greece.
For to enuahye and assaylle our enemies by strength And for to do to them
great domayges / and for to assaye if they might take any noble lady of greece
And her to send in to this cite And that by the commutacion of her / I might
get again my suster exione And for so much as I will not begin this thing
/ but that hit may come to your knowleche first. I pray you that ye say to
me your aduys For with out you I will not proceed further therein For as much
as hit touches you all as well as me.

When the king had thus finysshid his words and that each man held him
stille a great while Than stood up a knight named pantheus. That was the sone
of deufrobe the philosopher And said. O right noble king as I am your true
servant and vassale / I will expose to you my courage of this work also treuly
as a vassale and subgette owes to counceyll his lord / ye have had well in
knowleche deufrobe the great philosophre my fader That liuyd hole and sound
more than nine skore and ten year / And was so wise in philosophye that he
knew the science of things to come here after / he said to me many times and
affermed for truth / That if paris your sone went in to greece for to take
any noble lady by vyolence / That this noble cite should be destroyed and burnt
in to ashes by the greeks and that ye and all yowris should be slain cruelly /
And therefore right sage and wise king plese hit your noblesse to here my word
and believe that the wise men have said / And also in that thing that ye may
not lose to leave / And whereof great sorrow may ensiewe if ye persevere /
wherefore will ye put an enbusshement upon your rest / And to put your
tranquyllite under the dangereuses auentures of fortune / Leave this and depart
you if hit plese you fro this folly / And parfyne and end your life in rest
ewreusly / And suffer not paris to goo in to greece in Arms And if ye wolle
algate Send ye another than paris / At these words of pantheus sourded and
aroose great murmures of the heerers / Some reprouyd the prophecyes of deufrobe
the philosopher / And some held hit for mocquerye and fable / And they were of
the grettest nombre / in so much that by the consent of the more par^^e /
Paris was comysed for to go in to greece with men of Arms / And the parliament
fynysshid each man went him home in to his house and to his place.

When this conclusion was comen to the knowleche of cassandra the daughter of
king pryant / she began to make so great sorrow / As she had be folyssh or
out of her mind. And began to cry an high sayng. Ha. ha. right noble cite
of troy / what fayerye has meuyd the to be brought to such paryllis / for
which thou shall in short time be beten down And thine high tourys ben
demolisshid and destroyed unto the ground Ha ha queen hecuba for what sin
have thou deseruyd the death of thy children which shall be cruel and horrible
/ wherefore destournest not thou paris fro going in to greece / which shall be
cause of this evil adventure. And when she had so cried / she went to her
fader the king. And with weeping drowned in terys prayed him. That he should
deporte him and leave his empryse. And that she wiste by her science the great
euyllis and harms that were coming by this cause / But never for the
dissuacions of hector. Ne the monyssions ne warnynges of cassandra the king
would not change his purpoos ne for helenus his sone ne for pantheus etc.

How paris and deyphebus / Eneas Anthenor and Polidamas were sent in to greece
And how they rauysshyd helayne out of the temple of venus with many prysonne^^
and richesses and brought them to Troy where paris espowsed the said helayne.
AT thentre of the month of may / when the earth is attyred and aourned with
diverse flowers. Paris and deyphebus returned fro panonye and brought with hem
three thousand knights / ^^ght hardy and wise / Than they made ready two and
t^enty great ships and chargid and leyde in them all that was conuenyent for
them Than the king pryant callid Eneas Anthenor and polidamas that was the
sone of Anthenor / And prayed hem and commanded that they should go in to greece
with paris and deyphebus / And They offryd hem self to goo with good will /
And when they were all ready and assemblid for to goo in to their shyppis / The
king pryant spoke to them in this manereshit behooves not to replicque many
words For ye know well ynowhe for what cause I send you in to greece / And
how well that I have cause for to avenge me of the wrongs that the greeks have
don to us / Alleway the pryncypall cause is to recouere my suster exione that
lives in so great fylthe and miserye / And for to do so ye owe to employe you
/ Wherefore I pray you and admoneste you that ye put all your pain and
dilygence that I may recouere my suster / And be ye certain if ye have mester
or need of socours / I shall socoure you with so great a strength that the
greeks shall not mow suffer / And I will that in this voyage ye hold Paris my
sone Duc and conduytour of this bataylle. And after him deyphebus / And to do
by the counceyll of Eneas and Anthenor.

AFter these words Paris and all the other took leave of the king and entryd
in to their shyppis And drew up saylles / And recomanded hem in the conduyte
of Jupiter and of venus / And saylled so far by the high see / That they
arrived in the parties of greece in consteyyng the contre / that hit happend hem
on a day that they met a ship in the which was one of the grettest kings
of greece named Menelaus that went unto the cite of pyre unto the duc Nestor
that had sent for him This Menelaus was brother of king Agamenon and was
married unto the queen helayne / That was the fairest lady in the world that
men knew of in her time And she was suster of king castor and polus that
dwelled than to geder in the cite of samestare And nourysshyng with hem her
moan their nyece daughter of the said helayne / Menelaus made a lityll
discouere his ship And to torn out of the right way / And so that one knew
not that other And the Trojans sayllyd so far that they arrived in the isle of
cythare in greece And there they Ancred their shippys and went a land / In
this isle was a temple of venus passing Ancient and of great beaulte full of
all richesses / For as much as the habitantes also of the country had their
devotion specially unto venus the goddess And sollempnysed her festes each
year / and she gaf to them answers of their demandes Than when the trojans were
arrived they hallowed the most principal feste of venus And for this cause
were assemblid men and women of the contre there about / That made great feast
etc.

When paris knew this see / He took his best clothis and did hem on and
also the best faryng and klenliest men that he had. And went him in to the
temple and entryd therein by fair and sweet manner and made his oblacion of
gold and seluer with great largess Than was paris strongly beholden on all
sides of them that were there for his beaulte For he was one the fairest knight
of the world and was so richely and so queyn^ly clothed and habyllyd that hit
gaf great playsir unto all them that beheld him. And every man desired to
know what he was and whens he came. And they demanded of the trojans that told
hem / that hit was paris sone of king Pryant of Troy / That was comen in to
greece by the commandment of his fader. For to require amyably that they would
render and yield again Exione his suster that they had given to king Thelamon
/ So far went the tidyngis of the coming of these trojans and of their
beaulte and high apparayll that the queen helayne herd speak thereof And than
after the custom of women / She had great desire to know by experyence if hit
were truth that she herd speak of / And disposid her to go unto the temple
under the color of devotion for to accomplissh her desire. O how great folly
is hit unto honest women to will goo often times unto the festes and
esbatemens of young people / That lityll or naught do there / But muse and deuyse
how they may come to their desires. And recche not what meshyef may follow in
body and in soul. The ship should never peryssh if hit abode alleway in the
port / And were not sent out in to paryllys of the sea / Hit is a good
thing and a precious Jewel of a good woman that holds her honestly in her
hows. O how great damage came unto the greeks and to the Trojans of this that
helayne went so lightly to see the Trojans / That ought not so to do and
specially in the absence of her husbonde / But as hit is the custom of women
to will bring their desire to the end. Helayne Incontinent did do make ready
horse and all that was convenyent for to goo unto the temple. And she did hem
to understand that she went for devotion / For this temple was not far fro
the place that she dwelled / When all was Ready And she clothyd in habyte Ryall
/ She rood with her company unto the ysle of Cythare / And entrid in to a
vessel that brought her nyghe to the temple. where she was receyuyd with great
worship of them of the country as their lady / she entrid in to the temple
right stately. And made there her devotion and her oblacion^ with great
largess etc.

When paris knew that the queen helayne that was wife of king Menelaus one of
the most noble kings of greece was comen unto this temple / He arrayed him in
the most gentilmanliest wise that he could and his company And went in to
the temple. For he had long time before herd speak of her great beaulte. And
than as he was comen and saw her / He was greatly esprised with her love And
began strongly to behold her. And to desire to see the facion of her body That
was so fair and well shapen in all things / and in such wise that hit seemed
properly to them that saw her / That nature had made her to be beholden a
beseyn. For in her was no thing but that hit served to encrece all the beaulte
tht might befounden in a woman / wherefore paris might not forbere to behold
her / sayng in him self that he had never seen ne herd speak of any so fair
and so well fourmed And as he beheld her / In like wise helayne beheld him
also many times and often. and her seemed that he was more fayrer a great dele
than had been reported to her. And well said in her self that she saw never man
of so great beaulte / Ne that plesid her so well to behold And so she left
all her devotion and all other thoughts And gaf no fors ne raught of no
thing than / save only for to behold paris. When paris knew and saw this he
had great Joy / and beheld her swetely more and more and she him / By which
sight they showed ynowhe of their desires / that one to that other / And
thought greatly by what occasion they might speak to gyder / And so long they
beheld each other that by semblaunt / Helayne made a token or sign to paris
that he approchid to her / And anon paris satte down beside her / whilis that
the people playde in the temple And spack to her with a soft wys right swetely
and she to him / And exposid each to other how they were surprysid of the love
of that one and of that other / And how they might come to the end after her
desire / And when they had spoken ynowgh of their hot love / Paris took leave
of her And issued out of the temple / He and his felawshipp / And helayne sent
after him her eyes also fer as she might.

When Paris was comen to his ship / he called to him the most noble and
grettest of his company / And said to hem in this manyere / My friends ye
know well wherefore the king my fader has sent us in to greece / That is to
wete for to recouure Exione his suster. And if we may not recouure her that we
should do damage unto the greeks / we may not recouure Exione For she is in over
strong an hand And also hit should be to over great danger and damage / syn it
is so that the king Thelamon that holds her and loves her strongly / is
more puyssant than we and is in his owen propre heritage / We ben no thing so
puyssant for to take in greece any noble cite / the contre is so full of people
and of many vayllyant folk Than me seems good that the fair yefft and notable
that the gods has sent unto us / we reffuse not / we see in this isle comen
to the feste the most grettest Cytezeyns / and the temple replenysshid with
the most noble women of this prouynce And also the queen helayne / that is
lady of this contre and wife of king menelaus / This temple is also full of
all richesses / if we might take them a live that been in the temple and bring
them prisoners with us and take the goods that there ben of gold and of silver
/ we shall have conquered a great gain. And other richesses that we should go
fecche in other places / if ye seem good I am of the oppynyon / that now this
night we shall enter in to the temple all armed / And that we shall take men
and women and all that we shall find and bring in to our ships and
principally helayne / For if we may bring her in to troy / The king pryant
may lightly I nowh have again his suster Exione for her. Therefore advise you
hastily what is best to be don. whilis that hit is in point And er they
escape us / some of them blamed this thing And some allowed hit / and finably
they concluded after many councellys that they should do as paris had devised.

HOw hit happend that the night was come / and the moon was nyghe goon down The
trojans armed them the most secret wise that they cowde And left some of
them for to keep their shippys / And the other went preuyly unto the temple.
And entryd therein so armed as they were And with lityll deffence took all them
that they fond in the temple and all the rychesses that were therein. And
paris with his owen hand took helayne and them of their company And brought
in to their ships all the best and put hit in sure guard / And after
returned to the proye / Tho began the noise passing great with in the temple of
the prysonners / And of the some that had lever suffer to be slain. than for to
be take prysonners / the noise was herd far In such wise that they of the
castle that stood thereby herd hit / And Incontinent they aroose and armed hem
and came to assaylle the trojans as vayllyant as they were / Tho began the meddle
right fyers and mortalle. But the trojans that were four against one slew many
of them And the other fled and Reentryd in to their castle / And than the
trojans took as much as they could find of good / And bare hit unto their
shippis. And entryd in to them / And drew up their sayllys And sayllyd so
long that on the seventh day they came and Arryuyd at the port of troy their
ships full of good prisonners and of good Rychesses And they abood at the
port of thenedon that was but three mile fro Troy / And there were they
receyuyd with great Joy / And than paris sent a propre messanger unto his
fader the king pryant to let him have knowleche of his coming and of all
that / that he had done in greece Of these tidings the king was greatly
reyoyssyd and commanded in all the cite to make feste solempnly for these
tidings etc.

WHilys that helayne was with the other prisonners in the ship of paris she
made great sorrow / And ^essid not to weep ne to bewail with great sighs her
husbonde her brethern her daughter her contre and her friends And was in so
great sorrow / that she left to ete and drink / And paris conforted her the
most swetely tht he could / but she might not suffer to forbere weeping / and
than paris said to her in this manyere / How lady wherefore demene ye this
sorrow day and night with out rest / what man or woman is that might long
endure and suffer this. Ne wene not ye that this sorrow hurts your health.
yes verayly lady / ye make to much thereof / wherefore fro hens forth I pray you
to leave And take rest / for in this royame ye shall lakke no thing / And no
more shall tho prysonners that ye will have recomanded. And ye shall be the
most renomed lady of this royame and the most rich And your meyne that been
here shall fault of no thing / To these words answered helayne to paris in
this manyer / I know well said she that will I or will I not I must needs do
as ye will syn that I am your prysonner And if any good be done to me and to
the prysonners / I hope the gods shall thank and reward them that so do /
Ha. A. said paris ne doubt you not / For men shall do to them all that shall
plese you to comande / And than he took her by the hand and brought her in to a
more secret place and said to her. Madame wene ye for as much as hit had
plesid to the gods for to suffer you to be brought by me in to this prouynce
that ye be lost And that ye shall not be more rich and more honored than ye
have been And that the royame of troy be not more rich Than the royame of
Achaye / yes verily that hit is / wene ye that I will mayntene you dishonestly
Certes nay / but shall take you to my wife. And so shall ye be more honored
than ye have been with your husbond and more preysid / For your husbonde is not
issued out of so noble a house as I am ne so vayllyant. Nor he louyd you never
so well as I shall do / Therefore cesse ye fro hensforth to make such sorrow /
And believe me of this that I have said to you / Ha. a. said she who can
abstain her fro making of sorrow being in the estate that I am in Alas this was
happend me never to fore / But syn hit may be none otherwise / Sore anoyed and
greuyd / I shall do that that thing that ye me require / For as much as I
have no puyssance to resyste hit Thus was helayne reconfortyd a lityll And
paris did do playse her with all his power etc.

When the morn came be time he did do clothe her and Array her the most
honorably that he might And made her to sytte up on a palefroye rychely arrayed
and aourned / And so did he the other prysonners each after his degree / And
after he went to horsback himself and Deyphebus his brother / Eneas. Anthenor
and Polydamas with great company of noble men / And accompanied the queen
helayne / And departed fro thenadon / And went to troyes ward. And there came
against hem without the town the king Pryant with great company of noble men
/ And receyuyd his children and his friends with great Joy / And after came to
helayne / And bowed right swetely to her And did to her great Joy and
worshipp / And when they came nyghe the cite they fond great foyson of people.
That made great feste of their coming in many manyers of Instrumentis of
musycque / And in such Joy came unto the pallays of king Pryant / And he him
self light a down and help helayne down of her palefroye And lad her by the
hand unto within the halle / And there they made right great Joy all the
night through out all the cite for these tidings / And than when hit came unto
the morn Paris by the agreement and consent of his fader took helayne to his
wife And wedded her in the temple of Pallas. And therefore And therefore the feste
was lengthyd through out all the cite And the Joy that endured yet after
eyghte days hooll etc.

When Cassandra knew for truth that paris her brother had wedded helayne /
she began to make great sorrow to Cry and braye as a woman out of her wit
And said thus O unhappy trojans wherefore reioysse ye you of the weddyng of
paris. Whereof so many euyllys shall come and follow. And wherefore see not ye
the death of yourself And of your sons that shall be slain to fore your ^yen
And the husbondes to fore their wyuys with great sorrow / Ha. A noble cite of
Troyes how thou shall be destroyed and put to naught / Ha. a unhappy moders /
what sorrow shall ye see / when ye shall see your lityll children taken and
dismembryd to fore you / Ha. a hecuba kaytyf and unhappy where shall thou take
the water that thou shall weep for the death of thy children Ha. a people blind
and folissh / why send not ye Incentynent helayne home again / And yield her
unto her right husbond to fore that the swerdes of your enemies come and slay
you with great sorrow / wene ye that this prince the husbond of helayne wole
dwell at home with out grievous vengence / Certes that shall be your dolorouse
fyn and end / ha. a unhappy helayne / thou shall do us much sorrow As
cassandra said and cried thus with high wys and with great sorrow The king
pryant knew h^t And did her to be taken prysonner And send to her and did do
pray her that she should cesse / but she would not / And than he commanded that
she should be fast shette in prison and in yrons / where she was kept many days
O what pity was hit / That the Troyans believed not this warnyng and Amonycion /
For if they had believed hit / They had eschewid the right great euyllis that
came after unto them / That shall be told in fablys to them that wole here hem
unto the end of the world etc.

How menelaus was sore troblid for the Rauysshyng of helayne his wife / And how
Castor and Polux brethern of her poursuyeden Paris in the sea. And of their
death / And also of the condition and manner of the lords as well Grekis as
Trojans.
AS these things were done as said is / Menelaus that soiourned at pyre with
the duc Nestor herd tell the truth of the pryse and taking of his wife and
of his people whereof he was sore angry and much abashed / And was so dolau^t
and sorrowful that he fylle to the ground a swowne / And than when he was come
to him self again / He began sore to complain him and demene the grettest
sorrow of the world / And above all other things he was most sorry for his
wife. And bewayllyd her beawlte and her solace / And might by no way be
conforted / When the duc Nestor herd say thereof he came to him hastily and
conforted him the most best wise he cowde / For he louyd him with great love
/ But Menelaus cowde not leave his sorrow / But took his way unto his contre /
And the duc Nestor conveyed him with a great compayne of noble men.

He sent unto the king Agamenon his brother that he should come speak with him
And also he send to castor and polux the brethern of helayne that they should
come also to him / And anon as they had herd the message they came unto him /
When Agamenon saw his brother demene such sorrow and heaviness / he said to
him A my brother wherefore demenest thou such sorrow / suppose that the cause be
Just / Allewaye a wise man ought not to show such semblant outeward. For in
showing such sorrow outeward hit causes his friends to be sorrowful / And his
enemies to be Joyous / And therefore feign thy sorrow and kele thy courage / And
make semblant / as thou raughtest no thing of this that is befalle. For by
weeping ne by demenyng of sorrow / thou may never come to honor ne vengence
But alonely by the force of the naked swerd thou shall awake thy courage / and
so shall thou take vengance of the harms that been don to the. Thou know
what puyssance we have and what helpars and Aydeurs we shall find for to venge
us For this Iniurye touches all the kings and princes of greece. And as soon as
we shall require them of help There shall not be one but that he shall help us
with all his power And than we shall goo with great puyssance to fore troy /
and we shall slay our enemies And do what we will. and shall destroy the
Cite And if hit happen tht we may take paris / that is actour of these hurtis
and yllys / when shall do hang him and make him dye an evil death. Cesse than
thy sorrow. And late us do to beknowen to all the kings and princes of greece
this Iniurye / And require them that they will help us for to take vengance /
Than was menelaus Reconforted with the words of his brother / And anon they
sent her lettres unto all the barons of greece And at their sendyng they came
all / First Achylles. Patroclus Dyomedes / And many other / And as soon as they
knew wherefore they were sent fore / They said that they would go to Troyes
with all their strength for to avenge this shame and recouere helayne So they
chasse than Agamenon chyef and prince of their ooste / as he that was wise and
prudente / And of good counceyll.

HOw hit happend that the king Castor And the king Polux that weren brethren
of the queen helayne / As soon as they herd say / That her suster was
Rauysshid / They entryd in to their shippys / And went after the Trojans with
great company of men of Arms / For to see if they might recouere her / On the
third day that they were on the sea / There roose so a great torment in the sea / And there with came so great a Rain. And thonder. That their ships were
cast by the wawes one here another there. The mastes broken their saylles
rent / And fynably they were all perysshid and drowned / That never after was
none seen of them / And the payenems say that these two brethern were
translated with the gods in to the heaven or zodyacque And returned in to the
sign of two Iumentis / For as much as they were brethern germayn / And thus
ends their lives by the occasion of the pryse of her suster / Some poets
faynen that these brethren ben translatyd in to two sterrys That is the north
sterre and the south sterre which ben named after them Castor and Pollux.

IN this place declares dares in his book the facions of the greeks that were
to fore troy of the most notable of them as he that saw hem and beheld hem
many times during the triews that was often times between both parties during
the siege to fore the cite / And he begins to speak of helayne and says
that she was so fair. That in the world no man could find no fayrer woman ne
better fourmed of all members Agamenon was long and white of body / strong of
members and well fourmed / loving labor / discrete. hardy And passing well
bespoken Menelaus was of mean stature hardy in Arms and corageous / Achilles
was of right great beaulte / blonke heeris and cryspe gray eyes and great / of
Amyable sight / large breasts and broad sholdres great Arms / his raynes
high ynowh / an high man of great stature / and had no parcyll ne like to him
among all the greeks / desiryng to fight / large in yeftes And outerageous
in dispense Tantalus / was great of body and right strong / veritable. humble.
fleyng noyses if they were not Just and true Ayax of great stature / great
and large in the sholdres great Arms. And alleway was well clothyd and
richely. And was of no great empryse. And spack lightly. Thelamon ayax was a
much fair knight. He had black heeris. And herd gladly song And he sauge him
self gladly well. He was of great prowess. And a good man of war And with
out pomp Vlixes was the most fair man among all the greeks / But he was
deceyuable And subtle. And said his things Ioyously. He was a right great
liar And was so well bespoken that he had none felawe ne like to him Dyomedes
was great And had a broad breast and meruayllous strong / of a fires regard
and sight / false in his promesses / worthy in Arms / desirous of victory
dredde and redoubted / For he was greatly Iniuryons to his servants Luxuryous
wherefore he suffryd many pains / The duc Nestor was great of membrys and long
/ and well bespoken / discrete and profitable / And gaf alleway good
counceyll / Anon and sone he was strongly angry / And anon peasid again He
was the most true friend in the world Protheselaus was fair and of fair
stature right noble and light in Arms Neptolonyus was great / black here and
great eyes / but Joyous and well chieryd his wynbrowes Joined / stameryng in
his words / but he was wise in the law. Palamydes sone of king Naulus was of
right fair shapp and lene / hardy and amyable / a good man and large.
Polydaryus was passing great fat and swollen Hardy orguyllous and proud /
without truth. Mathaon was of mean stature powde and hardy And that lityll
slepte by night Brysayda daughter of Calcas was passing fair of mean stature /
white and medlid with reed and well made / sweet and pytouse and whom many men
louyd for her beawte. For the love of her came the king of perse in to the Aid
of the grekis unto the siege to fore Troy.

OF them that were within Troy / The same Dares says first of king Pryant
that he was long gresle and fair / And had a low wys / right hardy. And that
gladly eete erly in the morenyng a man with out dread / And that hated
flaterers / He was verytable and good Iustycyer And gladly he herd sing and
sownes of musycque. And strongly louyd his knights and enrichid them. Of all
his sons there was none so hardy as was hector the oldest sone of king pryant /
This was he that passid in his time all other knights in puyssance / and was
a lityll besgue he was great / And had hard members and might souffre much
pain And was much heery and crispe / and lisped There issued never out of
troy so strong a man ne so worthy Ne there issued never out of his mouth a
vyllaynous word. He was never weary of fightyng in bataylle. There was never
knight better beloved / of his people than he was Paris was a passing fair
knight and strong soft heerid and true swyft and sweet of speech tote mowthed
/ well drawyng a bow / wise and hardy in battle and well assewryd and
covetous of lordship / Deyphebus and helenus were passing like of facion in
such wise that a man might not well know that oon fro that other. And they
resamblid passing well the king pryant their fade^ Deyphebus was wise and
hardy marmes And helenus was a much wise clerk. Troylus was great and of great
courage well attempryd and sore beloved of young maidens In force and gladness
he resamblid much to hector And was the second after him of prowess And there
was not in all the Royame a more strong ne more hardy young man / Eneas had a
great body discrete meruayllously in his werkis well bespoken and attempryd in
his words. Full of good counceyll and of science connyng He had his visage
Ioyouse / and the eyes clear and graye. And was the richest man of troy after
the king pryant in towns and castellys. Anthenor was long and lene And spacke
much / But he was discrete and of great Industrye / And whom the king pryant
louyd greatly And that gladly played among his felawship / And was a right wise
man. Polydamas his sone was a goodly young man and a fair / Hardy and of good
manners / long and lene like his fader / brown and was strong in puyssance of
Arms / And of well Attempryd words / The king Menon was great and a goodly
knight large sholdres great Arms hard in the breast and of great prowess /
And that brought many knights unto Troy / The queen hecuba was a rude woman
and seemed better a man than a woman / She was a noble woman passinge sage
^^bonayre / And honest and loving the works of charity / Andrometha the wife
of hector was a passing fair woman and white and that had fair eyes and fair
here / She was among all other women right honest and attempryd in her
works / Cassandra was of fair stature and clear. Round mouthed. wise. shynyng
eyes / She louyd virgynyte / And knew much of things to come by astronomye
and other sciences / Polyxena was a much fair daughter and tender / And was
the verray Raye of beawte / In whom nature fayllyd nothing Save only that she
made her mortal / And she was the fairest maid that was in her time. And the
best fourmed. Many moo were within the town and without. During the siege.
But thise were the pryncypall and grettest of name. And therefore Dares
declares the facion of them And reherceth not of the other.

How the kings Dukes earls and Borons of greece assemblid all with their nauye
to forethe cite of Athenes for to come to Troy / And how many shippis each man
brought unto the help of the king Menelaus.
When hit came in to the end of feuerer That the winter was passid the kings
and the princes of all the prouynces of greece assemblid them to gyder at the
port of athenes for to go to troy / hit is not in the mind of any man syn
the beginning of the world that so many ships and knights were assemblid as
were at that time. For first Agamenon that was chyef and prince of all the
oost of the greeks / brought fro his royame of michames an honderd shippys full
of Armed knights. The king menelaus his brother brought fro his royame of
sparte.lx. shippis Archelaus and prothenor fro the royame of boecye fifty
shippis The duc Ascalapus and the earl helmins fro the prouynce of orconomye
thretty shippis / The king Epistrophus / And the king sedius fro the royame
of ^o cyden thretty shippis. The king thelamon of salamyne fifty shippis. And
in his company were the duc thent^r duc Amphymacus the earl polixeme and the
earl thephus And other many noble men. The Ancient duc Nestor fro his prouynce
of pillon fifty shippis. The king thoas of tholye fifty shippis The king
doxunois fifty shippis The king thelamon chyleus six and thritty ships /
Polibetes and Amphymacus fro his prouynce of calydone two and thretty shippis /
The king ydumeus and the king mereon of Crete four score and two shyppis /
The king Vlixes of trace two and fyfty shippis / The duc tynelus fro his cite
of frygis twelve shippis Prothocathus and prothesalus the dukes of philaca
brought with hem two and fyfty shippis / Collesis brought four and twenty
shippis fro the royame of cresome And brought king Machaon And the king
^ollydrys his sone three and thretty ships / Achilles brought fro his noble
cite of phaces two and twenty ships / The king Thelaphus brought fro Rodes
two and twenty ships Eruphylus fro orchomene two and fyfty shyppis The duc
Anthypus and the duc Amphymacus of rusticane threttene shyppis The king
Polibetes of Rythee And the duc Lopms his brother in law that had wedded his
suster.lxij. shippis The king Dyomedes of Arges four score and two shippis And
had in his company Thelamus and Euryalus The king Poliphebus nine shippis The
king Fureus thretten ships / The king prothoylus of chemenense two and
fyfty ships / The king Carpenor of Carpadye.lij. shippis / The king
Theorius of breysse four and twenty ships The some of kings and dukes that
were comen theder were sixty and nine / And there assemblyd at the port of
Athenes twelfe honderd and four and twenty shippis / without comprysyng the
shippis of duc palamydes the sone of king Naulus That came after on / With his
astate as shall be said after etc.

How the Greeks sent Achilles unto Delphos to the god Appollo for to know ^he
end of their war And how they fond Calcas sent fro the Trojans that went
with hem to Athenes.
When the king and the princes weren thus assemblid at the port of Athenes
The king Agamenon that was chief of all the ooste and taught alleway to
co^duyte this ooste meurely / assemblid unto the counceyll on a plain without
the cite all the noble men of their ooste And when they were all assemblid
about him in sieges that he had do make / He said to them in this manner O ye
noble men that by one will and volente ben here assemblid in this oost with so
great puyssance / ye know well that it is not (...) the mind of any man that
saw ever so many noble men assemblid / For tachieue any work / ne so many
young knights and deliuere in arms for tassaylle their enemies / is not he
than well out of his mind that presumes to reyse him self against us and to
begin war. verayly I doubt not but one of an honderd that is in this
company is suffysant ynowh to bring this work to an end / for which we
been all assembled. Hit is well known to each of you the great Injuries and
the great domagies that the trojans have don to us / wherefore we have Just
cause to take vengance by force of Arms To the end that fro hen^forth they ne
other ne empryse upon us in any manner / For if we should suffer such Iniuryes
by dissimulacion / they might yet grieve us more than they have don. And hit is
not the custom of the noble men of greece / for to late pass such wrongs in
dissimulacion / and therefore hit should be to us great vilonye that been so many
and that have assemblid so great strength for to dissimule in this quarelle /
and yet that more is there is no nation in the world but that ne dredeth our
puyssance save only these ^ol^sshe people of Troy that by evil counceyll have
meu^d them against us and also have enterprysid upon us. As did first the king
Laomedon that Iniuryed some of our people by lityll occasion / wherefore he
receyuyd death for his reward / And his Cite was destroyed. And his people slain
/ And some brought in seruytude where they ben yet / Certes hit is not so
dyfficyle and hard to us that been more puyssante to take vengeance on the
Trojans / Than hit was to four princes of less puyssance / That came to their
above of them / For so much than as the Trojans know verily that we ben
assemblyd for to goo upon them / And that they ben strongly garnysshid of men
of Arms against our coming and of all such as behooves them for to deffende
them with / Than seemed me good if hit playse you / that er we depart fro this
port here / we send in to the ysle of delphe our special messangers for to
have answer of our god Appolyn of this that we will do and empryse.

THan was there none but he allowed and approved the words of Agamenon And
cheese Incontinent Achilles and patroclus for to goo in to this ysle to here
the answer of Appolyn / And anon they departed and went And came sone theder /
For the said isle is as hit were in the mids of the yles of ciclades / where
locana enffanta Appolyn and dyane be And there was a rich temple in the which
the godde of the payenems was worshippid / And gaf answer to the people of
such thing as they demanded of him / This isle was first called delos / That
is as much to say in greek as manifestacion For as much as in this isle the
paynems saw first the son and the moon after the deluuye And therefore they
supposyd that they had been born there of their mother For appollo is the son /
and diane is the moon / In their langage / some call this isle ortygye / for as
much as the birds tht men call ortiges / in englissh they ben quayles were
first seen there. The paynems gaf to Appollo dyuerce names after the dyuerce
operacions of the son. In this temple was a great image composid and made
all of fyn gold In the worship of god Appolyne / and how well that the
image was deef and dombe / yet allwaye ydolatrye reigned in such wise that time
in the world. That the devil put him in the image and gaf answers to the
paynems of that thingis that they demanded of him And this did the devil for
to abuse the folissh people / that at that time believed that this image was
verray god etc.

UPon this part the Auctor declares fro whens came first ydolatrye / We find
in historia ecclisiastica / That when herodes was deceyuyd by the three kings
that returned not again to him. But worshippid our lord Ihesu criste as is
contained in the gospel And after departid by an other way etc / That herodes
purposid to have slain the child Ihesus / and therefore the gloryouse virgyne
our lady saint marie his mother And Joseph bare him in to Egypt And as soon as
our lord entryd in egypt / All the ydoles of egypt fill down to the earth
all to broken and brusyd after the prophecy of ysaye that said thus /
Ascendet dominus in nubem leuem et ingredietur egyptum and mouebuntur simulacra
egipti / En demonstrant and showing that at the coming of our saueour Ihesus
criste. All ydolatrye should have an end. And Among the Jews. ysmaell was
the first that made ydole / And that was of earth. And promotheus made the
first among the paynems and taught other the manner how to make hem / But the
right beginning of ydolatrye came of belus king of Assirye tht was fader of
king Nynus / the which belus when he was deed / his sone Nynus did burye him
in a rich sepulture / And did do make an image of fyn gold to the semblaunt
and lykenes of his fader for to have consolacion and memory of him / And
worshippid him as his god / And compellyd his folk to worship him / And anon
an evil spyryte entryd within the image and gaf to the people answers of their
demandes / And thus by the ensample of him. The payenems made other in the
worship of their friends And worshippid them And thus proceeded they in
ydolatrye And there were none but that they had her gods propice that gaf to
them their answer of their demandes by the engyne of the enemy that so
deceived them and brought to dampnacion by the envy that he had and yet has
upon the lygne humayn that god made for to fullfylle the sieges of paradys /
Fro whens he was cast out for his pride in this Air and derkenes. And after
the day of Judgment to abide in hell pardurably in the company of dampened men.

When Achilles and Patroclus were arrived in this isle of delphe / They went by
great devotion in to the temple of Appolyn and there made their oblacions by
great largess / And demanded of him answer of their affairs and works /
Than Appolyn answered with a low wys Achilles return to the greeks that have
sent the hither and say to hem. That it is to come and shall / happen for
certain that they shall go sauely to Troy / And there they shall make many
bataylles / But in the tenthe year they shall have victory and destroy the
cite / And they shall slay the king Pryant his wyffe and his children / And
the most great of the country. And there shall none escape save they only
whom they will save / Of this foresaid answer was Achilles passing Ioyouse /
and hit happend whilis they were yet in this temple / That a bishop of Troy
named Chalchas sone of a man named thistram that was a passing wise man / The
which entryd in to this temple. And he was sent also fro the king Pryant for
to have answer of Appolin for them of Troy. As he than had made his oblacions
and demandes for them of Troy / Appollyne Answered to him Calchas Calchas
beware that thou return not a gayn to Troy / But go thou with Achilles unto
the greeks / And depart never fro them for the greeks shall have victory of
the trojans by the agreement of the gods / And thou shall be to them right
necessary in counseyll and in doctrine Anon as Calchas knew Achilles that
was in the temple He approchid to him and made acqueyntance to him / And
accompanied to gyder by faith and oath Told each to other what the ydole had
said to them / whereof Achilles had great Joy. And made right great chiere and
feste to Calchas And took him with him / And s^yllyd so long that they arrived
at the port of Atthenes sauely / and when they were issued out of her ships
Achilles took calchas by the hand and presentid him to the king Agamenon and
to other And told to them the truth of the answer of Appollo / How they
should have victory of the trojans and how Appollyn bad him that he should not
return again to troy but hold him with the greeks during the war / Of
these tidings were the greeks greatly reioyssed / And made solemn feste and
receyuyd calchas in to their company by faith and by oath and they promysid
him to reward him well and do him good etc.

How the greeks with a great Naueye / went and saylled toward Troy / And how
they arryueden at the port of thenedon three mile fro Troy / which they
conqueryd and beat down to the earth.
AFter this feste that the greeks had made for the good answers of Appolyn
Calcas went him in a morenyng in the company of achilles and of Patro^lus
unto the tente of Agamenon / where all the most nobles of the ooste were
assemblid / And he salewed them right courtoysly sayng / O noble kings and
princes that been here assemblyd for vengeance of the great Iniuryes to you done
by the Troyans / wherefore tarry ye now here After that the gods have yeuen
their answer / Wene ye not that the king Pryant has his espyes among you /
And that whilys ye soiourne he garnysshith not his contre and cite with vytayll
with horses And with other necessaryes / Is hit not a great part of the somer
passed / And ye have yet no thing enterprysid upon your enemies Be ware that
ye ben not unkind and / Ingrate of the answer of the gods / And tht by your
negligence they change not their answer in to the contrary / there fore tarry
ye no longer. But ship you and your horse and goo ye to the sea. And cesse not
unto the time that the promessis of the gods be accomplisshyd / And when
Calchas had thus spoken / each man said that he had well said and spoken / And
than Agamenon sent unto all the ooste and commanded with a trompette that
every man should make him ready to remeue / And anon they entryd in to their
shippis / And disancryd and drew up their sayllys / And went all unto the sea / And they had not long sayllid not passing a mile fro atthenes / / But
the Air that was to fore clear and fair / began to wexe troblous and thykke /
And began a right great tempeste in the sea of wind of Rain and of thounder
in so much that there was none so hardy but he hadd fere and wend to have
deyde / For their ships were cast by the sea that one here and that other
there / And supposid none other for certain but to have been drowned / Than said
calchas to them that were with him. That the cause of this tempeste was. For as
much as dyane her goddess was wroth and angry upon them be cause they
departed fro Atthenes and had made to her no sacrifyce / And for to appese this
wrath / hit behooves that the king Agamenon sacrefye to her with his owen hand
Effygenye his daughter a young virgyne and tender of age / And that otherwise
the tempeste should never cesse / And for to speed this sacrefyse / he
counseyllyd to torn the nauye and to apply hit to the isle of Andylle where
the temple of the goddess dyane was etc.:.

When the king agamenon understood this thing He was all marrid and passing
sorrowful in his courage / For he louyd his daughter effigeme by great love And
on the other side he was prayed and required of all the other kings and
princes of greece / That he would give none enpesshement to this that was so
great an enpryse / For to wythstande the sacrefyse / wherefore he was
vaynquysshid by the said princes and for the love of his country / He took his
said daughter effygenye / And in the presence of many great kings and princes
sacrefyed her unto the goddess deane And anon the tempest cessyd And the air
becam net and clear / And the sea well attempryd and in tranquyllyte and pees
/ And than he went again in to his ship and all the other in like wise /
Drew up their sayllys and sayllyd to fore the wind so far that they arrived
at a port of the Royame of Troyes Nyghe unto a castle named sarabana / Dares
ne puts determynatly / whereof that king agamenon made his sacrefyce to
dyane / But ouyde in the twelf the book of methaphormose says that hit was
effygenye his daughter as a boue his said / And when they of the castle saw
the great Nauye at their port They armed them and came unto the port wenyng to
deffende their land again the Greeks / And assaylled them that tho were
descended a land / That were yet weary of the trauayll of the sea / But the
greeks issued anon out of their shyppys great plente all Armed that slew
them and chassyd them unto their castle And slew them fleeyng / And entryd in
to the castle with them And there put them all to death and took the Proye.
And after beat down the castle unto the earth / And than Reentryd in to their
shippis again / And sayllyd so far that they arrived at the port of thenedon
/ And there than they ankryd their shippis etc.

AT this port was a passing strong castle and well peupled and full of great
Rychessys and was three mile fro troyes / when they of the castle saw the
greeks / they ran to Arms / and garnysshid their castle with good fyghtars /
And the other issued out and came unto the port where they fond the greeks
that were than issued out of their ships all armed and great plente / And
took all that they cowde find Thus began the battle between them right fyers
and mortal / And there were ynowhe slain and deed of both parties. And many
moo of the greeks than of the trojans / But as soon as the great strength of
the greeks were descended. The trojans might no longer suffer ne abide but put
hem to flyghte sum to the castle. And the other fled unto troy. Than the
greeks put hem and beleyde the castle round about. And assayllyd hit on all
sides / And they within deffended hit passing well upon the wallis And slew
many by shot and by engyns. But the greeks dressyd their engyns all about
the castle / And set their ladders unto the wallys. And went up on all
sides. And they within defended hem vaylliantly / And made hem fall down in
their dyches some deed and some hurt. But the greeks that were so great in
nombre sent allewaye new folk to thassault whereof they within were so weary /
that they reculed and went aback fro their deffences / And than the Greeks
entryd by force in to the castle / And there slew all them that they fond /
with out sparyng of man or woman. And took and pylled all that they fond
that was good / And after beat down the castle and the howse^ unto the earth /
And put in the fire and burnt all up And after they reentryd in to their
shippis Joyous of the gain that they had gotten in the castle.

How the greeks sent Dyomedes and Vlixes unto the king Pryant for to have
again helayne and the prisonners / And of the answer that they hadd.
When the Greeks had demolysshid and beten down thus the castle and ediffyces
of thenedon and of Sarabana / And that they refresshid them in the medowe of
Thenedon / Than Agamenon that had the charge of all the ooste / And to
conduyte hit well as a good captayn ought to do / Commanded that all the butyn
and gain of these two castellys should be brought forth And so hit was done
anon as he had commanded And as a wise king distrybued the gayn to each man
after his deserte and qualyte / And after did do cry in all the ooste / that
all the noble men of the ooste should assemble them on the plain of thenedon to
fore the king Agamenon / And when they were all comen / The king Agamenon
spack and said in this manner / My friends and felawis that been here now
assemblid for so Just a cause as each of you knows And in so great puyssance
that it is and shall be tidings thereof in all the world / Alleway how strong
that the puyssance be / That hit plese the gods that hit be with out pride
and felonnye / For hit is so that of the sin of pride growealle other vices /
And that the gods resist and wythstonde the orguyllous and proud people /
And therefore we ought to put away pride fro our works. And in especial in
this work here now. And use the right way / of Justice. To the end that no
man may reprehende us ne blame. ye know well that we ben comen thus far for
to take vengeance of the Iniuryes and wrongs that the king Pryant has don to
us And we have don to him now great hurt and domayge. ye may well know for
truth / That they have assemblid in the cite of troy great power for to
deffende them against us / And also the Cite is passing great and strong / And
ye know well that they ben upon their propre herytagye That is a thing that
dowblith their force and strength / For ye may take ensample of the crow that
otherwhyle deffendeth well her neste again the fawcion / I ne say not these
things for any doubt that I have / But that we shall have victory / And that
we ne shall destroy their cite how well that hit is strong / But only for
our worship / to the end that we be Recomanded to have conduyted this work
by great discrecion and with out pride / For often times by over light and to
hasty enterprise. a thing of a great poyse and with out mewre counceyll may
come to a myschieuous end / ye know well that it is not long agoo / that the
king Pryant did do Require us by his special messangers that we should
Render to him his suster exione / And that by our orguyell and pride we would
not delyuere her again And if we had deliueryd and sent her home again These
euylly^ had never happend in the isle of Cythare as they now been / And the
queen helayne that is of the most noble of greece had never be rauysshyd ne
ladde away / And also we had not enterprysed the pain ne the labor / Where
we now ben in And there is none of us that knows what shall happen to him good
or evil / And therefore if ye seem good that we might Return in to our
country with out suffrynge of more pain with our honor and worship / We
shall send unto the king Pryant our special messangers / And bid him to
send and renvoye to us helayne freely And that he restore to us the domayges
that Paris has done in the isle of Cythare / For if he will so do / Our
return shall be honorable / And we may no more Axe of him by right / And if
he reffuse this / We shall have two things that shall fight for us / Justice
And our true quaryll And our puyssance excusid / And when men shall here of
our offres / They shall give the wrong and blame to the Trojans And to us the
loose and preysyng / And we shall ben excused of all the domayges that we
shall done to them after these offres. Therefore auyse you among your self what
thing ye will do.

THan were there some felonnes that blamed this counceylle / And some allowed
hit / And fynably they concluded to do so as Agamenon had said / Than they
Cheese for their messangers / Dyomedes and Vliyes for to goo to Troy. And make
their legacion / which took their horses. And went Incontinent theder And came
to troy about mydday And they went strayt to the pallays of king Pryant And
took their horses to keep at the gate And after went up in to the halle. And
in going up they meruayllyd hem greatly of the rich work that they saw in
all the pallays. And specially of a tree that they saw in a plain the which
was made by art mathematycque meruayllously. composed and of great beaulte /
For the tronchon or stock benethe was no gretter but of the gretenes of a spear
/ And was passing long and high. And above had branches of gold and of
silver and leeuys that spradde over the pallais And save a lityll hit coueryd
all / And the fruit of the same tree was of diverse precious stones that gaf
great light and bryghtnes And gaf great solace to them that beheld hit. They
went so fer forth that they came in to the great halle where the king Pryant
was accompanied with noble men / And than with out salewyng the king ne the
other / Vlixes said to him in this manyere.

King Pryant meruaylle the nothing that we have not salewid the for as much
as thou art our enemy mortell / The king Agamenon to whom we ben
messangers sends and comandeth the by us that thou renuoye and send to him
the queen helayne / whom thou haste don to be rauysshid and betaken fro her
husbonde. And that thou restore all the domages that paris thy sone has done
in greece / And if thou so do / I trow thou shall do as a wise man. And if
thou do not behold what euyllys may come to the and to thine / For thou shall
dye an evil death and all thy men. And this noble Cite shall be destroyed /
When the king Pryant herd Vlixes thus speak He answered In contynent to Vlixes
with out demandyng counceylle / I meruaylle me greatly of thy words that
requyrest of me that thing / That a man vaynquysshid and might not deffende
him self no more / With great pain would accord to the.. I believe not that
the greeks have such puyssance to do that thing that thou haste said to me
They require of me reparacion / And I ought to demand of them / have not they
slain my fader and my brethern And ladde away my suster in seruytude / Whom
they daigne not to marye honorably / But to hold her and mayntene as a common
woman / And for to have her again I have sent to them Anthenor. And would have
pardoned them of the surplus. But ye know the vilonnyes and menaces that they
did to my messanger And therefore I ought not to here any thing that ye say
to me / But had lever dye vylaynsly than to agree your request / And late
Agamenon know that I desire never to have peace ne love with the Greeks that
have done to me so many dysplaysirs / And if hit were not that ye ben
messangers I should make you dye an evil death / Therefore go ye your way anon /
For I may not see you with out displaysir in mine heart / Than began dyomedes
to lawghe for despyte and said thus. Ha king if with out displaysir may
not see us that been but tweyne / Than thou shall not be without displaysir
all the days of thy life For thou shall see fro hensforth to fore thyn eyes
great puissance of greeks The which shall come to fore thy cite. And shall not
cesse for tassaylle hit contynuelly. Against whom thou may not long
deffende the But that thou and thine finably shall receive bitter death.
Therefore thou sholdest take counceyll in thy works if thou were well auysed

THan were there many trojans that would have Run upon the greeks And drew
their swerdes for to have slain them But the king pryant destourned hem. And
said to hem that they should late two fools say their folly / And that hit
was the nature of a fool to show folly / And to a wise man to suffer hit / Ha.
A. sire said Eneas what is that. that ye say / men should show to a fool his
folly / And truly if h^t were not in your presence this felawe that has spoken
so folyly to fore you. should receive his death by my hand. Hit ^pperteyneth not
to him to say to you such venymous words ne menaces And therefore I auyse him
that he go his way anon. if he cesse not to speak folyly / Dyomedes that of no
thing was abashed answered to Eneas and said / what some ever thou be thou
show well by thy words that thou art right ill auysed and hoot in thy
words. And I desire that I may ones find the in a place couenable that I may
reward the for the words that thou have said of me / I see well that the
king is well ewrous and happy to have such a counceller as thou art that
counceyllest him to do vylonnye / Than Vlixes brack the words of Dyomedes
right wisely and prayed him to hold his peace / And after said to king Pryant
we have understand all that thou haste said And we shall goo and report hit
unto our princes. And Incontinent they went and took their horses And Returned
unto their ooste / where they fond all the nobles assemblyd to fore the king
Agamenon And said to them the answer of king Pryant. Whereof they had great
meruaylle And devised long to gyder For to conduyte well their works syn they
were ad certayned of the war of the Trojans.

How Agamenon assemblyd to counceyll the greeks for to have vitaylles and how
they sent Achilles and Thelephus unto the royame of M^^se where they slew the
king Tentram in bataylle And how Telephus was made king And of the kings
that came in the Aid and help of king Pryant.
AFter these things Agamenon callid his folk to counceyll in the plain of
theneden / And said to them Among all other things hit behooves us
necessaryly to be auysed how during the siege to fore Troy our Ooste shall be
socouryd of vytayll And therefore if ye seem good we shall send unto the Royame
of Mess for to have fro thens vitaylles contynuelly. For hit is a contre right
fertyle and comodyous And they that shall goo theder shall take sewerte of them
of the contre / That they shall not fayll to send vitaill to the ooste as
long as we shall be in this country This counceyll plesid much to the greeks
/ And they chese Incontinent. Achilles and Thelephus the sone of hercules for
to furnysshe this message And for to goo theder with a great company of men of
Arms / In that prouynce reigned a king that had to name theutram and had long
reigned in pees / For his contre was peplid of good and hardy knights. When
Achilles and thelephus with three thousand knights fires and hardy were arrived
in the isle of mess they issued out of their ships And descended on the
land / There came than against them the king theutram with a great company of
men of foot and on horse back / Than began the bataylle right fiersly and at
the assamble there were many knights slain on both sides And how well that the
greeks were less in nombre than the other were They deffended hem well / But
their defense had not auayllyd them ne had been the great prowess of Achilles
that did right meruayllys with his body. As he that was the most strong and
most vayllyant of the greeks For whom he araug^^ went therefore. And there
might no man endure to fo^^ him. When than Achilles had espied the king
theutram in the mids of his people that did great damage to his folk / he
thressid in to the grettest prees of his enemies / and beat down to fore him
all that he fond unto that he came to king theutram. And he gaf him so many
strokes that he all to hew his helm / And smote him down to the ground (...)
And had slain him in contynent ne had thelephus have ben / which put him
between and prayde Achilles humbly that he would not slay him Ner do (...) harm
than he had / And the king him self cried to Achilles mercy / Than said
Achilles to thelephus What meueth the of pity against our enemy mortal / that
is come to assaylle us by so great felonnye hit is rayson that he fall in to
the pytte that he had made ready for us Ha. A. Sire said thelephus / This king
was right famylier with my fader hercules / And also did to me on a time great
honor in this land And therefore I may not suffer to see him slain to fore mine
eyes. Well than said Achylles / take him than And do with him what thou will
Than was the bataylle fynysshid And the greeks cessid / And the king Thentram
was born in to his pallays as deed. For Achilles had so brussyd him and all to
frusshid him And the king prayed Achilles and thelephus / that they would goo
with him The which went / And were receyuyd with `grete Joy and honor.

HIt was not long after / that the king thentram that was wounded to the death
of the wounds that Achilles had given him / sent for Achilles and thelephus /
and than said to hem My friends I may not long live / And than after said to
thelephus / My friend I may no longer live / And I have no lawful Eyres of my
body / to whom I may leave this Royame that I have gotten with great labor / And
had lost long syn ne had been the most worthy of all worthy thy fader
hercules / Which waranted and was a shield to me against all them that would
have taken hit fro me / And so did of fayt to them that would have taken hit /
when thy fader by his great prowess slew hem and enchassed hem out / And syn
I have kept hit paysybly no thing by my merit / (...) the virtue of thy
fader / And syn hit is so that thy fader has conqueryd this Royame for me
that have none eyres. Hit is well right and rayson that thou be herytier of thy
fader And for so much as this is my last word / I leave to the this royame
and all mine other goods where some ever they be And make the mine herityer And
pray the that thou do burye me honorably as hit apperteyneth to a king. And
as soon as he had finysshid these words he deyde / And than thelephus and the
nobles of the country did do burye him honorably / And leyde him in a much
rich sepulture / where upon was wreton this Epithaphye / Here lies the king
thentram Whom Achilles slew The which left his royame to Thelephus. This
thelephus that before was but a duc / was made king of mess And all the nobles
of the contre did him homage And all the people promised to him faith and
seruyse / Than Achilles did do charge his ships with vytaill And ordeynd
that Thelephus should abide in his new royame / which he did sore anoyed And
he prayed him And also commanded in the name of the grekis that he should do
diligence to send unto the ooste of the grekis often times vitayllis / and he
promysid him that he so do would without any fawte And than Achylles took
leave of him and returned in to his ships / And sayllyd so long that he and
his felawship arrived at the poort of thenedon sauely where they fond the
ooste yet soiournyng. And anon as he was descended. He went strayt unto the
tente of king agamenon where all the princes and kings were assemblid / he
was receyuyd with great Joy / as he that all the ooste loved much for his
great strength and prowess / Than Achilles told to them how he arrived at
Mess and of the battle / and how that thelephus was made king And how he had
promysid to furnysshe the ooste of vitaylles / Of these tidings the greeks had
great Joy and allowed and preysid much the vaylliance of Achilles. And after
their parliament each man went unto his pauyllon / Than was Achilles receyuyd
with great Joy of his myrondynes that much louyd him.

IN this place here the auctour names what kings and princes came to the help
and aid of king pryant to troy not of all but of the most notable. First
came unto their aid / the king pandorus the king Galior and the king
Adrastus with three thousand knights armed. Fro the prouynce of tholoson came
four kings with five thousand knights armed the king carras the king
amasius the king Nestor that was a much strong man. And the king Amphymacus
Fro the royame of licye came the king Glauton with three thousand knights. And
his sone Sarpedon that was one of the strengest knyghtis of the world and cosyn
of king pryant. Fro the royame of lichaon came the king ensemus with three
thousand knights right expert in arms / Fro the royame of larysse came two
kings with fyften honderd knights the king imstor that was a much great man
And the king capidus / Fro the royame of thaborye came the king remus with
three thousand knights / and in his company came four dukes and seven earls
that were feyd with king pryant They bare in their arms the color of asure
with out other sign / and thereby was the king remus and his people known in
the bataylle. Fro the royame of trachie came the king pilex and the duc
alchamas with.xi. honderd knyghtis. Fro the royame of pauonye came the king
pessemus and the duc stupex his cosyn with three thousand knights right expert
to Iouste and to shote with the bow / This is a much wild contre of forestes
and montaygnes / And where is but lityll people / And ynowhe of wild bestes and
of birds. Fro the prouynce of boecye came three dukes with twelve honderd
knights the duc Ansermms / the duc fortunus And the duc sammus. Fro the royame
of burtyn where as grow good espices came two kings brethern with a thousand
knights / the king bo^tes And the king episteus. Fro the regne of paphagore
that is at the son rysyng in the eeste / full of all richesses / came the
right rich king philemeus with three thousand kngyhtes all her sheldes of the
hydes of fysshis all couerd with gold and precious stones And this king was as
great as a geant Fro the regne of Ethiope came the king perseus / and the king
of thiction with him / that was right hardy and wise with three thousand
kngyhtes that had in her company many a duc and many an earl / and also was
with hem simagon the sone of king thiction. Fro the royame of cheres came the
king theleus and Archilogus his sone that was of the affinyte of king Pryant
and brought a thousand knights Fro the isle of Argreste came two kings of whom
I have not the names with.xii. honderd knights / Fro the regne of Eliane that
is beyond the royame of Amasonne came an Ancient king right wise and discrete
named Epistropus and brought a thousand knights and a meruayllous best tht
was called sagittayre that behind the mids was an horse and to fore a man /
This best was heery like an horse and had his eyes reed as a cool / and shot
right well with abowe This best made the greeks sore aferd And slew many of
hem with his bow / Thus were in nombre all the knights that came in Aid of
king Pryant two and thertty thousand with out them of the royame of Uroye and
of ynde the myneur / And hit is not found by writing that syn the creacion of
the world that so many noble knights were assemblid in one place And that
meuyd the quarelle for so lityll occasion / O how the kings and princes ought
to take heed and be well auysed for to meue the war Also far as they might
amend hit by other way.

OF the coming of duc Palamydes And how the greeks departed fro the port of
thenadon by the counceyll of dyomedes and came and took land before the strong
Cite of Troy And how the trojans receyuyd them by battle right vigorously.
THe Greeks were not yet partyd fro Thenedon. when palamides the sone of king
Naulus came and arrived at this port of thenedon with thretty shippis full of
knights Armed All noble and hardy men And of his coming the greeks had great
Joy / And had murmured a fore be cause he tarried so long / whereof he excusid
him by sekenes that he had had / This palamides was holden in great worship
among the greeks and was the second after king Agamenon / puyssant and
discrete in Arms and much rich / And at his coming he was anon chosyn to be
counceyllour of the Ooste. And thus were the greeks many a day and many a night
at the port of thenedon often times assemblid to counceyll for to advise the
best manner to assege the Cite of troy / and finably after many oppynyons /
they held hem to the counceyll of dyomedes that was this / now said he All ye
kings princes and barons that been here assemblid / we ought all to have great
shame and vilonye. When hit is a year goon syn we descended here in this land
/ And have not yet ben to fore troy verayly in this we have given to our
enemies great auantage / syn hit is so that this time during they ben
pourueyed of great aids and all her cite strongly fortefyed and renforced of
wallys and bulwerkis that they have good leyzer to make / And verrayly them
seems that we ben not so hardy as to come unto them And therefore the more that
we delay us to goo theder / the more encreseth our shame and damage / and I
trow if we had goon theder when we came first in to this contre / we should have
more esely descended and taken land / than we shall do now. For they ben
better garnysshid now than they were at that time / of all such thing as they
behoeffyd for to deffende hem with / / And therefore I counceylle you that to
morn be times we put us on the way in good ordenance / And late us set the
siege fermly and as hastily as we may We ought well to know that we shall not
so do with out great bataylle Where fore hit behooves each man to employe
himself and to put behind all fere and dread. For by none other way we may
not exployte in this work / ne better ne more honorably by mine aduys etc.

THe counceyll of dyomedes plesid to all the barons of the ooste / and also on
the morn erly they reentryd in to their shippis And sayllyd strayt unto the
poort of Troy and brought their ships by good ordenance one after another /
In the first front they put an honderd shippis right well garnysshid of
knights and banyers that wauyd in the wind / And after them they put an
other honderd And after all the other by order / And they had not far
sayllyd but that they saw the noble cite of troy / And approchid thereto as
hastily as they might / When the trojans saw the greeks approach the Cite /
They Ran to Arms / And mounted upon their horses all armed / And went forth
with out ordenance unto the port / Than when the greeks saw the Trojans come
in so great nombre for to deffende their port / There was none so hardy but he
was a ferde / but for as much as they could not descend a land but by force
of Arms. They armed hem Incontinent / And contended to descend and take land
by force etc.

OF the first honderd shippis was chief and captayn / the king prothesalaus of
philarde That did great pain and diligence to bring his shippis within the
port. But the wind that was strong blewe hem in to the port so strongly
against the Ryuage that many of them brake and brussyd and many Greeks were
drownyd / And they that might take land took hit / And were anon slain by the
Trojans with great torment and in so great nombre / That the ground was reed
of their blood Hit is not in the mind of any man that ever any nauye wan land
with so great myschef as did the nauye of the greeks / After this first
honderd ships the other came and arrived that followed hem / And they that were
with in were garnysshyd of great arblasters / where with they shot and slew
many of the Trojans and constrained them to go a back. And than took the greeks
land And so couryd the first that fought at great myschief Than began the
bataylle mortal / The king protheselaus that was descended with the first /
did right meruaylles with his body and slew that day of the trojans with out
nombre. And if he allone had not ben All the greeks that were descended a
land had been slain But what might his deffence help / when seven thousand
greeks faughte against an honderd thousand trojans. And I say you that for the
great danger where in they felt hem self / They sold their lives dear /
abidyng the socours of king Archelaus and the king prothenor / That anon
arrived / And would the trojans or not They descended and took land And
socourid their people vayllyantly and began again cruel bataylle etc.

AFter arrived the duc nestor and his folk that threstid in among her enemies
right fiersly / there was many a spear broken and many an arowe shot /
knights fill down deed on both sides the cry was so great that hit was
meruayllous to here / there they slew many trojans Archelaus and prothenor.
After arryuyd the king ascalus and the king Agalus with their shippis and
descended a land and assayllid the trojans by great fiersnes and by force made
hem to recule and go a back / And than came to the bataylle great foyson of new
trojans / Than began the bataylle more great than hit had been of all the day
to fore in so much that the greeks were reculed by force unto their shippis
And than arryuyd Vlixes with a great company of knights that threstyd anon
in to the bataylle And the greeks recoueryd land at their coming And assayllyd
on the trojans There made vlixes great effusion of blood of his enemies / And
anon his ensign was known among them / And when the king philomenus saw
that Vlixes slew so their people he adressid him unto him / And beat him down
of his horse a lityll wounded. And vlixes smote him again so hard that he gaf
him a great wound upon his throat / And cut a two his orygynall vain / And
smote him as half deed / And the trojans ran and took him fro the greeks / And
bare him upon his shield in to the cite / And ne had be this adventure of this
king The greeks had been disconfited / But the trojans intended strongly to
save him / And than arrived the king thoas and the king Agamenon The king
Menelaus and the king Thelamon ayax with all their power and descended a land
and medlid hem in the battle / And brack their speres upon the trojans. And
beat down many some deed and some hurt / At this Ioynyng were many trojans
slain.

When the king prothesalus departid from the bataylle where he had been syn the
beginning For to take breath And when he came to the port He fond all his men
nyghe by deed / For whom he wept for pytye / And took again his courage for to
avenge the death of his men / And went again to the bataylle. And in his great
ire slew many Trojans and wounded hem and smote down many of them of their
horses. Than came to the bataylle of the party of the trojans the king perses
with great company of knights / At the coming of the ethyopyens began the
bataylle mortal. And had many greeks slain and by force made hem to goo back
And had with out fayll disconfited them / ne had the worthy palamydes sone
descended a land / For at his coming the greeks were recomforted And also
palamydes made right meruayllys with his hand / And addressid him against
sagamon the brother of king menon and neuewe of the king of perse / that sore
greuyd the greeks And he smote him so sore with his spear that he pershid him
through out the body / And smote him ded down to the earth And after he smote
in to the great press And beat down all that he met / And each man that
knew him made him way / And than roose a Cry upon the trojans that they
might not suffer the strength of palamydes And were reculed by force And had been all desconfited / But the most worthy of all worthy hector when he herd
the cry upon his people / he issued out of the cite with great company of
knights and entryd in to the bataylle Armed in rich arms / And bare in his
shield of gold a lione of gowles / his strength was anon known / among the
greeks / And encountryd and met in his coming the king prothesalaus that had
not of all the day cessid to sle trojans And he smote him with his swerd by so
great might upon his helm / That he clefte him unto the nombryll
notwythstandyng his Armor / And fill down deed to the earth. And after hector
threstid in to the grettest prees / and as many greeks as he araught with his
sword he slew Than each man fled fro him making him way And demanded the
greeks one of another / what was he that so greuyd hem And anon they knew that
hit was hector the most strong man of the world and than was there none so
hardy that durst abide his struck.

THan hit happend that hector went out a lityll for to refresshe him And than
the greeks reprised courage up on the trojans / And this happend that day eyghte
or ten times / Hit was about the our of euensonge what time hector departid
fro the battle / And reentrid in to the cite / For the Greeks were with all
disconfited And than arrived the right strong Achilles with his myrondones and
entryd anon in to the battle well with three thousand good knights / That were
with him And than were the trojans on all sides beten down and slain For
against Achilles endured no man but he were beten down to the earth or sore
hurt.

THan were arrived all the nauye of the greeks / and the knights go on a land
and medlid with the other in the battle / wherefore the trojans had much to
suffer in so far that they must needs flee in to their Cite and Achilles and
the other slew them fleeyng there was a great cry of the hurt men There was
achilles all dyed with the blood of the trojans that he had slain / And there
was great occision at the enter in to the cite / There saw the faders her
children slain to fore her eyes And the occysion and slaughter had been more
great / Ne if Troylus Paris and Deyphebus with a great company fyerse and new
ne had comen out and issued of the Cite that resisted the Greeks and made
thoccision to cesse / And also the night was nyghe / And each man with drew
him in to his place / The Trojans shytted her Cite and did make good wacche /
And Achilles with the grekis Returned to their tents with great glory / That
were not yet dressyd / But the king Agamenon did do dress hem Incontinent
And made each man to take place couenable after his astate. And they that had
no tents ne pauyllons loggyd them under the leaves the best wise they could
them and their horses And after ankryd their shippis as well as they might and
took out of them all that was necessary to them Thus made the greeks their
siege this night and set hit to fore the cite of troy And made meruayllous
great fyres in the ooste that made hit as light as hit had be day / So were
they logged nyghe to gyder and made right good wacche / how well that they had
none assaults this night / And they had all the night trompettis and
menestrellys great plente That agamenon ordained for to conforte the ooste And
they restid this night all Armed the best wise they could / This was the
first bataylle of the greeks and of the trojans at their coming etc.

Of the second bataylle to fore troy in the which were many kings and great
barons slain by the worthy hector / And how the trojans had been victoryous of
their enemies ne had been the prayer of thelamon Ayax cosyn of hector etc.
ANd when the night was passid / hector that had the charge of all them of the
cite ordained right erly his batailles in a great plain that was in the cite
And put in the first bataylle two thousand good knights which he betoke to lead and conduyte to tweyn of his kynnysmen That is to wete to Glaucon the sone
of the king of keye and to afiamolor his bastard brother / And assigned to them
the king thesus of Trahie and Archilogus his brother that was wise and
vay^liant / and made hem to issue out by the gate named da^dane that stood
against the Oost of the greeks / In the second battle he put three thousand
good knights and strong whom he took to conduyte to the king exampitus of
frigie and to the king Alcanus that were knights of great strength / and
recomanded them to the guard of the gods / and made them issue out after the
other in good ordenance / The third battle he be took to Troyllus his brother
for to co^duyte with three thousand knights wise and hardy / and said to him at
the departing My right dear brother the leysse of my heart puts me in doubt
of thy great hardynes wherefore I pray the that thou govern the wisely in the
battle in such wise that thou enterprise not such things as thou maiste not
achieue / and tht thou put not thy body in danger of death by over much wenyng
/ whereby thou myghtest give Joy to thyn enemies and owres / Go thy way in the
name of the gods tht the conduyte and keep fro paryll and encombrance / Ha. a
Sire brother answered Troylus hit needs you not to doubt of me. For I shall do
tht in me is / right as ye have commanded / and than he went forth with his
company after the other And bare in his shield three lions of gold.

HEctor put in the fourth bataill three thousand knights and seven honderd /
whom he took to conduyte to king huppon of larisse / This king huppon was
most strong of all the trojans next hector / and had in his company a
vailliant knight a bastard brother of hector wise and hardy named dyma^cus
The.v. bataill hector deliuerid to conduyte to the king of cisayne with all
his folk / that were meruayllous strong and great as geantis / And the same
king bare in his shield all asure with out any difference / And hector co^misid
in this battle polidamas his bastard brother with this king / and issued after
the other The sixte bataylle led the king precemessus / that had his people
well Induced to shote and draw the boowe And went with out Arms to bataylle
mounted upon good light horses And hector comysid deyphebus* his brother to
conduyte them and issued after the other / With this bataylle adiousted hector
all the cheuallerye of the Royame of Agreste under the conduyte of king
Esdras and of king philon This king philon had a meruayllous chare all of
yuorye of gold and of silver and of precious stones / This chare conduyted two
strong knights / with these two kings hector put epitagoren his bastard
brother / And they issued after the other The seventh battle ladde Eneas And a
noble admyrall named enfrene And they went after the other The eyghte bataylle
ladde the king of perse named perses / And Paris was chief and captain / And
hector prayed paris his brother that he should not assemble unto the greeks unto
the time that he came him self / And that he would follow him anon / The nyneth
battle and the last ladde hector him self And ten of his bastard brethern
after him And all the best knights of the Cite chosen / were in this
bataylle to the nombre of five thousand etc.

THan when hector was rychely ar^yed / And Armed with good harnoys and scewre /
he mounted upon his horse named galathe / that was one of the most great and
strengest horse of the world And so Armed and mounted he rood unto the king
his fader And said to him right dear fader reteyne with you a thousand and five
honderd knyghtis and all the men of foot of this cite / And hold you
without to fore the sight of the greeks And meue you not But if I send you
word / to the end if we have necessite / that ye be our reffuge / And I
shall send you all way among my messangers that shall say to you the state
of the bataylle / And take ye good heed and guard that our enemies take not
our cite by cautele or trayson. And the king answered to him / My sone I shall
do all as thou haste to me said / For next after the Aid and help of the
gods / Thou art all my hope and trust / And have no faith but in the
virtue of thyn Arms and in the great discrescion of thy wit And I pray to
the gods right humbly that they will keep the hoole and sound and preserve
the fro encombrance.

AFter these words hector went him forth after the other / This hector was
much coragyous. strong. and victoryous in battle / and a right wise
conduytour of men of Arms / His shield was all of gold / And in the myddell a
lion of gowles And how well that he was the last that issued out of his house
or of the cite / yet passid he allewaye all the bataylles and came and put
him self before in the first bataylle / The women that were in the cite / And
all the other went upon the wallys for to behold the batayles / Th^re were
the daughters of the king with the qu^ne hel^yne that had great doubt And
dyuerce ymagynacyons in her self.

WHylis that hector had ordained his bataylles. The king Agamenon was not idle
/ but ordained right erly of his people six and twenty bataylles / He put in
the first bataylle Patroclus with his people and with the folk of Achylles.
Which was not that day in the battle / for his wounds that he had and did
do hele hem in his tente This patroclus was a much noble due and rich and
louyd so much Achylles that they were both of one Alyance In the second
bataylle was the king men on And the king ydumeus with three thousand knights
And there was with hem the due of Atthenes with all his people The third
bataylle led the king Achalaphus / And his sone phimenus with her people /
The fourth bataylle ladde the king Archelaus / And the king prothenor his
brother and with them was securidam the right strong knight with all the people
of boecye / The fyfthe battle ladde the king menelaus with all his people of
sperte. The sixthe bataylle ladde the king Epistropus and the king celidus
with all her people / The seventh battle ladde Thelamon ayax with all his
people of salamyne And he had four erlis with him / that is to wete thesus
Amphymacus Dorius and Polidarius / The eyghte led the king Thoas / The
nynthe led Ayax aleus / The tenthe ladde the king philotus / The enleuenth
the king ydumeus and the king meron / The twelfth the duc nestor / The
thrittenth lad the king exiones / The fourt^nth the king Vlixes / The fyftenth
the king humerus In the sixtenth were the folk of prothesclaus much desiryng
to avenge the death of their lord / The seuententh ladde the king polidarius
And the king Machaon The eyghtenth the king of Rodes / The nynetenth the ^yng
sampitus And the king lidorus / The twentythe the king ger^pulus / The one
and twentythe the king philotetes of larisse / The two and twentyth dyomedes
The three and twentythe the king Oeneus of Cypres. The four and twentythe the
king Prothalus / The fyfe and twentythe the king carpenor / The six and
twentythe and the last bataylle ladd the king Agamenon Emperor of all the
ooste.

When all the bataylles were ordained on that one side and on that other / And
was no thing to do but tassemble Than auauncyd him hector all there first And
patroclus came against him as much as his horse might run / And smote him so
strongly with his spear in his shield that he perchid hit through out / but more
harm did he not / Than hector assayllid patroclus with his sword / And gaf
him so great a struck upon his heed that he clefte hit in two pieces / And
Patroclus fill down deed to the ground / When hector saw him ded he coueyted
his Arms / For they were right queynte and rich / And a lightid down of his
horse for to take them / But the king Menon came upon him with three thousand
good knights for to deffende the king Patroclus against hector / And said to
him thus / Ha. A wolf Rauysshyng and Insacyable. Certes the behooves to seek
thy pray in some other place for here geteste thou none / And than they
assayllyd him on all sides / And would have taken fro him galathee his horse /
But hector by his prowess remounted would they or not and wend to have vengid
him on king Menon / But the king Glancion and the king Thesus and Archilogus
his sone came with three thousand fightars / And than hector leyd on and beat
down all before him / And the first that he met he gaf so great a stroke that
he slew him and after him many mo he beat down and slew.

THus began the bataylle on both sides And hector came again to the body of
Patroclus for to have his Arms / But the king ydumeus of crete came against him
with two thousand fyghtars / And the king menon that had allway his eye to
hector let him and was so in the way / that hector might not have his Arms
that he sore desired And suffryd great pain for as much as he was on foot /
but he enforced him with all his courage / And began to slay man and horse And
to smite of heedes legs feet and Arms And slew fyften of the strengest that
assayllyd him. In this mean while the king menon took the body of patroclus to
fore him and bare hit unto his tente / as the greeks contended to grieve hector
and to take away his horse There was among them a right strong knight named
creon de la plerre / that greuyd him most / Than one of the seruauntis of
hector adressid him again this Creon / And gaf him so great a stroke with his
spear / that he smote him down deed to the earth / And after he smote down
another And escryed to the trojans right loud that they should come and socoure
hector / with this cry came first securabor one of the bastard brethern of
hector / and threstid in to the grettest prees so far that he came upon them
that most greuyd hector that had slain moo than thretty of them And did so
much that by force he made the greeks to recule And than was hector remounted
upon his horse And threstid in among them by great fierste and slew great
plente of them for the desplaysir that he might not have the Arms of patroclus
/ Than he recountryd none but he slew him / or beat him down hurt And each
man made him way and dredde him etc.

THan came to the bataylle Menesteus the duc of Atthenes and came and Joined him
to the bataylle where as Troyllus was that did meruaylles and had with him the
king Sampitus / The king Machaon And the king Alcanus / Tho began fyerse
bataylles Menesteus adressid him against Troyllus. And there faught against him
with so great force / that he beat him down of his horse in the great prees of
the folk And Menesteus contended with all his strength in so much that he
took him / And lad him toward their tents with great company of knights /
Than imseres of Troy escryed to the trojans that troyllus was prysonner / And
that they should be dishonored if they suffered him to be ledd away / Than the
king Alcanus took his spear that was right strong / And adressid him unto hem
that held troyllus / And smote the first down deed to the earth / and smote
another and sore wounded him / and did so much by the aid of his men that
troyllus was rescowed And set again upon his horse And also by the help of
king Sampitus that came on with all his people / And gaf so great a struck to
menesteus overthwart / That if he had not be well armed he had been slain / And
than escryed Menesteus to his people and so began among them a mortal bataylle
/ And there were many slain on that one side and on that other / Among these
things Menesteus that was sorry that he had lost his prysonner / Recountryd
miseres / By whom he had lost him And anon he knew him / he adressid him to
him and beat him down And the same time smote down another knight / Tham came to
the battle hupon and hiripisus with two thousand fightars And against them came
menelaus and prothenor with their folk And there began a mortal meddle etc.

Anon after came polidamas the sone of anthenor With a great company And
threstid in on that other side among his enemies / After came the king Remus
fro troy with three thousand fightars And against them came menelaus with all
his people / the said menelaus adressid him against king Remus / and Iusted to
gyder / And smote each other to the ground. Than adressid him polidamas and
remus against the neuewe of helayne a young man twenty year old / And remus gaf
him so great a struck with his spear that he smote him down deed to the earth /
wheerof menelaus had great sorrow / for he louyd him much And in his great ire
he gaf so great a stroke to Remus with his sword That he smote him down as
deed And when the king remus was so beten down / his men had wend that he had been deed and would have fled ne had been polidamas that retained hem with great
pain And did so much that they took their king so h^rte as he was And bare
him home in saefte Than the king celidus that was the most fair king of the
world adressid him to polidamas and smote him with his spear But he could not
remeue him polidamas gaf him so great a stroke with his sword that he smote
him down deed to the earth / Among these thyngis hector went and came fowlyng
and sleyng his enemies And made way to fore him in sleyng of knights and
betyng down so far that he came upon them of salamyne that the king thelamon
conduyted that slew many of the trojans and beat down by his prowess / Than
the king thenter gaf so great a stroke with his spear to hector / that he made
him a deep wound And than hector in his great ire encountrid an admyrall of
the greeks and slew him cruelly with his swerd. Than was hector closid with
his enemies on all parties There was of the greeks the king thesus And he said
to hector and warned him that he should go out of the bataylle / And said that
hit were damage for all the world to lose such a knight And hector thankid
him right courtoisly.

IN this while Menelaus and thelamon assayllid polidamas And thelamon that
adressid him first smote him with his spear / and after gaf him many strokes in
so much that they brake the laas of his helm and took him / And had lad him.
away ne had hector have be which was not far / that smote among them that
held him and slew and hurt many of them and did so much by his vaylliance
tht he slew thretty of them And the other fled / and left polidamas with
him Than there put hem to gyder the king Epistropus The king menelaus and
the king thelamon with all her people And smote in among the Trojans by so
great fierste that they made hem go a back maulgre them / Notwythstandyng the
great prowess of hector that was with the other that did meruayllys in his
person / and than was his good horse galathe slain under him / and than he
deffended him a foot so meruaillously that there was none so hardy of the
greeks tht durst approach him when his krethern knew the right great danger
tht he was in / they ran all to that part / tho was thelamon sore hurt And
dinadorus one of the bastard brethern of hector gaf so great a stroke to
polixenus a noble man that he slew him and beat him down of a great and a
strong horse whereupon he satte / And took the stead to hector that mounted upon
him in contynent there were meruaylles of Arms done by the bastardis Than came
on deyphebus with all his ooste where in he had great foyson of Archers that
hurted and slew great foyson of greeks / And deyphebus made and gaf to king
thenter a great wound in the visage / Tho began the battle also mortal as
hit had been malle the day There was thesus assayllyd of quyntelynus one of the
bastard brethern of hector and of king moderus and was taken and lad away /
But hector delyueryd him all quyte for the courtosye that he had done to him a
little to fore.

THan came to the bataylle of the party of the greeks / The king tho as And
the king phylota^ But the king Thoas adressid him against cassilanus one of
the bastard brethern of hector and gaf him so great a stroke that he slew him
down to the earth seeing hector / which than smote so Angerly among the
greeks / That anon he slew many / And put hem all to flight / Than came to
the bataylle nestor with six thousand knights / And the king Esdras and the
king Phylon that did great meruaylles of Arms came against hem / At this
assemble there were many knights slain. and beten down of that one party and
of that other / The king Philon that did right meruaylles in arms was
enclosid with the greeks on all sides And had be slain if Iecomas and the
king esdras his fader ne had deliueryd him fro their hands / Hector and his
brother did meruaylles with polidamas / and had put all the greeks to f^^ght /
but menelaus and thelamon resisted them strongly Than came Eneas to the bataylle
with all his oost / And put him Inn with hector and the other And by force
put the greeks to plain flight / whereof ayax had much great sorrow / And also
as he beheld behind him he saw the banyers that came to the battle that had
not yet have been there / And there was all the flower of the cheualerye of
greece Than prayed h^them that fled / that they would abide and recomence and
begin new bataylle Ayax and Eneas entrecountred so hard that they fylle
both to the earth / And than came philotras with three thousand knights and
made the trojans goo back. and smote hector with his spear but he might not
remeue him / and hector gaf him so great a stroke with his sword That he beat
him sore hurt / Than came to the battle the king humerus / and the king
Vlixes with all their people and the king hamelius / and they had well in their
ooste ten thousand knights / the which did the trojans much sorrow that
were much weary / to their socours came paris to the battle / and in his coming
smote so hard the king of frigie that was cosyn to vlixes that he slew him
and beat him down / whereof the greeks had much sorrow / And vlixes supposid to
have smyten paris with his spear / but he smote his horse and slew him / and
paris fill to the earth / Than Troyllus gaf to vlixes so great a stroke that he
wounded him in the visage and made the blood spring out like ^s the wyn
Kenneth out of a tonne etc. And vlixes hurted him again / and truly the trojans
had than fled / ne had been the great prowess of hector and of his brethern /
For hector ne cessid to put him self in the grettest prees here and there / And
each man that knew him made him way.

When he saw that his people might not suffer the great strength of the greeks
/ he wythdrew (...) on a side / And told them what Iniuryes the greeks had don
to hem / And what they would do if they came to their above / And than amonested
and warned hem to do well / And after brought hem by avaleye on the right side
for to assaylle their enemies / There was great occision of the greeks / There
was the king thoas assayllid of the bastard brethern of hector / For to avenge
the death of cassibelanus their brother that he had slain They beat him down of
his horse And rasyd of his helm fro his head And had slain him incontinent /
if the duc of Atthenes had not come on that threstid in among hem and gaf so
great a stroke to one of the bastardis quyntylynus that he fill down to the
ground sore hurt And paris smote the duc with an arowe in the side / And made
him a great wound / But the duc that was sore hurt set not thereby but magre
them all he deliueryd the king thoas fro their hands / Than hector did
great pain to put the greeks unto flighte / And than the king Humerus shot
an Arowe unto hector And hurted him in the visage / And hector ran upon him by
so great ire that he smote him so sore upon the head that he clefte hit unto
the teeth and he fill down deed Than with blowyng of an horn came more than
seven thousand grekis for tassaylle hector that defended him against them
meruayllously After this he went a litill to his fader and took three thousand
knights fresh and fires and brought hem to the bataylle / And at their coming
he made great occision of the greeks etc.

Ayax and hector Iusted to geder and fought each with other / Menelaus slew at
this Ioynyng an admyrall of troy Celidones slew moles of oreb the neuewe of
king thoas Mandon smote out an eye of king cedonyus Sadellus slew an
admyrall of the greeks / Thelamon beat margareton and sore wounded him. Famuell
beat the king prothenor to the earth The king of gaull Iusted against
menesteus But menesteus hurt him on the nose with his sword Than deanor
seeing his brother hurt / adressid him to menesteus and smote him down to the
earth And than ran upon him three brethern that would have slain him or taken him
/ but he deffended him vaylliantly And anon he was socourid by the king
thenter / but hector than assailled hem both And with out fault they had not
escaped him / ne had ayax the strong knight have comen to the rescows / with a
thousand knights that he had in his company / Tho came on the king of perse
with five thousand knights that paris ladde And so did all the other trojans
and made the greeks recule and goo back by force / Dares writes in his book
that hector slew a thousand knights only in this assault.

Among all other things Hector encountryd the king menon to fore a tente and
said to him / ha. a evil traytre the our is comen tht thou shall receive thy
reward for that thou restournest me to take the arms of patroclus / and than
he smote him so great a struck that he fill down to the ground / And after
hector alightid down and smote of his heed / and would have taken his arms
from him / But menesteus let him and smote upon hector overthwart by such
force tht he gaf him a great wound And went his way with out more taryyng
doubtyng the fureur of hector Than hector went out of the stowre And did do
bind his wound that hit bledde no more* And after went in again in to the
stoure / And slew in his coming many greeks / And dares says that after he
had bounden his wound / he slew the same day a thousand knights And there
was none that had courage to avenge him ayenste him or deffende / But he put
hem all to flight / And the trojans entryd in to their tents and pyllid and
robbed them / and took all the best that they cowde find etc.

IN this day had the trojans had vittorye of all the greeks if fortune that is
diverse had will consentyd / For they might have slain hem all And eschewyd
the great euyllys that after came to them. Certes hit is not wysedom when any
man fyndeth his enemy in great peril and fortune / to offer his power to
deliuere him thereof / For hit happeth often times / that he shall never recouere
to have his enemy in the same caas / but that fortune torn her back Thus hit
happend this day to the unhappy hector / that was at the above of his enemies
and might have slain hem all if he had would / for they sought no thing but
for to flee / when by great mysaventure came before him in an encountre thelamon
Ayax that was sone of king thelamon and exione And was cosyn germayn of hector
and of his brethern which was wise and vayllyant / which adressid him against
hector and deliueryd to him a great assault And hector to him as they that were
valyant both two / and as they were fightyng they spak to geder And thereby
hector knew that he was his cosyn german sone of his aunte And than hector
for curtoisye enbraced him in his arms and made him great chiere And offryd to
him to do all his playsir if he desired any thing of him / And prayed him that
he would come to troy with him for to see his lignage of his mother side / But
the said Thelamon that intended no thing but to his auantage said that he
would not goo at this time / But prayed to hector sayng / that if he louyd him
so much as he said / that he would for his sake and at his Instance do cesse
the bataill for that day / and that the trojans should leave the greeks in pees /
The unhappy hector accorded to him his request. And blewe an horn and made
all his people to withdraw in to the cite Than had the trojans begone to
put fire in the ships of the greeks and had all burnt hem / Ne had hector
called them fro thens / whereof the trojans were sorry of the rapeell This was
the cause wherefore the trojans lost to have the victory / to the which they
might never after atteyne ne come for fortune was to them contrary And
therefore virgile says / Non est misericordia in bello That is to say there is
no mercy in bataill A man ought not to take misericorde / But take the victory
who may get hit.

Of the first triews of two monethis demanded by the greeks / And of the third
battle between them in the which hector bare achilles to the ground twyes
and after slew the king prothenor and smote him with one stroke in two parties.
THan hit came on the morn betymes / the trojans armed them for to goo and
assayll the greeks But the greeks sent by times to king pryant / And demanded
triews for two months / and he agreed to them the said triews And than were
the deed bodies gaderid as well of that on party as of that other And some
were buried and some burnt Achilles was than sorrowful for the death of
patroclus That he could not in no wise be confortyd He made his body to be
buried in a much rich sepulture and so did they of the other as of the king
prothes^laus and other kings and pryn^es that were slain. And they that were
hurt and wounded / they did do be helid during the trews / Pryant the king
did do burye his bastard sone cassibelanus right honorably in the temple of
venus And took great sorrow for his death / and so did all the other etc.

When cassandra herd the doell and sorrow that the trojans made for the death of
their friends / she escried and said O meshau^t trojans make sorrow for your
self For in like wise shall hit happen and come to you as it is to your friends
/ that shall be the death / Alas why ne seche ye pees of the greeks / to fore er
these euyllys come to you and er this noble cite be destroyed / alas why ne
yield you not again helayne / that the king my fader did do rauysshe by force
/ wherefore ye shall all be destroyed Among al^ these things / palamides
murmured strongli of the seignourye of Agamenon / sayng that he was not worthy
to have so great domynacion above all the other And that he him self was more
worthy to have the seignourye of the ooste than agamenon / and that he had not
the g^^e and consent of the princes / but only of three or four and than at
tht time there was no thing further proceeded

When the trews were faylled / The king Agamenon that had the Charge of all
the ooste ordained right erly his bataylles / And gaf the first to Achylles /
And the second to Dyomedes. The third to Menelaus The fourth to Menesteus the
duc of Athenes And in all the other he ordained good captayns and conduytours
/ Hector ordained his batayllys in like wise / And set in the first Troyllus.
And in all the other he set good captayns and hardy And made all the
batayllis to issue out / And he set him self in the front to fore / And when
Achylles saw him he ran against him / And hector ayenste him That they smote
each other to the earth right sore. Hector remounted first and left achylles
lyynge on the earth / And smote in among the other in the most grettest prees
And he raught no knight but he slew him or beat him down / And went tourgh
out the bataylle all made reed of the blood of them that he had slain / when
Achilles was remountid he threstid in among the Trojans in the grettest prees
and slew many and he went so far that he encountrid hector again / And he
ran to him / And hector to him / But Achilles was born down to ground / And
hector would have taken his horse / But he might not for the great socours that
achilles had / When he was remounted he assaylled hector with his swerd and gaf
so great strokes to hector / That nyhe he had beten him / But hector gaf to him
so great a stroke upon the helm That he enfoundrid him and made the blood
spring out of his heed / Thus was the bataill mortal of the two knights /
and if they had not ben departid that one or that other had be slain / but
their people departid them / Than came dyomedes to the battle and troillus on
that other side / Which smote each other to the earth / But dyomedes remounted
first. And assayllyd troylus that was on foot that deffended him vayllyantly
/ and slew the horse of dyomedes But their men remounted them both / two / by
force And began again to meddle / And dyomedes had taken and ladde away troyllus
/ / if the trojans hadd not put hem in paryll of death for to rescowe him. And
many of them were slain / Than came to the bataylle menelaus of the greeks side
/ And paris on the other side And than in going and coming hector cessid not to
slay and to beat down knights Than there was a new knight named bretes that
assayllyd him fiersly / but hector by right great ire smote him upon the helm
so great a stroke that he clefte his heed unto the nombryll and he fill down
deed / seeing that The king archylogus his cosyn / And hector would have taken
his horse / But the king Archylogus deffended him as much as he might / And
than hector ran upon him and smote him so hard that he smote his body in two
pieces notwythstandyng his harnoys / The king prothenor adressid him to hector
that than took no guard ne head / And smote him down to the earth / And hector
Remounted anon upon his horse And gaf to king prothenor so great a stroke
with all his might that he clefte his body in to two halues / seeing Achilles
that was his pare^t or cosyn / that had so great sorrow / that he and the king
Archelaus contended to avenge his death / But the trojans came upon with so great
strength that the greeks must needs flee And the trojans followed hem. unto
their tents And than the night came on that made hem to depart And the trojans
returned in to their cite.

How the greeks held parliament how they might slay the worthy Hector / And how
they returned to the fourth bataylle / In the which Paris and Menelaus
encountryd / And the king thoas was brought prisoner to troy.
AFter this bataylle when the night was come. all the kings princes and
barons of the greeks assemblid at the tente of king Agamenon. And there held
they their parliament how they might slay hector / And they said well that as
long as he were a live and came to battle against them They might never
vaynquysshe the trojans / But he should to them do great domaige / And for to
bring this thing to the end / They required Achilles that he would take hit
upon him as well for his strenght as for his wisdom. And achylles enterprysed
gladly / As he that wi^te that hector desired more his death / Than the death of
any other / And also hector was he / by whom he might sonnest lose his life /
After this counceyll they went to rest till on the morn be times that they
armed hem. And hector was than issued out of the cite with his bataylles well
and diligently ordained / And was him self to fore all other in the first
bataylle / And after him Eneas And than paris And than deyphebus And after him
Troyllus / And after him the other following each in his order / Than Joined
all the trojans to geder / And were more than an honderd thousand fyghtyng
men / Tho began the bataylle horrible and mortal / Paris with them of perce
that were good knights slew with shot many grekis and hurted them Hector
encountrid the king Agamenon And beat him and wounded him sore And than
achilles assayllyd hector And gaf to him so many strokes that he brake his
helm / Than Eneas (...) Troyllus came to the rescows of hector / And dyom^^^
came upon that adressid him to Eneas and beat him / And said to him in mocquerye
/ Ha. A. good counceller that gauyst counceyll to thy king to offend and
grieve me. know thou for truth that if thou come often in to these bataylles
and that I may mete with the / that thou shall not escape with out death.

Among these things hector assaylled achilles And gaf to him so many strokes
that he all to ^russhid and brake his helm / And wend to have taken him But
the sone of guideus ran upon hector And gaf him so great a strok with his swerd
/ That he hurted him sore / And hector in his ire recountryd dyomedes / And gaf
him so great a stroke that he beat him down to the ground / Than Troyllus
alightyd and descended down for to fygh^e with dyomedes a foot / but dyomedes
deffended him so vayllyantly that hit was me^uaylle / And beside them fought to
gyder hector and Achilles / Than came to the medlee all the kings and princes
of greece with great company of men of Arms / And fro the party of the
trojans came all the barons that were comen to their aid / There began
meruayllously the bataylle / The king Agamenon And the king pandelus fought
to geder / The king Men^laus recountrid paris / And they knew each other well
/ And Menelaus smote him so hard with his spear / That he made him a great
wound and smote him down / whereof Paris was all a shamed / Vlixes beat the
king Arastous And took his horse that was good and sent hit to his tente.
Polimytes ^^^ayllyd huppon the ancient and slew him (...) and the king
Archilogus fought to geder / Polidamas beat Palamydes and wounded him sore /
And after mocqued him by reproach / The king Scelenus / And the king Carras
encountrid to geder and Carras was sore beten and wounded Philemenus beat
Anthenor / Philoteas and the king Remus fought to geder / the king Thesus and
the king Eryalus fought to geder and both were sore hurt And the bastardes
of king Pryant did meruaylles and slew many Greeks And hurt many kings /
The king Thelamon and the king sarpedon Iusted so sore that one ayenste that
other that they fylle both sore hurt and all astonyed of the angwysshe that
they had / The king Thoas and achilles that were cosyns assaylleden hector /
And gaf him many strokes And drew of his helm fro his head and hurted him in
many places And hector gaf to him so great a struck with his swerd tht he cut
of half his nose.

TO the rescows of hector came his bastard brethern that slew many of the
greeks and took the king Thoas and wounded and beat the king Agamenon in
such wise that he was born to his tents as deed / and the king thoas was
ladde prisonner to troy / Menelaus contended to grieve paris / And paris shot
to him an arowe enuenymed / and wounded him in such wise tht he was born in to
his tente / and as soon as menelaus had bounden his wound he came again to the
battle for to grieve paris if he had fou^den him / and he fond him and
assayllid him But eneas put him self between hem both / For as much as Paris
was unarmed for to auente him / and so eneas lad him in to the cite to the end
that menelaus should not slay him / Than hector assayllyd menelaus. And wend to
have taken him / But there came to the rescows great plente of chyualrye of the
greeks wherefore hector might not come to his entente And than he threstid in
and smote among the other And did so much with help of his folk that the
greeks fled / And than the night came on that made the battle to cesse.

How Pryant would that the king thoas that was prisoner should have been hanged
And how they returned to the fyfthe bataylle / In the which hector slew wi^h
his hand three kings And how dyomedes slew the sagittarye etc.
When hit came on the morn be times the king pryant would not that they should
fight that day but sent for his counceyll / That is to wete hector. paris
Troylus and deyphebus / Eneas Anthenor and polidamas / And said to them / ye
know how we hold prisoner the king thoas / That with out cause that we have
deseruyd is come for to destroy us / And therefore me thinks good / That we
make him dye an evil death / What say ye thereto / Ha sire said eneas. The god
forbede that your noblesse should do such a vilonye / Syn hit is so that the
king Thoas is one of the most noble kings of greece And that it might hap
that the greeks might take one of ours / To whom they might do in semblable
wise / / whereof ye might take the grettest sorrow of the world / So than hit is
better as me thinks that ye keep right well the king thoas with out
mysdoynge to him / that if by fortune one of ours were taken / we might make
a change and take that one for that other / This counceyll seemed good to hector
/ But the king pryant said to them yet / if ye do thus / hit shall seem to the
greeks that we doubt us and that we dare not put their folk to death
Notwithstanding I shall do by your counceyll This counceyll fynysshid Eneas
took Troyllus and Anthenor and went to see helayne / whom they fond in the
great halle of ylion with the queen hecuba / And many other noble ladies where
she made great sorrow And they supposid than to have conforted her / And so
did the queen hecuba that said to her that she should take no thought ne
sorrow / And that they of the cite should well deffende them.

Among these things the greeks complained hem sore of the death of their
friends that the trojans slew thus / And held hem self children that they had
put hem in such danger / Whereof they had well passid and ben deliueryd if
they had had good counceyll / And yet hit happend that same night. That there
came so great a wind and so great a rain that her tents ware all turned up
so down to the earth And seemed that the world should have ended by the great
storm Whereof her sorrow doublid When hit came in the morenyng When the tempeste
was passyd they armed hem all through out the ooste And went hem against the
trojans / / that tho were issued to battle Achilles adressid him first to
huppon that was great as a geant and was king of larrysse. And he smote him so
sore with a spear in the breast / that he slew him and bare him down to the
earth / hector slew in his coming the king Athomeus / Dyomedes slew the
king Antipus / Than the king epistropus and the king cedus assaylleden
hector / And Epistropus Iusted against hector And brak his spear upon him And
said to him many vilayns words / / whereof hector was angry And in his great
ire gaf him so great a struck tht he slew him / And after said to him that he
should goo and say his vilaynous words to them that were deed such as he was
wont to say to living men / Than was cedeus passing sorrowful of the death of
his brother And amonestid a thousand knyghtis that he had for to slay hector.
And they assayllyd him anon and beat him of his horse / And than they cried to
king cedeus for to sle hector. And when hector apperceyuyd tht / he gaf him so
great a struck That he cut of his arm whereof he fill for the angwyssh that
he felt / and anon hector slew him Eneas slew in his medlee the king
Amphymacus And there went to gyder all the most puyssant of greeks and
assaylled the trojans and slew many of them And they went by so great force
tht they put the trojans in a chasse in the which achilles slew the king
philis / Whereof hector had great sorrow / and in his ire he slew the king
Dalpmee and the king doreus And thus by the puyssance of hector The trojans
recouerd the field and slew many greeks etc.

THan issued out of troy the king epistropus with three thousand knights /
and they foureyed and threstyd among the greeks That reculed in their coming /
/ for as much as he brought with him a sagittarye the same that before is made
mention of / This sagittarye was not armed But he bare a strong bow and a
turquoys that was full of arowes / and shot strongly / When the knights of
the greeks saw this meruayllous best / They had no will to goo forth. And
they that were before began to wythholde hem. And went aback Among these
things hector slew Polixenes the noble due that fought sore against him. And
by the strenghte of the Trojans and the horror of the sagittarye the greeks
were reculyd unto their tents / Hit happend that Dyomedes to fore one of the
tents was assayllyd of the sagittarye / And had this best to fore him and the
Trojans on his back. And so behooved him there to show his puyssance The
sagittarye had tho shot an arowe to him And dyomedes that was not well
assewryd auaunfid him nyghe unto him / And gaf him so great a stroke with his
sword the which was not armed that he slew him. And at that time hit was
paste myddaye / And than the greeks recoueryd the field / And made the Trojans
to flee / And than entrecountryd Hector and Achylles And with force of their
speres they faught both two And fylle both to the earth / And as achilles was
first remounted / He supposid to have ladde away galathe the good horse of
hector But hector escryed to his folk that they should not suffer him to lead
him away Than they ran upon Achilles and did so much that they rescowed
galathe and rendryd him to hector that was right glad of him At this meddle was
anthenor taken and sent to their tents notwit^standyng that polidamas his
sone did meruaylles of Arms for to resscowe him / but he might not / And thus
they faught to great damage of that one party and of that other unto that the
night departed hem.

Of the trewes that were between hem / After the which began bataylle again
fro morn to even with great damage of that one party and of that other / But
the troyans lost more than the greeks.
IN the morn betymes the greeks sent diomedes and vlixes unto the king Pryant
for to have tryews for three months The king Pryant assemblid his counceyll
upon this thing / And each man agreed save hector That said that the greeks
feigned to will burye their deed bodies / by cawtele / And them lackyd vytaylle
/ And therefore required they tryews To the end that during this time that they
pourueye them of vytayll / And we daily waste owres whereof we may sone have
scarcete / how be hit he would not abide only by his entente against tho
ppynyon of so many wise men And agreed with the other And the triews were
accorded for three months / This triewes during the king tho as was deliueryd
in the stead of Anthenor that they held prisoner / whom they sent to the
trojans. Calcas that by the commandment of Appolyn had left the trojans had a
passing fair daughter and wise named breseyda / Chaucer in his book that he
made of Troylus named her creseyda. For which daughter he prayed to king
Agamenon and to the other princes / that they would require the king pryant to
send breseyda to him They prayde ynow to king pryant at the Instance of
calcas / But the trojans blamed sore calcas and callid him evil and falls
traytre / And worthy to dye / that had left his own land and his naturell
lord for to goo in to the company of his mortal enemies / Alleway at the
petycion of the greeks the king pryant sent breseyda to her fader.

THe triews during hector went him on a day unto the tents of the Greeks /
And Achylles beheld him gladly for as much as he had never seen him unarm /
And at the request of Achylles. Hector went in to his tente / And as they
spack totgeder of many thing / Achylles said to hector / I have great playsir
to see the unarmed for as much as I had never seen the to fore / But yet I
shall have more playsir / When the day shall come that thou shall dye of my
hand / Which thing I most desire / For I know the to be much strong And
I have often times prouyd hit unto the effusion of my blood / Whereof I have
great Anger / And yet have I more great sorrow for as much as thou slewest
Patroclus him that I most louyd of the world / Than thou may believe for
certain that be fore this year be past his death shall be auengyd upon the / By
my hand / And also I wot well that thou desire to slay me / Hector answered
and said Achilles if I desire thy death meruaylle the nothing thereof. For as
much as thou deseruest to be mine enemy mortal / Thou art come in to our
land for to destroy me and mine / I will well that thou know that thy words
fere me nothing at all / But yet I have hope that with in two year if I live /
And my sword faylle me not / That thou shall dye of mine hands / Not thou
allonely but all the most grettest of the Greeks: For among you ye have
enterprysid a great folly And hit may none otherwise come to you thereby but
death / and I am assewrid that thou shall dye of my hand Er I shall dye by
thine And if thou wene that thou be so strong that thou maiste defend the
ayenste me / make hit so that all the barons of thyn ooste promise and accord
that we fight body against body And if hit happen that thou vaynquysshe me /
that my friends and I shall be bannysshid out of this royame and we shall
leave hit unto the greeks / And thereof I shall leave good plegge And herein thou
may prouffite to many other That may Run in great danger if they haunte
the battle / And if hit happen that I vaynquysshe the / make that all they of
this ooste depart hens And suffer us to live in pees / Achilles achauffid him
sore with these words And offryd him to do this battle and gaf to hector his
gayge / which hector took and resseyuyd gladly etc.

When Agamenon knew of this haytye and bargayn / He went him hastily unto the
tente of Achylles with a great company of noble men. Which would in no wise
accord ne agree to this battle Sayng that they would not submytte hem so many
noble men under the strenghte of one man And the trojans sayden in like wise /
Save only the king pryant that would gladly agreed for the great strenghte
that he felt in his sone hector Thus was the champe broken / And hector
departed and went again to troy fro the greeks.

When Troylus knew certainly that breseyda should be sent to her fader he made
great sorrow For she was his souerain lady of love / And in semblable wise
breseyda louyd strongly Troylus. And she made also the grettest sorrow of the
world for to leave her souerayn lord in love / There was never seen so much
sorrow made between two lovers at their departing / who that list to here of
all their love / late him read the book of troyllus that chawcer made /
wherein he shall find the storye hooll / which were to long to write here /
But fynably breseyda was led unto the greeks whom they received honorably
Among them was diomedes that anon was enflamed with the love of breseyda /
when he saw her so fair And in ridyng by her side / he shewid to her all his
courage And made to her many promesses and specially desired her love And than
when she knew the courage of diomedes / she excused her sayng that she would
not agree to him ne reffuse him at that time. For her heart was not disposed at
that time to answer otherwise Of this answer Dyomedes had great Joy. For as
much as he was not reffusid utterly And he accompanied her unto the tente of
her fader. And halpe her down of her horse / And took fro her one of her glouys
that she held in her hands And she souffryd him swetely / Calcas resceyuyd
her with great Joy And when they were in pryuete between hem both. Breseyda
said to her fader these and semblable words

A A. A. my fader how is thy wit fayllyd that were wont to be so wise and
the most honored and beloved in the cite of troy And gouernest all that was
with Inn And had so many richesses and possessions / And haste ben
trayttre thou that ought to have kept thy Rychesses and deffended thy
contree unto the death / But thou love better to live in pouerte and in exyle
among the mortal enemies of thy contree. O how shall this torn to the great
vylonnye: Certes thou shall never get so much honor / as thou haste gotten
vylonnye. And thou shall not only be blamed in thy life / but thou shall also
after thy death and be dampened in hell. And me seems yet hit had been better to
have dwelled out of the people upon some isle of the sea / than to dwell here
in this dishonor and vylonnye. Wenest thou that the greeks hold the for
true and faithful / that art openly false and untrue to thy people. Certes
hit was not only the god Appollo that thus abusid the / but hit was a company
of deuyllys. And as she thus spack to her fader / she wept strongly for the
displaysyr that she had etc.

HA. a. my daughter said calcas than / wen^est thou it is a sewre thing to
despyte the answer of the gods / and specially in that thyngeth at towcheth
my health. I know certainly by their answers that this war shall not dure
long / that the cite ne shall be destroyed. And the nobles also and the
burgeyses. And therefore hit is better for us to be here sauf / than to be slain
with them. And than fynysshid they their parliament. The coming of breseyda
plesid much to all the greeks. And they came theder and fested her And
demanded of her tidings of Troy and of the king Pryant / and of them that
were with Inn. And she said unto hem as much as she knew curtoysly. Than
all the grettest that were there promised her to keep her and hold her as
dear as her daughter. And than each man went in to his own Tente And there was
none of hem but that gaf to her a Jewel at the departing / and than hit plesid
her well to abide and dwell with the greeks / and forgate anon the noble cite
of troy / and the love of the noble troyllus / O how sone is the purpos of a
woman chaungid and turned / certes more sonner than a man can say or think
Now late had breseyda blamed her fader of the vice of trayson / which she her
self excersised in forgetyng her contre and her true friend troyllus etc.

How the greeks and trojans began the sixthe bataylle that dured by the space
of thretty days in which were many kings and princes ded of that one side
and of that other / And how diomedes smote down troillus of his horse and sent
hit to breseyda his love that receyuyd hit gladly etc.
AFter the three monethis of triews passid / on the morn be times the trojans
apparayllid them to bataill / And when hector had ordained all his batayllis /
he issued out first and took with him fyftene thousand fyghtyng men. And
troyllus followed him with ten thousand knights. After him came paris with three
thousand fyghtyng men and good archers and well horsed. After came deyphebus
with three thousand fyghtars. After him came Eneas and the other all in order so
many that there were this day of the party of the trojans more than an
honderd thousand good fyghtyng men and hardy / Of the party of the greeks came
all there first Menelaus with seven thousand knights. and after him Dyomedes
with as many / And than Achilles that lad also seven thousand the king pampitus
with a great multitude of knights And the other after like as they were
ordained. The king Philis advanced him alther first. And hector came against
him so strong that he slew him with his spear. Than there roos a great cry of
his death among the greeks. And the occysion and slaughter began so great that
hit was an horrible sight to see as well of that one side as of that other /
The king Pampitus slew many trojans for to venge the death of his uncle and
assayllyd hector / but hector gaf him so great a struck with his swerd that he
sleewe him also. And for to avenge his death the greeks slew many of the
trojans / Achilles slew many noble men / Among the which he slew the duc
biraon. and cuforbe that was a much noble man. Hector was this day sore hurt
in the visage / and bledde great plente of blood. and wyste not who had done
hit. And therefore the trojans reculed unto the walls. And when hector beheld
and saw upon the wallis the queen hecuba his mother and his susters / He had
great shame. And by great ire assayllid the king menon cosyn of Achilles / and
gaf him so many strokes with his swerd upon his helm that he slew him seeing
Achilles / that wend for to have enraged and took a strong spear. and ran
against hector and brake his spear upon him / but he could not remeue him. And
hector gaf him with his swerd so great a struck that he maad him to tomble
under his horse. And said to him Achilles Achilles thou contendest to approach
to me / Know that thou approchest thy death. And as Achilles would have answered
to hector / Troyllus came upon between them with a great nombre of knights and
put him in the mids of them / And there were slain more than five honderd
knights of greece / and were put back by force / And menelaus came to the
rescows with three thousand fyghtyng men. And of the party of the trojans came
the king Ademon that Iusted against menelaus / and smote him and hurted him in
the vysage. And he and troylus took him and had lad him away / if dyomedes had
not come the sonner with a great company of knights / And fought with
troillous at his coming and smote him down and took his horse / and sent hit
to breseyda. And did do say to her by his servant / that hit was troyllus
horse her love / that he had beten him by his prowess / and prayed her fro than
forth on that she would hold him for her love and friend etc.

BReseyda had great Joy of these tidings / and said to the servant that he
should say unto his lord / that she might not hate him that with so good heart
louyd her / When Diomedes knew the answer / he was right Joyous / and threstid
in among his enemies. But the trojans that were stronger than they / maad the
greeks to goo a back and recule unto their tents and had slain hem all if the
king agamenon had not socowred hem with right great strength Than began the
battle horrible and mortal / And the greeks recoueryd the field. And rebowted
and put the Trojans aback unto their dyches. Than came palidamas to the rescows
with a great nombre and multitude of knights and did fair appertyses of
war Than Dyomedes adressid him to him / But he was beten of palydamas that
took the horse of dyomedes and took hit to troyllus that fought a foot / And he
mounted anon there upon / Than came Achilles against troyllus whom troyllus
receyuyd gladly / and beat down Achilles / which remountyd lightly. and
assaillid troyllus with his swerd And troyllus defended him right vaylliantly.
Than came on hector And had at this stowre slain more than a thousand knights.
but the greeks defended Achilles / that were so oppressid that uneath they
might defend him no more / And he had been slain or taken / if the king
thelamon and the duc of Atthenes had not socourid him. And they set him again
on his horse with great pain / and than the night came on that departed them.
They fougght thus thretty days contynuelly to the great damage of both
parties And there were slain six of the bastard sons of the king pryant. And
hector was hurt in the visage. And therefore the king pryant demanded trews
of the greeks for six monethis. And they were agreed and accorded to him etc.

How the greeks and the trojans began the seventh battle / that dured twelve
days And after began the eyghte battle much domageous for the trojans. ffor
hector was slain by achilles And were rebowted in to their cite by force of
their great damage.
DVryng the six months of the triews aforsaid hector did him to be heled of
his wounds And played in the noble halle of ylyon that was / as the hystorye
says the most Ryall halle and fair that was in all the world. Thus during
the trewes the king pryant did do burye his six bastard sons each in a
sepulture by him self right honorably. Among all other things Diomedes
suffered great my sease for the love of brescida / and might not ete ne rest
for thynkyng on her / And required her many times of her love. And she answered
him right wisely gyuyng him hope with out certaynte of any point / by the
which dyomedes was enflamed of all points in her love / When the six
months were passid they began to fight by the space of twelve days
contynuelly fro the morning unto the euenyng. And there were many slain of that
one side and of that other / And than came a great mortalite among the greeks
in the oost of the great hete that tho was / And therefore the king Agamenon
required tryews / which was agreed and accorded to him etc.

When the triews was passid the night to fore Andrometha the wife of hector that
hadd two fair sons by him whereof that one had to name la^medon / and that
other Astromatas. This Andrometha saw that night a meruayllous vysion. And her
seemed if hector went that day following to the bataylle he should be slain. And
she that had great fere and dread of her husbond Weeping said to him prayng him
that he would not goo to the battle that day Whereof hector blamed his wife sayng
that me should not believe ne give faith to dremes / / and would not abide ner
tarry therefore / When hit was in the morenyng Andrometha went unto the king
pryant and to the queen and told to them the veryte of her vysion. and prayed
to them with all her heart that they would do so much to hector that he should
not that day go to the bataylle etc.

HIt happend that day was fair and clear And the trojans Armed them And
Troyllus issued first in to the battle / After him Eneas / After Paris
Deyphebus Polidamas and the king sarpedon the king Epistropus the king Croys
/ and the king Philomenus / And after all the princes that were comen in the
aid of the trojans / each man in good ordenance / And the king pryant sent to
hector that he should keep him well that day fro going to battle. Wherefore
hector was angry and said to his wife many words reprochable / as he that knew
well that this defense came by her request / how be hit notwithstanding the
deffence he armed him. And when Andromeda saw him armed she took her little
children and fill down to the feet of her husbond and prayed him humbly / that
he would take of his Arms / but he would not do hit. And than she said to him /
at the least if ye will not have mercy on me / so have pytie of your little
children that I and they dye not a bitter death. or that we shall be led in
seruytude and bondage in to strange contreyes / With this point came upon them
the queen hecuba and the queen helayne and the susters of hector / And they
knelid down to fore his feet and prayed him with weeping teerys / that he would
do of his harnoys and unarm him and come with them in to the halle. But never
would he do hit for her prayers. but descended from the palace thus Armed as he
was And took his horse and would have goon to bataylle. But at the Request of
Andromeda the king pryant came rennyng anon / and took him by the brydell and
said to him so many things of one and other that he maad him to return / but
in no wise he would not unarm him.

Among all these things the battle was mortal of the greeks and of the
trojans / Diomedes and troyllus Iusted to geder / And at the assemble they
greuyd each other / and with out faylle each of them had slain other if
menelaus had not come and departid them. Than the king myseres of frygye beat
menelaus and had taken him when eneas came and distrowblid them. And would have
slain him / But the said troyllus delyueryd hem and slew many greeks. Than came
the king thelamon with three thousand fyghtyng men / And ^^stid in his coming
against polidamas / / and put him to the worse and vnhorsid him. But troyllus
socourid him and made him to remounte on his horse. After came paris and achilles
on the other side / that smote among the trojans by so great forcewyth the
help of his people that he put hem to the flight unto the cite / And in this
chasse achilles slew margareton one of the bastardes of king pryant.

When hector knew that Achylles had slain margareton / he had great sorrow And
did anon do lase on his helm / and went him to the battle that his fader
knew not of. And in his coming he slew two noble dukes greeks the duc
Coryphus / and the duc bastidus. And he threstid in to the grettest prees of
the greeks / and slew as many as he could areche And the greeks fled before
him that there was none so hardy tht durst abide his strokes / And thus the
trojans returned and slew the greeks on all sides Than the greeks took
polidamas and had lad him away ne had hector have been / which delivered him
and slew many greeks. Than an Admyrall of greece named Leocides assayllid
hector / and hector slew hymanone.

When Achilles saw that hector slew thus the nobles of greece and so many
other that it was meruayll to behold / he thought that if hector were not
slain that the greeks should never have victory / and also for as much as he
had slain many kings and princes. He ran upon him meruayllously and a noble
duc of greece with him named Polyceus / and was come for the love of Achilles /
the which had promised to give to him his suster in marriage / But hector slew
the same duc anon seeing Achilles Than Achilles wenyng to avenge the death of
policeus assayllyd hector by great ire. But hector cast to him a darte so
fiersly / and made him a wound in his thye And than Achilles issued out of the
battle and did do bind his wound and took a great spear in purpose to slay
hector if he might mete him. Among all these things hector had taken a much
noble baron of greece much queyntly and rychely armed / And for to lead him
out of the ooste at his ease / had cast his shield behind him at his back /
And had left his breast discouerte and as he was in this point and took none
head of Achylles that came pryuely unto him and put this spear with in his
body / And Hector fill down deed / to the ground: When the king Menon saw*
hector deed / He assayllyd Achylles by great ire. and beat him down to the
ground and hurt him strongly. And his men bare him in to his tente upon his
shield. Than for the death of hector were all the trojans disconfyte / and
reentryd in to their cite beryng the body of hector with great sorrow and
lamentacion.

Of the rich sepulture of hector and of the great lamentacions and wepynges
that the trojans maad for his death / / and how palamydes was chosen duc and
governor of the oost of the greeks:.
When hector was ded / and his body born in to the cite / there is no tongue that
could express the sorrow that was maad in the cite generally of men and women
And that there was none but he had lever to have lost his owen sone than him /
And they said all that from thens forth they had lost all her hope and trust
of deffence / And thus they demened right long their sorrow / The noble kings
and princes bare the body unto the palais of ylyon. Than when the king pryant
saw him he fill down a swowne upon the body and was as ded for sorrow that
uneath they could take him away by force. There demened great sorrow all his
brethern / what might men say of the sorrow that his mother the queen made /
and after his susters. O what sorrow maad his wife / Certes there can no man
express all the lamentacions that there were maad / And for as much as the
body might not long endure with out corrupcion. The king pryant took
counceyll of many wise masters How they might keep the body of hector with
out corrupcion and with out sepulture / And than he did do make by their
counceyll a rich sepulture upon four pylers of gold lift up an heyghte upon
the which was maad a much rich tabernacle of gold and of precious stones.
And on the four corners of the tabernacle were four images of gold that had
semblau^ce of Angellis. And above the tabernacle there was a great image of gold
that was maad after the semblance of hector And had the vysage turned toward
the greeks and held a naked swrde and seemed that he manaced the greeks. And
there was in the mids of the tabernacle a place wide. where the masters
setted and put the body of hector in flesh and in bones y cladde in his
best garementes and robes. And stood right up on his feet / and might endure
so a long time in that wise with out corupco^n by certain science that the
maystres had set on the sommet or top of the head of hector / that is to
wete a vessel / that had an hole in the bottom / Which vessel was all ffull
of fyn banie And that stylled and dropped in to a place above on his heed / and
so spradde down in to all the members of the body / as well with Iu^ as with
out / and they fyllyd often times the vessel with bame. And thus the body
might not enpayre for the great virtue of this bame. And all the people that
would see hector they saw him verily in like wise as he had been on live. To
this sepulture the same masters maad a lamp of fyn gold brennyng contynuelly
with out gooyng out or quenchyng. And after they maad a closure / to the end
that no man should approach ne goo unto this tabernacle with out license or
leave. And in this temple the king pryant ordained and set great plente of
prestes for to pray to the godde^ with out sessyng for his sone hector / And
gaf to them good rentes.

Among these things the king agamenon assemblid all the kings and most
nobles of his often And said to hem in this manner / My friends all ye kings
princes and barons / We ought to render and yield thankynges to the gods
humbly and with devout heart / that our right hard enemy hector have suffered
to be slain by the hand of Achilles / ffor as long as he was on live we had
never esperance to have comen at the above of our enemies / what may the
trojans fro hens forth hope and trust / but only their destrucco^n / And we
may in short time hope the victory upon them / And for as much as achilles
is strongly hurt and may not goo to battle / if ye think good whylis that he
may be heled and the other also that been hurt / of whom we have many / and
also for to burye the ded bodies / we shall send to king pryant for to have
triews for two monethis. The counceyll seemed good to hem. And they sent anon
to the king pryant for tryews / and he accorded them for two monethis.

DVryng this triews palamydes murmured again of the seygnourye of agamenon. And
as they were on a day all to gyder / and palamides spack of this matter / / the
king agamenon answered to him as sage in the presence of all the other / and
said to him / Palamydes wenest thou that I have great Joy of the seygnourye
that was given to me at the beginning and have occupied to this present time /
how well that hit was not at my request and that I have none avayll ne
prouffit thereby / but I have great charge and break many slepes / to the end
that by my neclygence our ooste goo not to declyne ner disworshypp^e / And
certes hit had well suffisid to me to have been under the governau^ce of an
other. And I fere no man that may accuse me / that for any evil will or
necligence I have fayllid in any thing. And if thou gauyst not thy consent to
mine eleccion / thou dare not esmaye the thereof / ffor thou were not yet at
that time comen with the other. but hit was two year after er thou came. And
therefore if we should have abyden thy coming we had been yet at the poort of
atthenes. And for as much as thou shall not wene that I have Joy of this
office and am desiryng to have this honor / I am content that another be
chosen and am ready to consent with the most wys / When agamenon had thus
spoken / there was no further proceeded tht day in this matere. And than at even
Agamenon did do cry in all the oost tht each man should be on the morn betymes
to fore his tente at the parliament.

When hit came on the morenyng that they were all assemblid / Agamenon said to
them. My brethern and friends I have had unto this time the charge of this
work with great trauayll for to conduyte hit well / In such wise that by the
suffrance of the gods I have brought hit to honor unto this time. And for as
much as hit is leeffful tht an vnyuersite answer not always to one master /
But that every man enploye him to the best / to his power / for so much than
as I have conduyted this oost long time / I will that we chese another that
may conduyte hit dyscretely. When Agamenon had fynysshid his words / His sayng
plesid to every man / and they chee^ palamydes to be their duc and governor /
And than he went unto his tente Achilles that lay seek of his wounds was
angry of the deposyng of Agamenon and said to fore all them that would here hit
/ that Palamydes was no thing like unto agamenon in wit and in discrecion.
And that me ought not to change him for palamydes / But for as much as all
the people had consentid / he abode thereby also etc.

How the king pryant issued to battle for to avenge upon the greeks the death
of his sone hector / and of the prowessis that he did / and of the
annyversarye of the said hector in which Achilles was esprysed with the love
of polixena the daughter of king pryant in such wise that he might not dure
ne rest.
When the two monthis of the triews were paste the king pryant desiryng to
avenge the death of his sone hector / Ordained with his owen person his
bataylles / and set in each battle good conduytours / and he him self went
and led with him fyve and twenty thousand of good knights chosen of the
best / And dares says in his book that there issued out of troy that day an
honderd and fyfty thousand men / Deiphebus was the formeste and than paris and
after him came the king pryant / and troyllus / Eneas menon and polidamas. And
went hem unto the tents of the greeks / Palamydes had ordained his bataylles
/ than began the battle great and mortal / The king pryant smote down
palamides in his coming / and after smote in to the grettest prees of the
greeks and slew many of them and beat hem down / and did so much in arms in
that day that with great pain a man should believe hit / that a man so Ancient
and old might do that he did that day. The king sarpedon of tro^ye
assaylled king Neptolonyus / that was a passing strong knight. And king
sarpedon was born to the earth that defended him vailliantly and gaf so great a
stroke unto king neptolonyus that he maad him a great wound in his thye. Than
came to the battle the king of parce that remounted the king sarped^n with
the aid of his folk. Menelaus and the duc of atthenes assaylleden the king
of perce and enclosed him and his people among hem / and slew the king of
perce / and maad the trojans to recule by force / There did meruaylles of
Arms the king Sarpedon.

THe king pryant and his bastard sons that than followed him cessid not to
slay the greeks And there was none that day that did so much in Arms as did
the king pryant / For his sorrow and his ire maad his strength to grow. Than
the greeks auysed hem to take the way by which the trojans should return unto
their cite / They went theder in great nombre / And than when the trojans
reculeden for to goo into that place / they fond hem self in the myddell of
their enemies / tho began mortal battle / And there came upon them the king
pryant with a great nombre of fyghtyng men by one wynge / And paris came a
trauerse with great foysson of good fyghtars And he had great foysson of
Archers that slew many of the greeks and hurted hem / And they did so well /
that by force the greeks must recule to their tents. And the trojans reentrid
in to their cite / And the king pryant had the loos and pryse of this battle.
He sent to the greeks to demand triews / and they agreed and acorded to him /
but we find not how long this triews endured etc.

Among these things the king pryant did do carye by land the body of the
king of perse for to be buried in his contre / Tho was the weeping and sorrow
great in troy. And in especyall of paris that louyd him strongly / During this
triews the Annyversarye of hector approchid where me should moorne fyftene days
in great sorrow. And after should me halowe the great feste funeral / as hit
was that time the guyse and custom for kings and princes. And than during the
tryews / the greeks went and came in to the cite sauely / And so did the
trojans unto the tents of the greeks: Than achilles had great desire to goo to
troy to see the cite and the feste of the annyversarye of hector / whom he
had slain / And so he went all unarmed unto the temple of appolyn where as
was the sepulture of hector / and he fond there great foyson of men and women
that were noble and wept and maad great sorrow to fore the sepulture which a
man might see on all sides all hool in like wise as he was first by the virtue
of the bame / there was the queen h^cuba / and polixena her daughter that was
passing foyre with a great company of noble ladies / that had all their here
spartled and hangyng about their sholdres / And demened right meruayllous
sorrow / And how well that Polyxena maad so great sorrow. yet she lost no
thing of her beawte / but seemed ande shewid her self so fair in all her
members and so well colowred that nature formed never none more fayrer etc.

When Achilles had well aduysed and seen polixena / He said in him self that he
had never seen so fair a woman ne better fourmed ne made / With that she was
one of the most noble women fo the world / than was Achilles shoten with the
darte of love / that stack him to the heart so meruayllously / that he could
not cesse to behold her / And the more he beheld her / the more he desired
her / He was so asottyd on her / that he thought on none other thing. but
abode in the temple unto the euenyng as long as the queen was there. And when
she went out he conveyed his eye upon polixena as far as he might see her /
And this was the cause and the beginning of his meschief / In this sorrow
Achilles returned unto his tente / And when he was leyde to sleep / that night
there came many things in his mind and in his thought And knew than the
danger where polixena had put him Inn. And thought in him self that the
most strong men of the world could not ner had not mow vaynquysshe him. And
the only regard and syghte of a frayll maid had vaynquisshid and overcome him
And him seemed that there is no medecyne of the world might hele him save she /
But he said my prayer / my strength / ne my richesse may no thing meue her to
have pity on me / I wot never what devyll has put me in this danger to
love her that hates me so sore / with mortal hate / And by right good cause /
ffor I am comen hither for to sle her kyu^ne and cosyu^s and now late have
slain her noble brother hector / Certes I see no remedy / syn she is the most
noble and fayreste of the world. And than he turned him to the wall and fill
in weeping and drowned him self in teres / and of necessite he must think how
he might come to the love of polixene / And so he coueryd and hid his courage
as well as he might.

How Achylles sent his secret messanger unto hecuba the queen of troy for to
require her daughter polixena and of the answer / and how for the love of her
the said achilles assemblid the cost of the greeks / and cou^ceyllid hem to
depart / and have pees with the trojans /
THe night following as achilles was leyde on his bed and might not sleep / he
thought that he would send be times his messanger unto the queen hecuba for to
know if he might fine with her that she would give to him her daughter polixena
to wyve / And he would do so much for her / that he would make the greeks to
reyse their syege and goo again in to their contrees hastily. And the pees
should be maad between them. All thus as he thought in the night / he put in
execucion and sent his true messanger unto the queen for to require her
daughter. And said to her the promyses that his lord had commanded him / when
the queen had understand the words of the messanger she answered him discretly
/ how well that she hated achilles more than any man of the world: sayng friend
as much as is in me I am ready for to do that thing that thy master requires
of me. So say unto him that I may not do this thing allone by my self. But I
shall speak to my lord and to paris my sone. And thou shall come the third
day again / and I shall say to the thyn answer.

When the messanger herd the queen so speak / he returned unto his lord and
said to him all that he had found / And thus began Achylles to have hope to
come to his entente. The queen hecuba went her anon unto the king pryant her
husbond where as paris was / and told to them all that Achilles had sent to
her / And than the king henge down his heed and was so a long while with out
sayng of any word. And after said to his wife. O how is hit as me thinks
herd thing to resceyue in to friendship and Amytye / him that has don to me
so great offense that has taken away the light of mine eyes in sleyng my dear
sone hector: And has therein given hope to the greeks to have the victory /
But alleway for to eschiewe the most great peril / To the end that mine other
sons lose not their life and that I may have rest in mine old days / I me
consent with you that he have that he requires. Alleway forseen that he do
first that thing that he has promysid with out any decepcion / Paris agreed
to this thing lightly / for as much as in the promesses of Achilles was no
thing spoken of the queen Helayne etc:.

AT the third day after / Achilles sent again his messanger unto the queen /
And as soon as he came to fore her / she said to him. I have spoken to my
husbonde and also to my sone Paris of the request and also of the promise of
thy lord / and they be content that his request be agreed to him. But that
he do first that thing / that he has promised. And so thou may say to him
that he may come to the chief and end of his desire / and that he conduyte
wisely and secretly this thing as much as in him is: The messanger took leave
of the queen / and came anon to his master / and counted to him all that the
queen had said to him. Than began Achilles strongly to think how he might
perform this that he had promised to the king Pryaut. And that hit was a
grievous thing to do / And that hit was not all in his puyssance. But hit is
a propre vice unto the folissh lovers to promise thing that is hard to bring
about and dyfficyle / for to come to the effect of their loves / In like wise
gloryfyed him Achilles that for his merytes or for gyuyng his aid to the
greeks he would make them to leave their syege / And than Achilles by the
counceyll of palamydes assemblid all the kings and noble men of the oost In
parliament and said to them in this manner.

MI friends that be here assemblid for to bring this war to the end /
thenke ye not otherwhile on your self. How by great legyerte / ^ lyghtnes and
folly and for to recouere the wif of menelaus we have left our contrees and
lands / our wyves and our children. And ben comen in to this strong land /
Where we have dyspendyd the owrys folyly / and put our bodies in danger of
death and in great Infynyte labor / And syn we have been comen hither there ben
right many kings and princes ded / And I my self have shed much of my blood
tht never should have happend if we had not begone this folly he lay^e is
nothing of so great prys that there behooves to dye for her so many noble men /
there ben ynowhe in the world of as noble and as fair women as she is / of whom
menelaus might have one or two if he would / And hit is not a light thing to
overcome the trojans / as they that have a strong cite and well garnysshid of
good fightars on horse back and a foot / and hit ought to suffice to us that
we have now slain hector and many other of their nobles by the which we might
now return with our honor and worship And if we leave helayne / have not
we exione / to whom helayne may not compare in noblesse.

THan meuyd them the duc of Atthenes And the king thoas / And contraryed
strongly to the words of Achilles / And so did all the other and said / That
he said neither fair ne well / whereof Achilles had great sorrow / And commanded
to his myrondones that they should not arm them no more against the trojans And
that they should not give no counceyll ne Aid unto the greeks / Among these
things vytaylles began to faylle among the greeks / and they had great famyne
/ Than assemblid palamydes all the most nobles of the oost to counceyll And
by their counceyll was the king Agamenon sent unto the cite of mess to the
king thelephus / That charged and laded his ships with vitayll and came
sauely again in to the ooste of the greeks / where he was receyuyd with great
Joy. Among these things palamydes did their ships do be reparyed to the
end that they might be more ready if they had need etc.

Of the death of deyphebus the son^ of king Pryant And how paris slew
palamydes / and how the trojans rebouted the greeks in to their tents and
set fire on their shippis And how for all these things Achilles would not
goo to battle for the love of polixene.
When the triews were passid they began to fight as they had been acustomed /
deyphebus assayllid in his domyng the king Cressus of greece / And he adressid
him to him gladly and Iusted that one against that other / But deyphebus beat
the king cressus deed down to the ground / Whereof the greeks were sore
trowblid and put hem to flight / But palamydes and Dyomedes came with five and
twenty thousand fyghtyng men that resisted the Trojans / with them was the
noble king Thelamon ayax / that adressid him again efronyus one of the bastard
sons of the king Pryant / And smote him so hard that he beat him down deed to
the ground seeing Deyphebus / that in his great furour ran upon Thelamon and
beat him and sore hurt him / when Palamydes saw that stroke He took a great
spear and adressid him to deyphebus / And smote him so hard in the breast that
the spear entryd in to his body and the spear brake and the trouchon a bood in
the body of deyphebus / When paris saw his brother hurt to the death he took
him and ladde him unto by the gate of the cite And took him to his men to keep
And as deyphebus opend his eyes and saw paris his brother. He said to him /
brother shall thou late me descend in to hell with out auengyng of my death / I
pray the as I may that er this trouchon betaken out of my body / that thou do
so much by thy hand that thou slay him that has slain me / Paris promysid
him that he would do his power And returned him in to the bataylle right angry
for his brother / And said in him self that he desired no longer to live but
till he had auengyd the death of his brother / And sought palamydes all abowtes
/ And fond him that he fought against the king sarpedon that had assayllyd
for to sle him and palamydes deffended him vayllyantly / And in his great
fureur gaf so great a struck with his sword to the king sarpedon that he
cut of his sholdre fro the body / And anon king sarpedon fill down deed.

Paris seeing the great damage that palamydes did to them / And also with his
prowess had put the trojans to flight / and cessid not to slay and smite
down allway / he bend his strong bow And auysed well palamydes at leyzer And
shot to him an arowe enuenymed / And smote him in the throat / And cut a
two the maistre vain / and palamydes fill down deed to the earth. For whose
death the greeks made much sorrow and left the battle / and went unto their
tents And there held a stale against the trojans and deffended them strongly /
Than descended the trojans a foot and entryd in to some of their tents and
took all that they fond that good was / Than Paris and troyllus went by a
side way unto the port / and did do put fire in to her shippis and burnt
so great plente that men might see the flame far / To the rescowse of the
shippis came the king thelamon with a great company of fightars / and began
the battle horrible that there was great occision and slaughter on both sides
/ And verayly the shippis had been all burnt / Ne had been the prowess of
king thelamon tht did meruaylles with his body / And what some ever he did
there were more than five honderd ships burnt / There was great occision of
the greeks. And many were hurt / There was Ebes the sone of the king of trace
sore hurt with a spear and bare the tronchon in his body / And in that point
he went to the tente of Achylles / where he restid him that day And had
reffused to goo to the bataylle for the love that he had to polixene / Ebes
reprochid strongly Achylles that he suffryd so destroy the people of his contre
and to dye vyllaynsly / And that he might well help hem if he would / And as soon as he had fynysshid his words One took out the tronchon of his body And
anon he fill down deed in the presence of Achilles.

ANon after came fro the battle oon of the varlettis or servants of Achilles
/ And Achilles demanded him tidings. of the ooste / Ha. A Sire said he hit is
this day myshappid to our folk. For the great multitude of trojans that been
comen upon them / And they have slain all that they cowde mete with / And I
trow there is not left oon at home of the men of troy / But that every man is
come to the bataylle / And therefore if hit plese you now whilis that the
trojans ben weary to come to the bataylle ye shall get to you perpetuell
memory of worship and of glory / For by your prowess ye shall in little
space have all vaynquysshid hem / And they shall not dare deffende hem against
you they ben so weary / Never would achylles for the words of his varlet ne for
the death of Ebes / / change his courage. But dissimyled all that he had seen
and herd for the great love that he had to polixene.

Among these things the bataylle was right sharp And endured unto the night
to the great damage of the greeks / And the night departed them / yet was not
deyphebus deed / but he drew toward his end / And when Paris and Troyllus
saw him in that sorrow / They began to cry and make great sorrow / And than
Deyphebus opend a little his eyes and demanded of paris with a feeble voys if he
were deed that had slain him / And Paris said to him ye. Than deyphebus did do
draw out the head of the spear with the tronchon / And anon deyde / Wherefore
the trojans made great sorrow / hit is no need to hold long parliament of the
sorrow that the king Pryant his fader made ne his wife and his susters / For
hit was to much and also for the death of the king Sarpedon Of that other
party the greeks made great sorrow for the death of palamydes And made his body
to be buried worshypfully / And as they that might not be long with out an
heed and governor by the counceyll of duc nestor and of other / Agamenon was
remysed in his dignyte as he was to fore.

THe day following the trojans erly in the morenyng issued out of the cite in
good ordenance. And the greeks came against hem / tho began the battle mortal /
And there was great slaughter on both sides / But hit rayned so much that day
/ that the greeks wythdrewe hem to their tents / And the trojans followed after
them / But the rain was so great that they must needs leave the bataylle and
return in to their cite. On the morn betymes they began to fight / And slew
that day many barons of the greeks and fought to the even And so they faughte
the space of seven days contynuelly / where was great occision of that one and
of that other / And for as much as the greeks might not suffer the stenche of
the deed bodies / They demanded triews for two monethis / which were accorded
to hem by king pryant.

DVryng these triews the king agamenon sent the duc Nestor Vlixes and
Dyomedes to speak to Achilles for to pray him and amoneste him to come to the
ooste for to deffende hem against the trojans that slew hem over meruayllously
/ when they were come unto him / He resseyuyd hem with great Joy. And than
Vlixes said to him / Sire Achilles / ne was hit not by your entencion and also
owres all of this ooste to leave our contre / And come run upon king Pryant
and destroy him and his by force of arms / And beat down his cite / Fro whens
comes this new courage / After so many hurtes and domages as we have resseyuyd
in this land by the trojans that have slain so many kings and princes pylled
and robbed our tents and burnt our ships / And we were now in hope to
have vaynquysshid hem / After that ye by your force and valeur have slain
hector that was the ^^rray tutor of the trojans and also now that deyphebus i^
deed The trojans ben therwyth put under foot And than after this that ye have
gotten with so great trauayll so great worship and so good renome / will ye
now lose all attones and suffer your people to be slain cruelly that ye have so
long deffended with the effusion of your blood. Plese hit to you fro hensforth
to entretene and keep your good renome / And defend your people / That with
out you may not long defend hem against your enemies / to the end that we
may come to the victory by your prowess / By the which we hope to attain
and come.

SIre Vlixes said than Achilles / if we be come in to this land for tho causes
that ye have declared we may say that great folly was among us / that for
the wife of one of us / that is to wete of sire Menelaus so many kings and so
high princes be but in paryll of death / had hit not ben much more wysdom for
the noble palamydes to have abyden in peace in his contree / Than for to be
slain here / And other kings and princes in like wise / Certes as the most
great party of the world of noble men ben here now assemblid / if they dye
here / As many ben all ready deed / Hit must needs follow that the contrees
shall be Replenysshid and governed by villayns / Hector that was so noble and
so worthy / is he not deed / In like wise I may dye lightly that am not so
strong as he was. And therefore how much as ye require me to goo to bataylle /
so much pain and labor lose ye For I have no more entencion to put me
more in danger / And love better to lose my renomee than my life. For in the
end there is no prowess But hit be forgoten Nestor and dyomedes contendeden
ynowh to draw Achilles to their quarellis But they might never enduce him to
their porpose Ne the words of Agamenon neither And than he said to hem that
they should make pees with the trojans to fore that they were all slain etc.

THan Returned these three princes unto Agamenon and said to him all that they
had found in Achilles. And Agamenon did hit to be known to the princes of
the ooste / Whom he had assemblid for this cause / And demanded of them their
auyse / Than stood up menelaus. Sayng that hit should be to us now great
vylonnye to seek pees with the trojans syn that hector and deyphebus ben deed /
and slain / and that for their death The trojans repute them as vaynquysshid /
and that with out Achilles they should well mayntene the war against the
trojans / To that answered vlixes and nestor And said / that hit was not
meruayll though menelaus desired the war for affeccion to recouere his wife /
And that troy was not so disgarnysshid but that they had a new hector. That
was troyllus / that was a lityll less strong and worthy than hector And there
was also another deyphebus / and that was paris / whom we ought to dowte as
much as the other And therefore they cou^ceyllid the pees And to return hom
again to greece Than escryed the false traitor Calcas / which was traitor to
the trojans. And said ha. a. noble men what think ye to do against the
coma^dement of the gods / have not they promisid to you the victory / ^ will
ye now leave hit Certes tht should be great folly Take again courage to you / and
fight ye against the trojans more stronglye than ye have done to fore And
cesse not till ye have the victory that the gods have promisid to you And
than with the words of the said calcas / the greeks took heart to hem / sayng
verily that they would mayntene the war against the trojans / whether achilles
help hem or not and that for him they would not leave

Of many bataylles that were made on that one side and of tht other to their
both great damage / and of certain triew^ And of the death of the noble
Troyllus that Achylle^ slew against his promys / And drew him at his horse
tayll through the oost And how Achilles slew the king Menon etc.
When the triews of two monethis were passid. They began to fight in bataylle
right sharply. There did troyllus meruaylles of Arms for to venge the death
of his brother / Dares says in his book that he slew that day a thousand
knights And the greeks fled to fore him / And the bataylle endured to the
night that departed hem / The day following the fourtenth bataylle began hard
and sharp / There did dyomedes meruaylles of Arms / And slew many trojans
and hurt hem / And adressid him against troyllus one time that smote him so
hard that he smote him down to the earth And was sore hurt / And reprochid
him of the love of breseyda / Than the greeks ran with great strength and took
dyomedes up and bare him upon his shield unto his tente / Menelaus that saw
Dyomedes so beten. Adressid him against Troyllus / But troyllus that had yet his
spear hole smote him so hard that he beat him down to the earth sore hurt And
was born in to his tente by his men upon his shield / Than Agamenon assemblid
all his strength / And threstid in among the Trojans and slew many / But
troyllus came against him and smote him down of his horse / but he was anon
remounted by the help of his folk.

THus finysshid the bataylle that day And Agamenon sent for to have triews for
six monethis Which were agreed and Accorded by king Pryant / How be hit that
hit seemed to some of his counceyll tht he should not accorded them so long /
among these things breseyda against the will of her fader went for to see
diomedes that lay sore hurt in his tente And she knew well that troyllus
that was her love had so hurt him / Than returned in her courage many purposes
And in the end she saw that she might never recouere / troyllus / and
therefore as soon as diomedes were hole she would give to him her love with out
longer taryyng.

Among these things the king Agamenon tra^sported him unto the tente of
Achilles in the company of duc Nestor / And Achilles receyuyd hem with great
Joy / And than agamenon prayed him that he would come forthon to the bataylle
And suffer no more their people thus to be slain But achilles would never molefye
his courage for his words / How well for as much as he louyd agamenon he
agreed and consentid that his men should go to battle with out him. Whereof
agamenon and nestor cowde him great thank. And thanked him ynowhe / And after
returned in to their tents.

When the triews were passid agamenon ordained his people to the battle and
achilles sent to him his mirondones habilled and ensigned with a reed sign
for to be known Tho began the battle hard and sharp to the great damage of
both parties There troylus beat down the duc of atthenes and slew many of the
miro^dones and hurt / and fought thus till the night departed them On the morn
be times began the battle sharp and mortal The king philomenus and
polidamas took the king thoas and had lad him away / ne had the miro^dones
have rescowed him / Than troylus smote in among hem and slew many and hurted
hem / But they deliueryd to him a great assault and slew his horse and would
have taken him / When Paris and his bastard brethern smote in among hem and
brake them / And remysed Troyllus on his horse. Than was there there a fires
medlee / there slew the myrundones emargeron one of the bastardis of king
Pryant of Troyes / whereof troyllus had great sorrow And by the Aid of his
people smote in among hem and slew and hurt many / But they deffended hem
vayllyantly and held hem to gyder And troyllus cessid not to grieve hem and to
enter among hem often times / Tho came to the bataylle Agamenon Menelaus
Thelamon Vlixes and Dyomedes with all her people And began an hard medlee there
the greeks did the trojans suffer much pain / But troyllus socouryd hem
vayllyantly / And put him self alleway where as most need was and slew and
beat down all that he fond and did so much by his prowess that the greeks
fled unto their tents And thelamon deffended hem vayllyantly / And made hem
to recouere the field by his prowess / This was the sixtenth bataylle in the
which dyed many knights of both sides / Troyllus cessid not to grieve the
myrundones And there was none so puyssant ne so strong that might dure against
him / And did so much that he remysed the greeks to flighte / And took an
honderd noble men that he brought in to the cite.

When the bataylle was fynysshid / against the even / the myrundones returned
unto the tente of Achilles / And there was founden many of them hurt / And there
were an honderd of hem deed / whereof Achilles had much sorrow / And hit was
night he went to bed / And there he had many thoughts / and purposid ones
to go to the bataylle for to avenge the death of his men And another time he
thought on the beawte of polixene / And thought that if he went / he should
lose her love for alleway / And that the king Pryant and his wife should hold
him a deceyuour / For he had promysid them / that he should help no more the
greeks. And how well he said in him self / that he had sent his men in to
their aid / And in this thought a chilles was many days And in so much that
the day came that the seuententh battle began much horrible / that dured by
seven days contynuelly where in were many Greeks s^ayn / wherefore Agamenon
required triews / But the Trojans agreed no longer the triews but till they had
buried their deed bodies / And when the days were passid / The eyghtenth
battle began right aspre and fires / Menelaus and Paris Iusted to gyder And
beat well each other / Polidamas and Vlixes faught to gyder a great while /
Menesteus beat down eneas with Iustynge / The king Phylomenus beat Agamenon.
And had sore hurt him / if Thelamon had not come on that smote to ground
Phylomenus sore wounded Archylogus the sone of duc Nestor / assayllyd one of
the bastardis of king Pryant named brum / And smote him so hard with his
spear / That he bare him down to the ground and slew him / Whereof the trojans
had great sorrow / And above all other troyllus was angry / that smote in
among the greeks that he had put hem to flight ne had the mirondanes have been
that resisted him / And therefore troyllus smote in among them And slew so
many and beat down / and did so much much that he made the greeks to rebonte
hem Into their tents And descended a foot and entryd in to the tents and
slew hem on all sides / And there was so great a cry / that the sown came to
Achilles that rested him in his tente / And demanded of one of his servants
that was there / what hit was / And he said to him that the trojans had
vaynquysshid the greeks and slew them with in their tents / which might no
more deffende them / And wene ye to be sewre here. Nay ye shall see anon more
than forty thousand trojans that shall slay you unarmed / And at this time
they have slain the most part of your myrundones / And they cesse not to slay
them And there shall not abide one a live / But if they be socouryd.

At these words Achilles quoke for ire / And set behind him the love of
polixene / And did do Arm him hastily and mounted on his horse and ran out all
araged as a lion And smote in among the trojans and pershid hem slew and
hurt them in such wise that anon his sword was known and the blood Ran in
the field all about as he went. When troyllus knew that Achilles faught
with his sword he adressid him to him and gaf him so great a struck that he
made him a great wound and a deep. That he must needs cesse many days of
coming to bataylle / Troyllus was hurt also of the hand of achilles But no
thing so sore / And both fill down to the ground / And the bataylle dured
unto the night. And on the morn they began again and endured unto the even /
And thus they faught Six days contynuelly / Wherefore there were many slain on
either party / The king pryant had great sorrow of this that Achilles against
his promise was come in to the battle And wend that he had made him to
understand thing that was not / but rather for to deceive him than otherwise
And reprochid his wife to believe so lightly him And polixene sorowed than
ynowhe. For she was plesid than to have had Achilles to her husbond.

AChilles among other things / ^dyde do hele his wounds / during six
months of triews that they had gotten / which wounds troyllus had given him
/ And he porposid to avenge him / And that troyllus should dye villaynsly by his
hand / After these things the nynetenth battle began with great occision And
before that Achilles entryd in to the bataylle he assemblid his myrondones / And
prayed hem that they would entende to none other thing but to enclose troyllus
and to hold him with out sleynge till he came And that he would not be fer fro
hem / And they promysid him that they so do would / And he smote in to the
bataylle / And of that other side came troyllus that began to slay and beat down
/ ^alle them that he raughte. And did so much that about mydday he put the
greeks to flight / Than the myrondones that were well two thousand fyghtyng men
and had not forgete the commandment of their lord / threstid in among the
trojans and recouerid the field / And as they held hem to geder and sought no
man but troyllus / they fond him tht he fought strongly and was enclosid on
all parties / but he slew and wounded many. And as he was all allone among
hem and had no man to socoure him / they slew his horse / And hurt him in
many places / And araced of his heed his helm / And his coyffe of iron / And
he deffended him the best wise he cowde / Than came on Achilles when he saw
troyllus all naked / And ran upon him in a rage / And smote of his heed And
cast hit under the feet of the horse / And took the body and bond hit to the
taylle of his horse And so drew hit after him through out the ooste / O what
vylonnye was hit to draw so the sone of so noble a king / that was so worthy
and so hardy / Certes if any noblesse had been in Achilles / he would not have
done this vylonye.

When paris knew that Achilles had thus vylaynsly slain Troyllus he had great
sorrow and so had Eneas and polidamas / And did great pain to recouere his
body / But they might not for the great multitude of grekis that resisted hem /
On the other part the king Menon deyde for sorrow for the death of Troyllus /
And assayllyd Achylles / And said to him in Reproach / Ha. A evil trayttre
what cruelte has meuyd the to bind to the taylle of thy horse The sone of so
noble a prince as the king Pryantis. And to draw him as he were the most
vylayne of the world / Certes thou shall abyd hit / And ran upon him And smote
him so hard with his spear in his breast. That he made him a great wound /
And after gaf him so many strokes with his sword that he beat him down to the
ground / And than was the body of Troyllus Recoueryd with great pain / The
folk of Achylles Releuyd their lord and set him again on his horse. And as soon as his strength came to him again / he came again in to the stoure / And
recountryd the king Menon / And assayllyd him strongly / And the king Menon
defended him vayllyantly and hurted Achilles in many places / But there came so
much people on that one side and of that other that they were departed Than came
the night on that departed them and made them to cesse / And they faught thus
the space of seven days.

AT the seventh day when Achilles was heled of his wounds / Desiryng to avenge
him of the king Menon / said to his folk / that if they might recountre him
they should hold him in cloos like as they did troyllus / Than began the
bataylle right Aspre / Achilles and Menon faught to gyde^ and by great felonye
beat down each other a foot / Than the myrundones enclosid him and took him by
force that had no man to socoure him / Than achilles seeing the king menon in
this danger he ran upon him and slew him with great martyr / But menon gaf
him to fore many great wounds / whereof he lay long after / Among these
things menelaus and menesteus with great company of kings and princes and
many fightyng men threstyd in to the stoure and put many trojans to flight The
which entered in to their cite with great myschief for as much as the greeks
chassed hem so nyghe that they slew and hurted many of them.

How paris by the ennortement of hecuba his mother slew achilles in the temple
of appollo and the sone of due Nestor / And how paris and apax slew each other
in bataylle.
FOr the death of troyllus the king pryant his wife and his children and all the
habitantes of the cite made great sorrow meruayllously / And they said all.
That syn they had lost hector. deyphebus and Troyllus that they had from thens
forthon no more hope of their life than of their death / The king Pryant
demanded tryews / And hit was a greed and Accorded by the greeks / During the
which they did burye honorably the body of Troyllus and the body of king
Menon / The queen might not be appeasid ner conforted for the death of her
children / and toughte in many manner wyses how she might be auengyd on Achylles
that thus had slain her sons by cruelle tyranny And fynably she called paris
sore weeping and said to him secretly these words / Right dear sone thou
know how this traytte Achilles has slain by trayson forseen thy brethern my
children / That were with the the so lace of my life / And for as much as he
has so slain hem by trayson / me seems good and also Just and right that he
be slain by trayson. And I shall tell the how hit shall be done / The unhappy
man has many times required me to have to his wife my daughter polixene And I
have given to him good esperan^e I have purposed to send to him my feall
messanger / And bid him come speak to me in the temple of Appolyn / And I
will right dear sone that thou be there in awayte with a good company of
knights / And than when he shall be comen that ye run upon him and slay him
that he escape not with his life / Paris answered that he would do this thing in
such wise as she had devised / And there upon he assemblyd twenty good knights
in whom he affyed him much / And went hem forth in to the temple of Appolyn.

As Soon as achilles herd the messanger speak that came from the queen hecuba /
the fool being evil counceyllid took with him the sone of duc nestor and
went both unto the temple of Appolyn And as soon as they were comen / Paris
and his knights ran upon him / And Paris cast at him three darts wherwyth he
hurt him sore / Achilles drew out his sword that had no more Armor / and
wrapped his Arm with his mantell / and smote in among the knights right
fiersly and slew seven of them / But fynably the sone of duc nestor Archilogus
and Achilles were both slain with in the temple / And anon paris commanded tht
his body should be cast out to the hounds and to the birds / But at the
request of helenus / they were put in a place to fore the temple for to be
kept / And the Trojans had than great Joy / and said forthon they had no
charge of the greeks ne set naught by hem / When agamenon knew thereof he
sent unto king Pryant for to have the bodies for to burye hem / The king
Pryant made them to be deliuerid and were born to their tents Tho aroose a
great sorrow among the greeks And said that they had all lost. The duc
Nestor might not be comforted for the death of his sone And they made for
Achilles a noble sepulture. And by the consentement of king Pryant was leyde
with in the cite at thentre of the gate of tymbre.

AFter these things the king agamenon assemblid to his counceyll all the
nobles of the cost / and shewid to them / how for the death of achilles the
most part of them were disconforted and distalentid of the war and therefore
demanded them if hit were good to leave the war or to entertene and hold hit /
Than was there among them diverse opynyons The some allowed the war. And the
other blamed hit And finably they concluded all to geder with one acorde to
mayntene the war / sayyng if Achilles were fayllyd / yet for that should not
faylle the promesses of the gods. Than stood up Ayax among them And said if
Achylles were deed / late send for his sone whom the king Nycomedes his beell
sire^ norisshith and techith the feet of Arms / For I trow that with out him
we may have no victory of the trojans. His counceyll seemed good And by the
agreement and will of every man / Menelaus was chosen for to goo fe^che
Neptolonyus sone of Achylles that was named other wise Pyrrus.

Among these things when the tryews were faylled the.xvi. day of Iuyn when
the days ben at the lengest of all the year. The trojans began the twentyth
bataylle against the greeks that was right sharp and hard / this day went
Ayax by great folly to bataylle with out Arms and bare nothing but his
sword / The trojans that had lost their best defendours were not than so
hardy as they were wont to be But for to save their lives they fought
myghtyly Paris with all the people of perse that were the best archers slew
many greeks / And the king phylomenus fought strongly and they of paphaghone
came on that slew many greeks and by for^e made them to Recule / Menesteus
Iusted against polidamas / And beat him right fiersly / And ran upon him with
his sword And had taken or slain him ne had the king phylomenus deliueryd him
fro his hands / Ayax made this day meruaylles of Arms thus unarmed as he was.
And slew many trojans / And was not yet hurt In the end he smote in among
them of perse that Paris ladde and slew many of them and made hem to torn to
flight / When paris saw his people thus slain / He shot to ayax an arowe
enuenymed and raught him between the rack and the sides And ayax anon felt
that he was hurt to the death And he thought he would not dye / till he had
auengid him on him that had slain him And did so much that he fond paris /
and said to him / thou haste slain me with thyn arowe / But to fore that I dye
I shall slay the / And also by the and for thy cause ben many noble men slain /
And than gaf him so great a struck that he cut a two his visage so deep that
he fill down deed / to the earth And ayax fill down after him The trojans took
the body of paris with weeping teres / and bare hit unto the cite and they were
followed unto the gates / The next night following. Agamenon made the ooste to
aproche ner to the cite And there pyght her tents And the trojans kept their
wallys day and night / Than had the trojans no more esperance ne hope of their
lives / when they saw that all the sons of king pryant were deed And there
is no tongue that can express the lamentacions that the king pryant made and
his wife and his daughters / And the queen helayne for the death of paris / And
above all other helayne made the most grettest sorrow The king did do burye
paris in a right rich sepulture And set him in the temple of Juno honorably
etc.

How the queen panthasile came from Amazonne with a thousand maidens to the
socoure of troy / And how she bare her vayllyantly / And slew many grekis /
And after was she slain by pyrrus the sone of Achilles.
THan two monethis during hoole / the yates of troy were not opend. and the
trojans did no thing but goo in the cite and lamented and sorowed. And the
king Agamenon sent often times unto the king pryant that he should send his
men to battle. But the king pryant doubtyng his destrucco^n would not do hit
for as much as he abood the socours of the queen of Amasone / that was than on
the way for to come unto the socours of king pryant / Amazou^e is a prouynce /
where ne dwelled than but women with out men. And they were enduced to war
and to fight. They had nyghe their contre an ysle where the men dwellid. And
they were accustomed three times in the year to go thither / In Appryll. may
and Iuyn unto the men for to have their company / And after they returned in
to amazonne / And they that were ensayanted and were with child / if they bare
sons / they gaf hem sowke certain time / and after sent hem to the faders /
And if hit was a daughter / they held hit by them And did do brenne of the
right pappe for to bear the better the spear / and taught her the feet of
arms. Of this prouynce than was lady and queen a much noble virgyne / and a
strong fightar that had to name panthasilee / And she louyd much hector for
his good reno^mee / When she knew that the greeks had assaillid troyes with so
great strength / she went theder for to socour hit with a thousand vyrgynes
for the love of hector / And when she was comen and knew that he was ded she
made great sorrow / and praid to the king pryant that he would late her issue
out to the bataill against the greeks / and tht she myht show to hem how her
maidens could bear arms.

AT the prayer of panthasilee on the morn by times was the gate opend And
issued out the king philemenus with all them of paphaghone Eneas and
polidamas with all their people / the queen panthasile with all her maidens /
The greeks were anon ready and began the battle hard and sharp / menesteus
adressid him to panthasile / and she to him and anon she smote menesteus to the
ground and took his horse and gaf him to one of her maidens. Than came dyomedes
against her / and she receyuyd him gladly. and smote him so strongly that he was
turned up so down fro his horse / And she took fro dyomedes his shield fro his
neck / and delyueryd hit to one of her maidens / when thelamon saw that she
did such appertyses of arms He adressid him against her / and she against him.
And thelamon was born down to the ground / and had ladde him in to the cite /
but that diomedes came to his rescows with great deffence And than she escryed
her maidens. that smote in among the greeks / by such sierte and ire that she
and they turned hem in to flight / And they chassed hem sleyng and betyng hem
unto their tents / and had slain hem all if diomedes had not so greatly
resisted hem / that mayntened the stowr unto the night tht departed them And
the queen panthasilee returned in to the cite with great glory / where the
king pryant resceyuyd her with great Joy / and gaf her many fair Iewellis and
rich / And him seemed well that she should avenge him of his sorrows / They
fought thus many times after / and so long that menelaus returned fro the
king nycomedes And brought in to the ooste neptolonyus the sone of achilles
otherwise named Pyrrus.

This Pirrus was receyuyd with great glory of all the baron^s of the ooste
and above all other / the myrundon^es were passing Joyous and held him for
their lord. Than was desyueryd to pirrus all the conduyte of the men of arms /
And they made him knight by the hand of the noble thelamon that prayed to the
gods to give him strength and courage in gyrdyng of his swerd / and that they
would give him: vyctorye and honor for to avenge the death of his fader / And
two other princes set on the sporres of gold. And the king Agamenon gaf to
him all the arms of Achilles his fader / and all his other baghes and
Iewellis. And for this new knight and feste of the Chyualerye the greeks maad
many days great gladness and Joy etc.

AFter these things came the day of fyghtyng and the bataylles were ready on
that one side and on that other / Tho began the battle right hard. Pirrus that
wad armed with the propre arms of his fader recountrid polidamas in his coming
and had slain him with the great strokes of his swerd that he gaf to him. But
the king philemenis came upon and delyueryd him / And than pirrus smote fro his
horse philemems / and had lad him away / ne had they of paphaghone rescowed him
with great trauayll / Among these things the queen pantasilee entered in to
the bataill with her maidens and smote in among the myrundou^es / and slew
many of them. There came upon the king thelamon that smote to the ground the
queen pantasilee / and she gaf him so great a struck with her swerd tht she
beat him down to the earth in like wise / And than her maidens releuyd her and
set her again on her horse / and she smote in among the myrondones / that
held the king phylomems in great dangier / and many she slew and hurted of
hem When Pyrrus saw that his men were so evil entretyd. He escryed to hem and
said that they ought to have great shame that suffryd hem to be vaynquysshid
by women. And than he left the king phylemems. for to deffende his men against
the maid / Than adressid the queen panthasilee nyghe to pyrrus / and reproched
him of that his fader had slain hector by trayson / and that all the world
ought to run upon him / Pyrrus that had so great sorrow at these words
adressid him against her / And anon she bare him down to the earth And than
anon he releuyd him and assayllid panthasile with his swerd / And she him by
great strength / And than was pyrrus remounted by the aid of his myron dou^es
/ Than came to the battle Agamenon. Dyomedes menelaus and menesteus the duc of
Atthenes with all their people / And so did all the other princes and barons.

Among these things the king phylomems was delivered of the myrondones and
gaf great thankyngys unto the queen panthasilee / and said / had not she have been / he had been slain. Than came to the battle all the trojans / Tho began
the shower sharp and mortal / There recountrid Pirrus Glacon the sone of
Anthenor and brother of Polidamas of an other mother / And gaf him so great a
stroke that he slew him and fylle down ded to the earth / Than adressid
panthasilee unto pyrrus / and he to her / And beat down each other to the earth
/ But they remou^tyd anon And began the meddle to geder again. Than came upon so
much people of both parties that they were departed. Polidamas for to avenge
the death of his brother slew that day many greeks and hurt them. And did so
much in arms he and panthasilee that they put the greeks to flight. Than came
to the rescows pirrus / diomedes and thelamon / and maad them that fled to
abide and sustain the stour / And so they did unto the night / that each man
went in to his place / They faught thus every day a month longe^ in which
time were slain more than ten thousand fyghtyng men of both parties / And
panthasilee lost many of her maidens / And when they had restyd a month /
they began the battle right sharp.

AT this assamble came one against an other of pirrus and panthasilee / and brake
their speres with out falling / but pyrrus was sore hurt And the tronchon of
her spear abode with in his body / wherefore the cry arose greatly among the
greeks / And ran upon panthasilee with great strength / / and brake the lase
of her helm And than pirrus tht in his great furour took none head to his
wound ne set not thereby that he had the tronchon in his body / but assayllid
strongly panthasilee / that had tho her helm broken: And she wend to have
smyten him / but pirrus araught her first And gaf her so great a stroke with
his sword / that he cut her Arm of by the body / whereof the said
panthasilee fill down deed / to the earth. And pirrus that was not yet content
/ smote the body and cuttid in two pieces And anon after for the great effusion
of blood that ran fro his wound / he fill down as ded among his people And
they took him up and leyde upon his shield and bare him in to his tente / Than
the maidens of panthasilee / for to avenge the death of their queen smote in
among the myrondou^es by great fureur / And slew many and hurt but hit
prouffited but lytill to the trojans / as they that were but afewe ayenste a
great multitude of greeks. And so there were slain of them of troy that day in
the battle more than ten thousand men. And the other withdrewe hem in to the
cite for to save hem self. And shette and closid fast their gates / And had no
more entencion to yssu^ out to battle against their enemies etc.

How Anthenor and Eneas spack to geder among them for to delyuere the cite
unto the greeks by trayson. And did hit under symylacion of peace / and how the
king pryant again said hem with some of his bastardis by great and rude words.
THe trojans had much great sorrow when they saw hem in this myschef ffor
they had no more hope to have any more socours from any place / And they
contended to no thing but to keep well their cite / and to garnyssh hem well
with vytayll / ffor they fered ne dredde hem naught of any assault / Among
these things the greeks would have cast to the dogs the body of Panthasilee
/ for as much as she hadd slain so many noble men of greece / But Pyrrus again
said hit for the honor and worship of nob^esse. And fynably they concluded
that they cast hit in a stagne that was nyghe the cite / Anchyses with his
sone eneas / and Anthenor with his sone polidamas went to counceill to gyder
for to advise them / how they might have their lives sauyd against the greeks /
and their goods / And rather than fail hereof they would betraye the cite:
Than they concluded that they should speak to king pryant. And counseylle him
to take a peace and a poyntement with the greeks / In restoryng of helayne to
her husbond and the do^mage that paris did in the isle of cetharys. O if the
king pryant had been so happy to have done this and had plesid the greeks at
the beginning he had sauyd his life and his wives. And the life of all his
children. and had sauyd all the cite and cytezeyns. And had eschewid all the
myschyeuys that came to them afterward / Therefore say men in a proverb / that
the concordes or peace sone taken ben good. ffor hit is an hard thing for to
repease such manner domages to him tht has avauntage of the war ffor with
great pain would the greeks have been content that were tho at their above with
these offres / for as much as they had suffered so many hurtes and domages
tofore troy / ffor them seemed well that they were at the point for to destroy
the cite and all the Inhabytau^tes / But when the foresaid named traitors spoke
not of this matter / but to the end that under the color of peace they might
betraye the cite / / if other wise they might not save their lives.

THan they went hem to fore the king pryant And Amphymacus one of his bastard
sons And spoke there of this purpose tofore many noble men of the cite / And
ano^n as the king pryant hadd herd hem speak of purchasyng of peace with the
greeks. He thought that they said this thing by great felonye And began to
syghe / and said to them that he would be aduysed and take counceyll fyrs^e. And
than they said to him thus / if thou wo^te here our counceyll upon this thing
/ take heed what we shall say / And if hit plese the not / use the counceyll
of other The king said that he would well here their counceyll / and would wete
what seemed hem good And said to them / what seems you good. Than spack
anthenor sayng / King ye may not dissymyle but that ye and yowres ben
envoluped with your enemies / And ben here by your cite desyryng your death and
destruction / and ye may not issue out. And they ben moo than fyfty kings that
desire no thing but to destroy this cite and you and all them that dwell
therein / And ye may no more resist them / and ye dar no more open your gates /
and thus we late us than be enclosid here in Me ought of two evil things
chese the less ylle / And therefore for to have peace with the greeks if ye seem
good / We shall render Helayne to menelaus her husbond syn that paris is ded.
And also restorre the do^mage that paris did to them in greece rather than we
should suffer our self to be put to the death etc.

AT these words arose up Amphymacus one of the bastard sons of king pryant /
And reprouyd strongly the words of anthenor / and said to him / What trust
and hope may my lord my fader and we have in the / ^syn that thou ought to
have ferme courage unto him and this cite / And we see the thus recreaunt that
ought to live and dye with us / And thou counceylle^t now to make peace with
the greeks to our great dishonor and shame. Trewly to fore that the king
shall do that / there shall dye twenty thousand men / that thing that thou
counceyllest the king comes of trayson / Many other Iniuryous words said
Amphymacus to Anthenor. And Eneas began to refrain him sayng / ye know well
that we may not from hens forth goo to battle against the greeks. And we dare
no more open our gates / Wherefore hit behooves us to find manyer to have peace
with hem. Than the king pryant with great ire said to Anthenor and to Eneas.
Have ye not shame in your self for to speak so to me / ye do me dye for sorrow
/ ffor all that I have done yet hitherto / I have do^n hit by your counceyll /
Anthenor when thou retornest fro greece where I had sent the for to require
exyone my suster / counceyllest thou not me that I should send paris in to
greece for to endomage the greeks / and I had never taken upon me for to have
meuyd war against them / ne hadd thy false counceyll have been. which meuyd me
to send thither / And thou Eneas alas when I sent the with paris in to greece:
Were not thou pryncypall of the counceyll that paris should rauysshe Helayne and
bring her in to this royame: And thou heel pest thereto with thy person. And
if thou would have been contrary thereto and have lettyd hit. Helayne had
never seen the walls of troy. And now after this that they have slain all my
Children and have done so much damage and hurt: ye counceyll me against honor
to make peace with the greeks that have me so cruelly destroyed. Certes your
counceyll fynysshith my life with great sorrow and dishonor etc.

OF these words was Eenas strongly angry and wroth / And answered to the king
words sharp and poyna^nt ynowhe / And departed he and anthenor from the king
evyll content. And when they were goon the king began to weep as he that
dredde that they should delyuere the cite in the hands of the greeks* / which
should slay him Incontinent. Than he thought that he would do hem dye first /
And called to him Amphymacus and said to him. Right dear sone I am thy fader /
We ought to supporte each other / unto the death / I know certainly that
Anthenor and Eneas contenden for to slay us by the greeks and to delyuere them
this cite / And therefore hit should not be ylle done to make them fall in to
the pytte that they have maad ready / to fore er they do any such evyll / And
I shall tell the in what manner / to morn at even they shall come to
counceyll. thou shall be enbusshyd here with Inn / and shall have with the
good knights / and when they shall be comen / thou shall run upon hem and
slay hem. Amphymacus answered unto him and said that he would so do with a good
will / And how well there were no moo at this counceyll but the king and his
sone / yet there is no thing so secret but otherwhile it is known. Eneas
knew well the truth of this thing / And hit was not known by whom he
knew hit. And anon he and Anthenor and some other of their conplices spack
forth of the trayson of the cite / And there they swore each to other / And
than they said if they went more to counceyll to the king / that they would
goo with great company of men of arms / ffor eneas was of the most noble of
troy and most rich next the king / and best of lynage. And might we^l
compare to the king. And anthenor was also rich and puyssant of friends in
the cite. And their trayson was such that they would delyuere the cite in the
hands of their enemies / But that they and all they of their lignage should
have their lives and their goods sauyd* and hereof they took good sewerte of
the greeks /

Among these things the king pryant sent for anthenor and eneas to come to
counceyll* for to perform that thing that he had purposid. But they came with
agrete company of men of arms. And therefore the king sent to Amphymacus
that he should leave his empryse: The day following the king sent for all the
trojans to counceyll. And when they were assemblid to fore him: Eneas stood up
and amonested all them to make peace with the greeks / to whom all the other
accorded save the king / and than said to him eneas / Sire king werfore
consentest not thou with the other / for will thou or will thou not We shall
trete for the peace / and shall make hit magre the / When the king saw that
his contradicco^n might no thing auaylle / He had lever consent him with the
other / than for to be the cause of his destrucco^n. And than said he to eneas
/ late hit be made as ye shall think that hit may be most expedient to the
peace. and I shall hold hit agreeable. Than by the counceyll of them all /
Anthenor was chosen for to goo to the greeks and trete for the peace. And than
the trojans took branches of palm in syngne of peace. And went upon the
walls of the cite and shewid the sign unto the greeks the wihche showed well
that they would entende to the peace. And than was Anthenor aualed fro the
wallis and late down / and was presented to the king agamenon. And the king
agamenon co^mysid all the work to the king of Crete. dyomedes. and vlixes /
And that all thoo things that these three kings should besoyne with anthenor /
All the greeks promysid to hold hit agreeable / and swear hit upon their law
etc.

When they were all four assembled / Anthenor replenesshid with barate
promised to them to delyuere the cite by trayson / for to do with hit their
will and playsir / Save that they would assure to him and eneas and to their
kynnysmen and parentele / and all them that they would chese / And that eneas
should have all his possessions with out any lo^se. These three kings of greece
swore to anthenor that th^s they would do and hold / Than said one to that
other that this thing must be scerete / unto the time hit be brought about /
/ And to the end for to keep this trayson more secret. Anthenor prayed to the
greeks / that they would delyuere to him the king cassilus that was a much
ancient man for to goo with him to troy to thentente that he might be the
better believed / and that he knew the will of the trojans / that is to wete if
they would have peace with the greeks / And also for to say to them the will and
desire of the greeks / And than demanded anthenor the body of panthasile /
which the greeks agreed to him gladly.

AFter these things Anthenor and the king Cassilyus entryd in to the cite /
And did hit to be known to the king their coming / On the morn be times /
the king pryant assemblid all the trojans for to here the answer of Anthenor
/ the which said to the king otherwise than he had founden / making a long
sermon for to couere with his felonnye where he spack long of the puyssance
of the greeks and of their truth in their promesses / And how they had holden
the tryews that they had maad lyyng to fore the Cite. And had been faithfully
governed with out brekyng of them. And after spoke he of the ffeblenes of the
trojans and of the great dangers that they were Inn. And in this concluded
that forthon hit were profitable to seek peace and that they come thereto. And
said hit could not be / but if they gaf a great quantyte of gold and silver
unto the greeks for to restore to them the great domages and losses that they
hadd in the war / And after auysed the king and the other each in him self /
for to employe him in this thing with out any sparynge / And for as much
said Anthenor as I can not know at this time all their will / I would that
ye would late Eneas goo with me unto them for to know better their will and to
the end that they believed us better / Every man allowed the words of Anthenor.
And than went he and Eneas unto the greeks / and with hem the king Cassilyus.

When the counceyll was fynysshyd and all done / the king Pryant entryd in to
his chamber and began to weep right strongly as he that apperceyuyd well the
trayson / And playned sore the death of his son^es and also the great damage
that he bare / And yet that worste is that he must bye his peace of them that
have done to him all this do^mage and hurt / and to give to them all the
tresour that he had in long time gadryd to gyder / / And to become pour in
his old ancient days / And yet he is not sewre of his life / and must needs
do the will of them that shall betraye him. On that other side when helayne
knew that Anthenor should goo to the greeks / she prayed him right effectuously
that he would make her peace against menelaus her husbond and that he would have
pity on her / And he promysid to her that he would do his power

When Eneas and Anthenor were comen in to the ooste of the greeks they treted
of their trayson / / with the three kings that the greeks hadd co^mysyd / / and
there they maad the peace for helayne and took good sewerte / After their
parliament the greeks ordained that Dyomedes and Vlixes should goo with them to
troy / And they went with them. There was great Joy when they herd of their
coming in to their cite / wenyng to the trojans to have had the peace that they
had so much desired. On the morn erly by the commandment of the king pryant
all the trojans were assembled at his palace / And than spoke vlixes that said
that the greeks demanded two things That is to wete restytucion of their
do^mages / / and great quantyte of gold and silver / And also they demanded
that Amphymacus should be bannysshid for ever out of the cite of troy / with
out any trust ever to come in again / This purchasyd Anthenor for Amphymacus
for as much as he had contraryed him before. O how hit is great paryll to speak
lightly in time of parturbacion and sedicion. Than as they were all assemblid
in parliament / they herd suddenly a meruaylous cry / and than dyomedes and
vlixes hadd great dread that the people would have slain them. And the other said
that they would take these two kings in the stead of Amphymacus to the end
that he should not be bannysshid. And alleway there could no man know ^n wete
from whens this noise came ne wherefore / And therefore they departid and every
man went in to his place etc:.

THan Anthenor drew a part dyomedes and vlixes for to speak of their felonnye
/ Than said to him vlixes wherefore taryest thou so long and delayest to do
that thou have promised. Anthenor answered and said the gods know that Eneas
and I attend to none other thing / but to do that we have promysid to you.
But there is a meruayllous thing that enpessheth us / and I shall say you /
what hit is Certain when the king ylyon founded first the palace of ylion in
this cite / he establisshid in the name of pallas a great temple in this cite.
And when hit was all ready and made save the tour a meruayllous thing descendid
fro the heaven. And that stack in the wall of the temple with in the great
Aroter / And hit has been there till this time / And none may bear hit away
save they that keep hit / The matere is of tree or of wood / but there is no
man that knows of what wood ne how hit is so maad But the goddess Pallas
that sent hit theder gaf unto this thing a great virtue / that is this That
(...) this said thing shall be with Inn the temple or within the cite within
the wallis / the trojans may not lose their cite ne the kings ne the eyres /
And this is the thing that holds the trojans in sewerte / And therefore they
may the better keep hit / and this thing has to name palladyum / for as much
as the goddess pallas sent hit / Than said dyomedes if this thing be of
such virtue as thou say / we lose our pain. Than said Anthenor that they
ought no thing to esmaye them / for he and eneas attended for to fulfylle the
promise / ffor I have but late spoken to the priest that keeps hit / to
the end that he deliver hit by stelthe. And I have verray trust that he shall
delyuere hit to me for a great so^me of gold that I have promysid him. And
as soon as I shall have hit / I shall send hit to you out of the cite / and
than we shall perform that thing that we have promysid to you. And er ye goo
hens for to couere and hyde our work I shall goo unto the king pryant and
shall do him to understand that I have spoke long to you for to know what
quantyte of gold ye demand / and hit was so done as anthenor had purposid.

How the trayttre Anthenor bought of the priest the palladyum / and gaf hit to
Vlixes and of the horse of brass that was by the greeks brought to the temple
of Pallas being full of men of arms / And how the cite of Troy was taken and
burnt And the king p^yant slain etc..
When Dyomedes and vlixes were returned in to their oost. Anthenor went him
unto the king pryant and said to him that he should assemble all his folk to
counceyll. And when they were all comen. Anthenor said to hem that for to come
to the peace of the greeks they must needs pay twenty thousand mar^ of gold
and of good poys / and as much of silver / And also an honderd thousand
quarters of whete. And this must be maad ready with in certain term. And than
when they have this / they shall set sewrte to hold the peace with out any
frawde or malengyne. There it was ordained how this some should beleueyed and
whylis they were besy there abowtes. Anthenor went to the priest tht kept the
palladyum / the which priest had to name Thoant / and bare to him a great
quantite of gold. And there were they two at counceill Anthenor said to him
that he should take this some of gold. whereof he should be rich all his life /
and that he should give to him the palladyum / and that noman should know thereof
/ ffor I have said he great fere and as much dread as thou. that any man should
know thereof. And I shall send hit to vlixes / and he shall bear the blame
upon him. and every man shall say that vlixes shall have stolen hit / and we
shall be quyte thereof both two etc.

THoant the priest resisted long to the words of Anthenor / but in the end
for couetyse of the great some of gold that anthenor gaf to him. He consentyd
that he should take the palladyum and bear hit away. Than Anthenor took hit
anon and sent hit unto vlixes / the same night / And after the wys ran
among the people that vlixes by his subtilite had taken and born away the
palladyum out of troy O what trayson was this of a priest / that louyd better
for covetyse to betraye his cite / than to leave the gold that was given him.
Certes hit is afoule vice in a priest the sin of couetyse / But few have been
to fore this time / and few ben yet but if they ben attaynte therwyth / whereof
hit is great pity / syn hit is so that auaryce is mother of all vices / Whilis
that the trojans gadryd to gyder their gold and silver and put hit in the
temple of mynerve to keep unto the time that hit was all assemblid. Hit
playsid them to offer and make sacrefyse to their god Appolyn / And when they
hadd slain many bestes for their sacrefyce and had put them upon the Awter /
And hadd set fire on them for to brenne them / Hit happend that there came
there two meruayllis / the first was that the fire would not alyghte ne brenne
/ for they began to make the fire more than ten times / And always hit quenchid
and might never brenne the sacrefyce. The second miracle or meruaylle was when
they had appointed the entraylles of the bestes for their sacrefyce / A great
Eygle descended fro the air cryyng greatly and took with his feet the said
entraylles and bare hem in to the ships of the greeks.

OF these two things were the trojans sore abasshid and esmayed / And said
that the gods were wroth with hem. And than they demanded of cassandra / what
these things signefied / and she said to them / that the god appolyn was wroth
with hem for theffusion of the blood of Achylles that was shed wherewith his
temple was defowlid and violid / this is the first / / and ye must go fecche
fire at the sepulture of achilles And light your sacrefyce there with / and
than hit shall quench no more / And they did so / and the sacrefyce burnt
clear / And for the second miracle. she said to hem that for certain the
trayson was maad of the cite with the greeks. When the greeks herd speak of
these miracles. they demanded of Calcas what hit signefyed. And he said to hem
that the tradicion of the cite should come shortly. Among these things Calcas
and Crisis the priest councellyd the greeks / that they should make a great horse
of brass. And that must be as great as might hold with in hit a thousand
knights armed. And they said to them that hit was the playsir of the gods.
This horse made a passing wise master as Apius was. Whose name was synon / and
he maad hit so subtylly that with out forth no man could parceyue ne see
entree ne issue. But within hit apperyd to them that were closid there in for to
issue when they would etc.

When the horse was full maad. and the thousand knights therein by the counseyll
of Crysis / they prayed the king pryant that he would suffer this horse enter in
to the cite: and that hit might be set in the temple of Pallas / for as much
as they said that they had maad hit in the hanour of Pallas for a vow that
they had maad for restytucion of the Palladyum that they hadd done be taken
out of the same temple etc.

Among these things the princes that were yet in troy / When they saw that
the king had so foul and shamefully trayted with the greeks they went out
of troy and took their men with them And the king philemenus ladde no moo with
him but two honderd and fyfty men and sixty maidens of amazone that were left
of a thousand that came with the queen panthasile And carried the body of her
with hem And rood so much that they came unto their contre. Than came the day
that the greeks should sweet the peace faynedly upon the plain field upon the
sayntuaryes. The king pryant issued out of the cite and his people And swear
there each party to hold the peace fermly fro than forthon / And dyomedes
swore first for the greeks / / after when they had broken the peace that they
had treatid with Anthenor of that thing that they made after / And therefore
they mayntene that they were not forsworn by that color / / And therefore me
says in a proverb / he that swerith by cawtele or malicyously / he by malice
forswerith him self / After diomedes swear in like wise all the kings and
princes of greece. And than the king pryant and the trojans swore in good faith
as they that knew no thing of the great trayson And after their oaths thus
maad / The king pryant delyueryd helayne to menelaus her husbond / and prayed
him and other kings and princes of greece that they would pardon^e helayne with
out suffryng to be done to her any Iniurye or hurt / And they promysid him
faynedly that they would do to her no wrong.

THan prayed the greeks that they might set the horse of brass with in the
temple of pallas / ffor the restytucion of palladyum / to the end that the
goddess Pallas might be to them aggreable In their return. And as the king
pryant answered not thereto. Eneas and Anthenor said to him that hit should be
well done / And that hit should be honor to the cite / / how be hit the king
pryant accorded hit with evil will / Than the greeks receyuyd the gold and
silver and the whete / that was promysid to them. And sent hit and put hit
in to their shyppis / After these things they went all in manner of procession
and in devotion with their prestis. And began with strength of cords to draw
the horse of brass unto tofore the gate of the cite / And for as much as by
the gate hit might not enter in to the cite / hit was so great / therefore they
brake the wall of the cite in length and heyght in such wise as hit entryd
with in the town And the trojans receyuyd hit with great Joy. But the custom
of fortune is such that great joy ends in tristres and in sorrow: The
trojans maad Joy of this horse / / wherein was closid their death. and knew
nothing of hit: In this horse was a subtle man named synon that bare the keys
of the horse for to opene hit. When the trojans were aslepe and restyd hem in
the night. And as soon as they issued out of the horse / they gaf a token of
fire to them that were in the feldes to the end that they should come in to the
cite for to put hit all to destruction.

THe same day the greeks fayneden to goo unto Thenadon: And said that they
would resseyve Helayne and set her in saefte / be cause that the people should
not run upon her for the great evyllys and hurtes that were fallen for her.
And thus they departed from the port of troyes with her saylles drawn up /
and came to fore the son going down to thenedon. Than had the trojans great
^oye when they saw the greeks depart / And they sowped that euenyng with
great gladness / And the greeks as soon as they were come to thenedon / they
armed them in the euenyng / and went hem stylly and pryuely toward troy / /
when the trojans had well sowped they went to bed for to sleep / than synon
opend the horse and went out and light his fire and showed hit to them that
were with out / And anon with out delay / they that were in a wait entryd
in to the cite by the gate that was broken for to bring in the horse of brass.
And the thousand knights issued out / and where they fond the trojans they
slew hem in their howsis / where they slepte as they that thought on no thing.

THus entrid the greeks in to the cite And slew men and women and children
with out sparyng of any and took all that they fond in their howses / And
slew so many that er hit was day they had slain moo than twenty thousand /
they pylled and robbed the temples / the cry aroose much horrible of them
that they slew / When the king pryant herd the cry / he knew anon that
eneas and anthenor had betrayed him he aroose anon hastily and went him in to
his temple of Appolyn that was within his palace / as he that had no more
esperance ne hope of his life / And knelid to fo^e the high awter. Cassandra
fled on that other side as one that had been out of her wit in to the
temple of mynerue / weeping and demenyng great sorrow. And the other noble women
abood still in the palace in wepynges and in teeris.

Than hit came on the morn the greeks by the conduyte of Eneas and of Anthenor
that were open traitors unto their Cite and also to their king and lord. came
and entrid in to the palace of ylyon where they fond no deffence and put to
death all them that they fond. Than pyrrus entryd in to the temple of Appolyne
and fond there the king pryant abidyng his death / Than he ran upon him with a
nakyd swerd seeing Eneas and Anthenor that guyded him He slew there the king
pryant tofore the high awter / which was all bebledd of his blood. The queen
hecuba and polixene fled and wyste never whyder to goo / and happend that she
met with Eneas. And than said hecuba to him in a great fureur Ha A felon
trayttre / fro whens is comen to the so great cruelte / that thou have brought
with the / them that have slain the king pryant / that has done to the so
much good and has set the in magnyfycence: and also have betrayed the
contre where thou were born / and the Cite that thou ought to keep At the
left late hit suffice the And refrain the now of thy courage: and have pity of
this unhappy polixene / to the end that among so many euyllis as thou haste
done: thou may have grace to have done one good deed as for to save her fro
death er the greeks slay her / Eneas meuyd with pity resseyuyd polixene in his
guard and put her in a secret place.

Among these things the king thelamon set in the temple of mynerue in
keeping Andrometha the wife of hector and Cassandra whom he fond there ylyon /
And put the fire in the cite on all parties and burnt all the noble cite.
Reseruyd only the howses of the trayttres which were kept and reseruyd / When
the cite of troy was all burnt / the king agamenon assemblid all the most
noble of greece in the temple of mynerue / And when they were all assemblid /
He required them of two things / One was that they should hold her faith and
throuthe to the trayttres. And that other was that they should take advise by
good manner for to depart the proye of the cite / The answer was such of the
greeks that they would hold her faith to the trayttres as for the first point /
and as to the second / every man should bring all the proye in common / And
there to depart to each man after his merit and deserte / Than spoke Thelamon
and said that me should brenne Helayne / / for whom so much hurt and evil
was comen / / and that so many worthy kings and princes had deyd fore. And
there was a great murmr here upon / that with great pain Agamenon vlixes and
menelaus might save her / But vlixes with his fair langage said to hem so
much of dyuerce things / that they were content that helayne should have no
harm / And than agamenon did so much to all the other that for his reward
the daughter of king pryant cassandra was deliuerid to him / Whilis that the
greeks held yet her parliament / came to them Eneas and Anthenor And aduertysed
hem how helenus had always blamed the trojans of thempryse that they made against
the greeks / And counceyllid them to put the body of Achilles in sepulture
which they would have given to the hounds / and praid hem therefore that they
would save his life And hit was accorded and agreed to them. And than andrometha
and helenus prayed for the two sons of hector / which were sauyd how well
that pyrrus was there against and debated hit a lityll / but in the end he
agreed hit: and so the Children were respited.

AFter this fureur they ordained that all the noble women that were escaped fro
death / should goo whyder they would freely / or dwell still there if hit plesid
them / And after these things done / they purposid them to depart from troy.
But the great tempeste began to arise that time that endured a month hole to
fore they might goo to the sea / Than demanded the greeks of calcas the cause
of this enpesshement that dured so long: And he answered that the puyssan^es
Infernals were not yet oppesid of theffusion of the blood of Achilles / that
was shed in the temple of Appollyn for the love of polixene. And for tappese
the gods / hit behooves to sacrefye polixene for whom achilles deyde.

THan pyrrus inquired dyligently where polixene was becomen / that was cause of
the death of his fader / ffor there was no tydynge whether she was alive or ded.
Agamenon demanded of Anthenor. which said to him that he knew not where she
was / Whereof he lied not. And yet for to make an end of all his euyllis / he
inquired so much that polixene was founden in prison in an old ancient towr
where as she was put Inn: And than he went theder / And drew her out by
force by her arms: And presented her unto the king Agamenon. Which anon
sent her to pyrrus / the which sent her to the sepulcre of Achilles for to
be slain / And as they led her / there ne was king ne prince but that he had
great sorrow for to see so fair a figure of a woman to be lost / And without
that she had deseruyd hit / And had delivered her fro the hand of pyrrus / /
if calcas had not ben / that said alleway that the tempeste should not cesse
unto the time that she were ded.

When the fair Polixene was to fore the sepulture of Achilles / / she excusid
her much humbly of the death of Achilles / and said that she was much wroth
and sorry of his death / And that the kings and princes of greece suffryd her to
dye against Justice and with out culpe or trespaas / how well that she had
lever have the death / than to lyve with them that had taken away and slain all
her friends / And when she had fynysshid her words / Pyrrus smote her with his
swerd / seeing the queen her mother / and slew her cruelly. And cut her all
in pieces / and cast hem all about the sepulture of his fader / When hecuba
the queen saw thus her fair daughter slain / she fill down aswowne / And
after went out of her wit and becam mad. And began to run vacabonde and
all araged And assaylled with her teth and with her nails all that she might
come by / and casted stones and hurt many of the greeks / Than they took her
by force and ladde her in to an isle And there they stoned her to death / And
thus the queen hecuba ended and fynysshyd her life / And the greeks maad for her
a noble sepulture / And put her body therm. And her sepulcre appears yet in
the same isle unto this day etc.

Of the dissencion that meuyd because of the palladyum between the king
thelamon and vlixes. And how eneas and Anthenor were exylled out of troy. And
how the greeks returned and of their adventures.
WHhylis that the greeks soiourned yet at troy And might not depart for the
great tempeste / after that they had destroyed all the cite / and taken all
that they fond that was good. The king thelamon made his quarrel to fore the
king Agamenon for the palladyum that Vlixes had / He that had not so well
deseruyd hit as he hadd / that had so many times socowryd the oost with vytayll
/ and also had defendid hit by his great prowess / where the oost of the
greeks had been in da^nger to have been lost ne had he ben / And said that he
had slain the king polmestor / to whom the king pryant had put polidorus his
sone And after had slain the same polidorus / and hadd brought a great tresour
that he fond unto the oost of the greeks. And also he had slain the king of
frygye. and brought his goods in to the ooste. And aleggyd than that he had
gotten many royames to the seygnourye of greece / and other many vayllyances that
he had done to the honor of the greeks: And said more over that vlixes had in
him no prowess ne vaillyance / but only subtylte / and fair spekyng for to
deceive men / / And by him have we gotten to us great villonnye / that where we
might have vaynquysshid the trojans by Arms / Now we have vaynquysshid hem by
dysceyte and barate etc.

TO these words answered vlixes / and said that by (...) vayllyance and by his
wit the trojans (...) vaynquysshid / And if he hadd not ben / / the trojans
were yet in astate and in glory in the cite. And after said to Thelamon /
Certes the palladyum was never ^^nquerid by your prowess / but by my wit /
And the greeks wyste never what hit was ne of what virtue hit is / / when I
did hem to know thereof first by the dylygence that I did thereto / and when
I knew that the cite of troy might not be taken as long as hit was in the
same / I went secretly in to the cite / and did so much that hit was
delyueryd unto me. and after we took the cite / To this answered Thelamon
Iniuryously / And Vlixes to him in like wise in so much that they becam
enemies mortal each to other. And Thelamon manacyd Vlyxes to the death openly /
And allewaye after that this matter was well discuted / Agamenon and menelaus
Iugyd that the palladyum should abide with vlixes / And so^me said that they
maad this Judgment for as much as vlyxes by his fair spekyng had sauyd fro
death helayne / that Thelamon and other would have hadd ded / And of this
Judgment they might not be content / the most grettest part of the ooste
said that Thelamon ought better to have the palladyum than vlixes / And
therefore Thelamon said to Agamenon and menelaus many Iniuryous words. And said
unto hem that he would be their mortal enemy fro than forth on / For this said
cause Agamenon. Menelaus and Vlixes held hem all three nyghe to gyder / And
hadd allewaye after with them great nombre and multitude of knights Than hit
happed that on the morn erly / that thelamon was found slain in his bed / /
and had woun^^^ in many places of his body / Werof roos a great Cry in the
ooste and maad great sorrow / And gaf all the blame unto three kings to fore
rehercyd / Pyrrus that louyd strongly the king thelamon said many Iniuryous
words to vlixes and to the other / Than vlyxes doubted him. And the next night
following he and his men entryd in to their ships all secretly and went to
the sea for to return homward and left with dyomedes his friend the
palladyum: Pyrrus did do brenne the body of thelamon and put the ashes in a
rich vessel of gold for to bear with him in to his country for to burye hit
honorably. The hate was great between pyrrus and the king agamenon and his
brother / But Anthenor maad the peace / And after on a day gaf a dinner unto all
the nobles of greece. And did do serve hem with many metes and gaf to them
fair yeftes etc.

Among these things the Greeks reprochyd En^^s that he hadd falsyd his oath /
in that / that he had hyded polixene / And for this cause they banysshi^ him
out of troy for ever / And when Eneas saw that he might not abide there he
prayed hem much that they would accord and agree that he might have the two and
twenty shipp is that paris had with him in to greece / and they agreed to him
his request And gaf to him four months space for to repair them and
garnysshe them of all that they lacked / Anthenor departed after from troy
with his good will / and ladd with him great nombre of trojans / But the
hist^^ye tells not whether he would goo / Eneas hated than strongly Anthenor
for so much as by him he was banysshyd out of troy / / And was in great
sorrow because Anthenor was not as well banysshid as he / And for this cause
Eneas assemblid all the trojans / And said to them my friends and my brethern.
syn that fortune has put us in the state where we ben Inn / we may not live
with out heed and governor And if ye will do by my counceyll ye shall chese
Anthenor / / and make him your king / ffor he is wise ynowhe for to govern
you. This counceyll seemed good to the trojans / And sent after Anthenor that
returned anon unto them. And as soon as he was come Eneas assemblid great
nombre of people / for to run upon him / as he that was most myhhty in troy /
Than the trojans prayed him that he would cesse / / syn that the war was
fynysshid / And that he would not begin hit again / How said Eneas should we
spare one so felou^e a trayttre / that by his great felonnye has causid to dye
polixene the fair daughter of king pryant. And by him I am bannysshid out of
troy that should have counceyllid and helped you / And now I must needs leve
you. Eneas said so much to the trojans / that they bannysshid Anthenor for
ever out of troy And constrained him anon to goo his way out of the town
etc.

ANthenor entryd in to the sea with a great company of trojans / And sayllyd
so far that he fylle among men of war and pirates of the sea / that ran
upon him and slew many of his men and hurt And robbed and pyllid of his
shyppis And in the end Anthenor escapyd from them. and saillid so far that
he arryuyd in a prouynce / named Gerbandye / whereof the king Tetides was lord
and king a Just man and a debonayre. In this land aryved Anthenor with a few
shyppis and rested on the side of a great isle / that was nyghe unto the port /
he saw the contre fair and puyssant of woods and of land and of fou^taynes
/ And there he edyffied a Cite to him and to his people / and fortefyed hit with
wallis and good towrys / And when the trojans knew thereof many went theder
and dwellid there with Anthenor / And the cite grew strongly and was full of
people / And anthenor governyd him so wisely in this land / that he was well in
the grace of the king tetydes / And was the second after the king in his
royame And named his cite Cortirem erralum.

CAssandra that was left at troy had great sorrow for the great myschyefs
that were fallen to her friends / And cessid not to weep and waylle / And when
she had demeuyd long her sorrow The greeks demanded her of their estate in
their retournyng home / of which she said to them / that they should suffer
many pains and great paryllis er they were come in to their contre / And after
she said to agamenon that they of his own hows should slay him So hit happyd to
him after and to all the other like as cassandra had deuysyd to them and said.
Of the king thelamon were left two son^es. of two queen's the eldest was named
hermycides of the queen glausta And that other of the queen thymyssa had to
name Anchisatus / These two children norysshid the king Theuter as long till
they were great to bear arms.

Among these things Agamenon and menelaus demanded congye for to return in
to their lands / And the most great of the ooste gaf hem leave sore anoyed /
ffor as much as they had been taken as suspecte of the death of thelamon with
vlixes / which was stolen away like a thief / wherefore he showed well / that
he was culpable of the death. Thus these two brethern put hem to the sea / for
to return home thus in thentree of the winter / when the sea is most
dangerouse / And anon after the other greeks entryd in to the sea as fools
and evil aduysed for the doubts of the sea / And had her ships all charged
and laden with the rychesses / whereof they hadd despoylled the rich Cite and
royame of troy. And for the great desire that they hadd for to ben at home in
their contre They began to return thus as in the mids of the winter / And
set aparte all dangers and paryllis / which fill unto them greatly / And
when they hadd sayllyd four days and four nyghtes / on the fyfthe day they
were in the sea of egee / About the hour of none came a great tempeste. And
supprysed them suddenly with great rain and thonder / with wind and with
great wawes of the sea that casted her ships here and there in the sea / And
many brake their mastes and all to rent their saylles / And when the night
came which was long and derke / the ships left each other / in saillyng to
fore the wind some in one place and some in an other / And many were burnt
with lyghtnyng and thonder tht fill upon hem / And many were drowned and sonken
into the sea. And they that were therm were ded and drowned / and the great
rychesses of troy lost / Oyleus ayax that had.xxxii. ships in this company
/ had all his ships burnt and perisshid / And he him self by the forse of
his arms and legs all naked swymyng came and arrived a land all swollen of
the water that he had dronken / And lay a great while upon the gravel / more
hopyng the death than the life / And anon after came other in like wise that were
so sauyd with swimming / which were disconfortid in her maleheurte and
unhappiness. This myschief came to this ayax for as much as he drew cassandra
out of the temple of mynerue / And hit happeth often time / that many be
punysshid for the sin and trespace of one man etc.

How the king naulus and cetus his son did do perysshe in the sea many
ships of the greeks in their return for the death of his sone palamydes and
of the death of king Agamenon / and of thexyle of dyomedes and of his Rapeell
by egee his wife etc.
IN this time there was a king in greece named Naulus that was much Rich and
puyssau^t and his Royame stood upon the side of the sea of greece toward the
South / In the which see were great Roches and high and many montaygnes and
hills of Sand which were right peryllous. This king was fader of palamides
/ that was slain to fore troy. And had yet a sone named Cetus. There was no^n
in greece so rich ne so puissant a king / Now were there some evil people there
that could not be in ease with out greuyng and anoyng of other / which made
the said king Naulus to understand and to his sone king cetus / that
palamides was not slain in battle so as the wys ran / but he was slain
covertly by vlixes and diomedes / Agamenon and menelaus had made and contryued
a false lettre / where in was contained that palamydes would have betrayed the
ooste of the greeks / whylis he was emperor of the oost / for a great quantyte
of gold And they made this lettre to be put by the side of a knight that was
slain. And than vlixes tretyd in such wise with one of the secretayres of
palamydes / for a great so^me of money such as the lettres contained. And this
secretarye by thynduccion of vlixes put this some of money under the heed of
palamides whilis he slepte / And as soon as the secretary had said to vlixes
that he had done Than vlixes slew this secretarye pryuely / And forth with
did so much that this lettre came in to the hands of the greeks / that read
hit / and were all abasshid when they saw in writing the trayson / and that
the some contained in the same leye under his heed / They went anon in to his
tente / and fond the truth of this thing / And would have run upon
palamides / But he offered him himself to deffende hit against whom tht ever would
prove hit. And so there was none that durst fight against him Than Vlixes did so
much by his fair langage that this thing was repeasid. And seemed that hit
was best that palamydes should abide in his dignyte.

AFter this thing thus repeasid. Vlixes and diomedes on a day did palamydes
to understand that they knew a pytte / where in was much tresour. And that
they would that he had his part / and that they should goo the night following /
when the night was come they went all three allone with out more company. And
there offryd palamydes for to goo down in to the pytte first / and they said
that they would follow. And as soon as he was within / the other two cast stones
upon him so many that they slew him / and after returned to their tents
pryuely. This thing said these enuyous men to king naulus and to Cetus of the
death of palamydes / And all was false / Than the king and his sone began
strongly to think how they might avenge hem of the greeks / they knew well
that the greeks were in her return in the heart of the winter / And that they
must pass by his royame. And than the king naulus did do cry in all his
royame that men should make great fyres every night upon the montaignes that
stood by the sea side / And this did he to the end / that when the greeks should
see the fire by night that they should come theder / wenyng to find good
haue^n. And if they came they should find hard rockkes and montaignes of sand
/ And so they should not escape with out death / Hit was thus done as naulus had
devised. And there were well two honderd shippis of the greeks broken against the
rokkes. And all they that were therein were drowned / When the other shippis tht
followed them herd the noise of the shippis that so were broken and the cry of
them that were drowned / they turned on that other board and made to see ward
and sauyd hem self Of them that escaped were Agamenon. Menelaus. diomedes and
so^me other that shall be named here after.

CEtus that otherwise was callid Pellus had great sorrow when he knew that
Agamenon was escaped / And than he thought long / how he might avenge him
when he should be come home and descended in his owen land / He did do write a
lettre to Clytemestra the wife of agamenon. And this lettre contained that for
certain Agamenon her husbond had espowsyd one of the daughters of king pryant
/ and that he louyd her strongly / and brought her with him in to his contre
for to make her queen. And to put out clitemestra or to do slay her / / And
therefore cetus aduertysed her to the end that she might pourveye for her self.
Clytemestra anon believed these lettres / and thanked cetus ynowhe / and
thought that she would avenge her of her husboond. This Clitemestra in the
absence of her husbond louyd a man named Egystus by whom she hadd a daughter
named Erygona / She loved more her love ^gystus / than ever she did her
husbond how well he was comen of low blood / But hit is the custom of a woman
that does a mysse to take one to her of less value than her husbond is. She
had tretyd with egistus that the first night that agamenon should lie with her /
he should run upon him and slay him. This thing was done in like wise as she
had purposid / And Agamenon was slain and put in the earth / And anon after
Clitemestra took to husbond her love Egystus king of mychames.

AGamenon thus slain had a sone of this clytemestra that was named horestes a
young child which that calcybus his parent took in keeping And took him from
his mother / to the end that she should not slay him. And after sent him to the
king of Crete ydumeus that was his uncle. And he had great Joy of him and his
wife tharasis also that loved him as much as Clitemestra her daughter that hadd
no moo children but her / and was a fair young maid / Thus as Cetus had wryton
to Clitemestra the wife of Agamenon / In like wise he wrote to the wife of
dyomedes named Egee / and was daughter of the king polymytes of Arsymens / and
suster of assandrus that returned fro troy with dyomedes his brother in law /
So hit happed in their retournyng that they descended in the land of king
Thelepus / which was evil content And went against hem with a great company
of men of Arms and assayllid them. And they deffended hem strongly / and
assandrus slew many of the knights of thelepus whereof he hadd great sorrow
and was angry. And took a great spear and adressid him against assandrus by so
great force / that he smote down to the earth and slew him. Dyomedes for to
avenge the death of his brother in law slew many knights of thelepus. And
recoueryd the body of assandrus with great pain and bare hit in to his ship
etc.

THus deyde assandrus / but hit was not reported thus to Egee his suster / But
hit was said to her that dyomydes her husbond had done slay him for to have all
the seygnourye of archimens whereof assandrus had that one half against his
suster egee / Of these tidings and of them that cetus had wreton / Egee was
much wroth and angry with diomedes her husbond And procured so much against
her people / / that they promised her that they would not resseyue no more
dyomedes for her lord. And thus when dyomedes returned. His wife ne his folk
would not resseyue him but banysshid him out of the contre of Archymens for
ever / Than hit happyd him that he arrived in salamyne / where the king
theuter brother of the king thelamon was / And this king had herd say that
dyomedes was culpable of the death of his brother / / with vlixes / and than
commanded that dyomdes should be taken. But dyomedes herd hereof And fled
thens / The king demephon and the king Athamas / when they were arrived in
their lands / were banysshid by semblable manner / Than they arrived in the
land of duc nestor / which resseyuyd hem with great Joy / These two kings
purposid to goo in to their lands with men of arms / and take vengeance on
their people / But the duc nestor blamed hem thereof / And counceillid them that
they should send first to them for to amoneste and warn hem for to resseyue
them for their lords / And promise to them great fraunchyses and lybertees /
And thus they did as nestor councellyd to them / And hit was not long after
but their people resseyuyd hem as a fore is said etc.

When Eneas was a biden at troy for to repair his shyppis / He suffryd many
assault of his neighbors that would have taken to proye all the remena^nt of
the trojans. And for as much as he might not abide there longer than his
term that was assigned unto him by the greeks / He assemblid the trojans. And
counceyllid them that they should send and fecche dyomedes to be their king /
and said to hem that he would come gladly for as much as he was put out of
his country And he was wise and hardy for to deffende them. They sent for to
seche dyomedes / and fond him. And he came gladly and with a good will / and
fond the trojans half assiegid of her neighbors. And yet was Eneas there
present And appointed hem to the battle against their enemies And fought many
days In the which diomedes did many prowesses and slew many of their
enemies and many took and many he henge as theuys. At the fyfthe bataill did
so much of prowess that he came to the above of his enemies. and were all
vaynquyshid / wherefore there was never after / none of here neighbors ner none
there about them / that durst assaylle the trojans. And so they dwellid after
in peace.

Among these things the Nauye of Eneas was ready / and than he entryd therm
and Anchyses his fader / And took the sea / with many trojans for to goo.
whyther the gods would consent that they should dwell and abide. And they
fond many peryllous aventures in the sea / In the end they sayllid in to the sea of hellesponte / and sayllyd so far that they aryved in ytalye and in
toscanne. Of his aventures and how he arryuyd at Cartage / and after in ytalye
/ they that will see hit / late hem read virgyle in eneydos / and there they
shall find hit. When Egee the wife of dyomedes knew that the trojans had
resseyuyd dyomedes / and that he hadd desconfyted her enemies. She doubted that
dyomedes would take vengeance on her / Than she counceyllid her with her people
And by their counceyll she sent for to fecche him / And he came with a good
will / and was resseyuyd with great Joy / And so in like wise the other that
hadd exyled their lords at their retourn fro troy callid hem home again. And
every man returned in to his seygnourye of them that escaped fro the paryllis
of the sea.

How Horrostes sone of king Agamenon took cruel vengeance of the death of his
fader / And how the king vlixes after many diverse adventures returned to his
seygnourye and royame.
When Horrestes the sone of king Agamenon that was / had four and twenty year
of age / The king ydumeus that had nourysshid him made him knight and maad a
great feste of the new chyualerye of horrestes. And than horrestes prayed him
that he would help him with his people to take vengeance of the death of his
fader / and to recouere his land / The king ydumeus delyuerd to him a
thousand knights wise and hardy / And horrestes assemblid an other thousand in
many places / And after took his way unto mychames / And in going thederward
passid by the cite of trasem / whereof the king forensis was lord that halpe
him with three honderd knights / for as much as he hated egystus / by cause
that he said egystus had troth plight his daughter / / which had left her
for the love of Clytemestra / and so he went with horrestes for to make war
to egistus / And than when they set forth on their way hit was at thentre of
the month of May / When they came to fore Mychames / They that were with Inn
the cite would not yield hit unto him. Than he set siege round about hit
Horestes had an answer of the gods that he him self should take vengeance of
his mother by his hands / notwythstandyng she was closid in the cite / Egisteus
was not than there / but he was goon for to feche socours and for to assamble
knights for to deffende his cite against the coming of horestes his enemy / At
the Instygacion and counceyll of Clitemestra his wife. And anon as horestes
knew thereof. He set great nombre of knights in a wait for to take him at
his retournyng / And than he maad the cite to be assayllid often times / And
for as much as hit was not well garnysshid / Horestes took hit with assault
the.xv. day of his siege / And co^mysyd his people to keep the yates / to
the end that none should issue out ne enter / And after went him to the palace
ryall / and made to take his mother and set her in s^wre prison / and took and
did to be taken all them that he felt culpable of the death of his fader /
and that had be rebel against him / And that same day Egistus retournyd with
his socours. And fill in the hands of the people of horestes tht slew all his
people and ^^ke him a live and brought him to horestes / his hands bounden
behind him at his back.

IN the morn Horestes did his mother Clitemestra be brought to fore him all
naked her hands bounden / And as soon as he saw her / he ran upon her with his
naked swerd / and cut of her two pappes / and after slew her with his hands
/ and maad her to be drawn to the feldes for the hounds to ete and deuowre
and to the birds. After he did do dispoylle egistus and do draw him through
the cite. And after did do hang him on a forke. And in like wise he did to
all them that were culpable of the death of his fader / Thus vengid horrestes
the death of the good king Agamenon his fader etc:.

MEnelaus after the great paryllis of the sea / aryued in Crete / And with him
dame helayne his wife / When he knew of the death of his brother / And of the
vengeance that the said horrestes had taken. He was evil content with his
nevewe that had taken so cruel vengeance on his mother / There came to menelaus
the grettest lords of greece for to see helayne / for whom the greeks had
suffrid so many hurtes and do^mages / And from Crete menelaus went and aryued
at the poort of michames / And said to horrestes that he was not worthy to be
king and lord for as much as he hadd taken so cruel vengeance on his mother /
And for to avenge this tyranny / Menelaus assemblid all the nobles of greece at
Atthenes / to the end that horestes should be declarid as pryuyd of his
seygnourye for the cruelte that he had done against his mother / Horestes excusid
him thereof / / sayng that / that he had done the gods had commanded him. Than
avau^ced him the due of atthenes / and offryd for horestes that if there were
any man that would prove that horestes had not done well / that he would deffende
him / There was none that would preue hit. And therefore was horrestes assaylled
and restablisshyd in his seygnourye And bare heavy heart to his uncle menelaus
for this cause But the king ydumeus came to mychames and maad the peace between
hem both / And than horestes took hermone the daughter of menelaus and of
helayne to his wife Erigone the daughter of Egistus and of Clytemestra had so
great sorrow when she saw horestes in so great seygnourye that she henge and
strangled her self.

Among these things Vlixes came in to Crete with two merchants ships that
he had hired / ffor he had lost all his ships / and all that was with Inn
them by pirates and robb^urs of the sea that had robbyd him. And after that he
was so robbed hit myshappid him that he arrived in the land of king thelamon
/ And there was taken and lost the resydue of his goods / And they of the
contre had hanged him / but by the Industrye and subtylte of his wit he
escaped right pour / After that he aryuyd in the land of king naulus which
hated him for the death of his sone palamydes / alleway he did so much by his
connyng and wit / that he escaped much pourly And so he came and aryued in
Crete / The king ydumeus resseyuyd him Ioyously ynowh / / but he was much
esmayed that he saw him so pour / And demanded him of his adventures what
they were syn he departed fro troy / Than vlixes told him all a long many
dangers and meruaylles. And how he had lost his men and his great richesse
that he brought fro troy / The king ydumeus had pity on vlixes / And honored
him much as long as he would abide there with him / And when he departed he
gaf to him two ships full of all such thing as they behoved for to goo with
all in to his country / And gaf to him other goods ynowhe / And prayed him
that he would goo by the royame of alcynous that was in his way / And that he
would see him gladly etc.

THus departed vlixes fro crete / And went him to king Alcynous wiche
resseyuyd him with great Joy. And herd him gladly speak / There herd vlixes
tidings of Penolope his wife how many notable men had required her / But she
would never entende to man / she was so much chaste. And how certain persons
held party of his land against the will of his wife / There came to vlixes
thelamotus his sone and acertayned him of all things tht were true / And for
that cause vlixes prayed to alcynous that he would accompanye him unto his royame
/ with a great nombre of knights / And alcinous agreed to him gladly / They
sayllid so long that on a night they aryued in his contre / and entryd in to
the cite / and in the howses of his enemies / and slew them all. And on the
morn by day Vlixes thus accompanied entrid in to his palace / And there was
resseyuyd as king and lord with great Joy. And above all other Penolope his
wife had great Joy as she that had so long desired him / His people came fro all
sides and ran for to see him that was her lord gyuyng to him great and rich
yeftes. And thus was vlixes much honouryd and exalted in his royame And than
he treted so much with Alcinous that he gaf his daughter naufica in marriage to
thelamotus his sone / And after the great solempnyte of the weddyng. Alcynous
went him in to his contre. And vlyxes abood in his royame in great peace.

Of the feetes of pyrrus syn his retournyng fro troy And how horrestes the
sone of Agamenon slew him in delphos for the rauysshyng of Hermone his wife And
of moo adventures etc.
PIrrus that was the sone of Achilles and of dyadamie the daughter of king
Lychomedes of his mother side. This king lichomedes was sone of king Achastus
that lived yet at that time. And this king Achastus that was much old and
ancient. hated strongly pyrrus / But the historye tells not wherefore ne for
what cause this hate came. This king Achastus had put the king Peleus out of
his royame of thesaylle / and had sent him in exyle. And set espyes in many
places for to slay pyrrus in his return fro troyes / Pirrus in his coming fro
troy passid many paryllis in the sea / And cast in to the sea of the best
Iewellis he had / And after he arryuyd at molose / Where he descended and
did repair his shippis And as he there soiourned he knew how the king
achastus had sent the king peleus his grauntfader in exyle / / and was fader
of Achilles / And how he had set his espyes for to slay him. Hereof he had
great sorrow and was much wroth. The king peleus wyste not where to hold him
for the doubt that he had of the two son^es of Achastus of whom that one was
named philistenes / and that other menelapus for fere if they fond him they
would sle him. Than he avisid him of an old ancient ediffice that was half a
mile fro the cite of Thessaylle / between the sea and the cite / And there was
an old closure of wallis and of rocks about / And there was no moo howses as
there had been in time paste / But there was Celiers under the earth / where in
men might enter secretly by an hole that apperyd but little for the busshes and
thorns that were there etc.

IN this place dwellid the king Peleus in abydyng the retornyng of his nevewe
pyrrus from troy / that might avenge him of his enemies And went often time
upon the ryuage of the sea / for to see if his nevewe might come / When the
shyppis of pyrrus were repaired / he took his way toward thessaylle / for to
avenge him of king Achastus / And for to do this thing more wisely he sent
to thessayll two of his secretaryes that one named Cryspus And that other
Adrastus that were wise and subtle / unto an high and mighty man of the Cite
named Assandrus / that was at that time a true friend to him and to king
Peleus for to have his advise / / they went theder / And when they had herd
speak Assandrus / they returned unto pyrrus / and told to him what they had
founden. And anon pyrrus maad to draw up their saylles / and saylled toward
thessaylle / But a great tempeste arose in the sea that dured three days / and
on the fourth day they arrived at the poort of sepehadem that was but half a
mile from thessaylle nyghe unto the cave where Peleus held him / Than pyrrus
descended a land for to rest him of the trauayll that he hadd on the sea /
And to take the air of the land / And of adventure he went strayte to the
cave where as peleus was / And by the thorns and busshes that hyded from him
the hoole / he fill there Inn and fond there his belefader peleus / And than
anon Peleus knew his nevewe / ffor as much as he resemblyd right well unto
his fader Achylles / And he beclipte him about the neck and kyssed him / And
exposyd unto him all his malehurte and great unhappiness whereof pyrrus had
great sorrow. Than they went up and went to his ships / There came tidings
that Philistenes and Menalipus the sons of king Achastus were comen for to
hunte in the foreste that was fast by / Than pyrrus vnclothid him / and did on
an old roobe all to broken and to rent / And took his swerd and said to his
people that they should abide him there / And he allone would goo in to the
foreste. And he had not far goon / but that he encountrid the two brethern
that demanded of him what he was / and fro whens he came / and whyder he would
goo. He said to them that he was of greece. and was returned fro troy in a
ship with other / And would have goon again in to his contre / But the
tempeste of the sea had so trauaillid them that there were well fyve honderd
persons all ded / And that there was no man escaped but he allone by great
adventure. And hadd dronken much water of the sea and so have lost all that I
had. And I must now goo beg fro door to door till I come in to my contre And
if ye have brought in to this foreste any thing to ete / I pray you that ye
will give me thereof / Than the two brethern said to him that he should abide
with them etc.

Whylis they spoke thus to gyder / A great heart passyd to fore them / And
Menalapus put him to the chasse / And left his brother with pyrrus allone /
Than hit happyd that Phylistenes alyght down of his horse for to rest him /
And as soon as he was descended / Pyrrus ran upon him with his naked swerd in
his hand and slew him / and after when menalipus was returned Pyrrus
assayllid him and slew him / Thus slew pyrrus his two uncles that were
brethern of thetys the mother of Achilles his fader / and than as he returned he
encountrid Chinaras that was of the household of king Achastus / at whom pirrus
demanded where was the king achastus / And he answered to him that he was there
fast by and not far fro thens / And as soon as he had so said pyrrus slew
him. And after went again to his shyppis. And cladde him with precyouse robes
/ And returned again unto the foreste / And met with the king achastus /
that demanded of him what he was / I am said he one of the sons of king
pryant of troy that am prisonner to pyrrus / Where is pirrus said the king And
he ensigned him toward the sea / And as the king turned him to see thederward /
Pyrrus drew out his swerd and would have slain him / but thetys was present
and escryed him and knew him sayng. Ha right dear neuewe what wolte thou do /
will thou sle my fader / And thou haste slain my two brethern thine uncles /
And she thus sayng held him by the arm where with he held his sword / And
than pyrrus answered to her the king Achastus thy fader has exylid the king
peleus thyn husbond / where in has he trespaste and offended the / if he wole
pardoune to peleus his maletalent and evil will / I will pardou^e him mine /
The king Achastus was well content And peleus came to fore him / And the peace
was made between hem / And when they were returned to geder with good love /
The king Achastus said to them / I am so ancient and feeble that I may no more
help my self And therefore I will discharge me of the charge and government of
this royame / And now I have lost them that should have governed hit after me /
and for as much as Pirrus my right dear nevewe is the next eyer I sease him
now therein. And peleus said I give him the right and title that I have therein.
And am in will that pyrrus be king: Than commanded the king achastus to all
the barons of thesaylle that they should make ho^mage to pyrrus as to their king
/ and they had thereof great Joy and did hit gladly / And thus was Pyrrus
crowned king of thessaylle. And was taken as the most redoubtyd king of
thessaylle and of greece / ydumeus the king of Crete deyde anon after And
left two sons after him. Merion and Loarca / But loarca deyde sone after him
/ and merion was made king. Thelamotus had a sone of Naufica his wife which
was named Deyphebus

Among these things the king achastus did do burye his two sons in thesayll
by the agreement of pirrus / Hit happend when that pirrus was thus enhaunsid in
high seygnourye / that he becam amorouse of herimone the daughter of helayne
that was wife of horestes / He did so much that he rauysshid her by force /
and brought her in to thesayll / and took her to his wife. Horestes was passing
sorouful of this thing and durst not assaylle pirrus in his royame and said if
he might live / he would avenge him in time and in place / Now hit happyd that
pyrrus went in to the isle of delphe for to thank his god Appolyn of this that
he hadd taken vengeance of the death of his fader Achylles: And left in his
pallays Andrometha the wife that was of hector / / that had a lityll sone of the
said hector named Laomedon / And left the same Andrometha with child of his
works / whereof Herimone was evil content / And sent to menelaus her fader
that pyrrus had all left her / for the love of Andrometha / And that he should
come theder and leave for no thing whilis that pyrrus was out / for to sle
andrometha / and her sone Laomedon / Menelaus went anon to thessaylle for to
do this thing that his daughter required him. And ran upon Andrometha which
took her sone between her arms / And ran in to the cite requyryng help of the
people ayenste Menelaus that would slay her and her child.

THe people Armed them anon and ran upon menelaus / And did so much that
menelaus must return in to his country / with out doing of any thing there
/ When horestes knew that pyrrus was in the isle of delphe / He went theder
and assayllid pyrrus and slew him with his owen hand / And maad him to be
buried there / And anon after horestes recoueryd his wife / and brought her in
to his royame / When pyrrus was ded / Peleus and Thetis took andrometha that
was with child of pyrrus / And laomedon her little sone. And sent hem in to
the cite of Molose. There was Andrometha delyueryd of a fair sone / which she
named Achilleydes / the which when he was great / crowned his brother laomeden
king of the royame of Thesaill / And would for the love of him that all the
trojans that were there should be frau^chised Here sai^^ the historye that the
suster of the king menon that achilles slew to fore troy / and whom the king
pryant did do burye byside troyllus his sone / the said suster came to troy /
much rychely arrayed. And did do open the sepulcre of her brother and took out
the bones chat she fond. And as soon as she had hem and held hem she vanysshyd
suddenly away / / that never man wyste where she became ne the bones that she
had taken And they said that saw this that she was a goddess or daughter of a
goddess.

How thelagonus sone of vlixes and of the queen Cyrces came for to find his
fader vlixes / and how he slew him not wetyng who he was. And of the avysion
that came to the said vlixes in his slepyng.
AS Vlixes slepte on a night in his bed / He had a meruayllous vysion and him
seemed that he saw an image of meruayllous form / and the fairest that ever
was seen. And desired sore for to towche this image / and would have enbraced
her / But the image would not suffer him / but wythdrewe her afterward. And
after she approchid and demanded of him / / what wylt thou. And he answered to
her I will that we be conjoined to geder / and that I may know the flesshly. O
said the image that thy request is hard and bitter / / ffor our conionccion
shall be unhappy. ffor one of us two shall deye. Him seemed further that this
image held a spear and that above on the heed had a pensell all maad with
fysshis much subtylly. After he saw that the image wld goo. And said to him
at her departing. This sign signefieth the ylle and destruction that shall be
of us two.

When Vlixes was awaked / he had meruayll of this dreme / And thought sore
what hit might signefye / He sent after his deuyns and saages of his royame
and demanded them wat his vysion might signefie / and when they had a little
taken head thereof / they said that his owen sone should slay him / Vlixes that
had great dread and feer of his sone / made him to be taken and kept sewerly.
And after he chese a place only and far fro people / where he dwelled with
some of his true friends. And did do fortefye this place / with high towers
and closid hit with water round a bowte. And there might no man enter but by a
draw bryge and a wyket / And made that to be kept that no man should enter but
they that he had brought with him / Now hit happend to vlixes when he returned
fro troy / that fortune brought him in to an isle where Circes dwellid / which
there was lady / the which knew as much of enchantements as any woman of the
world. And by her art held vlixes by her nyghe a year. And vlixes gate on her
a sone which she named thelagonus / And thus in the time that vlixes dwellid
in this place that was so strong / Thelagonus his sone knew not yet who was
his fader / And when he was of cage for to bear arms / He demanded often times
of his mother / who was his fader and if he were alive and where he dwelled. And
so long he prayed her / that she said to him that vlixes was his fader / and
told to him where he dwelled etc.

When thelagonus was right Joyous / And desired strongly to see his fader / he
took leave of his mother And went so many Iourneyes that he came to achaye And
when he knew where Vlixes dwellid he went theder And when he was comen on a
monday in the morenyng to the brygge where they stood that kept hit diligently
/ / he prayed hem that they would late him pass for to see vlixes. And they would
not agree to him in no manner / And as he prayed hem / they put him a back
felonsly and rudely / whereof he was right angry and so wroth that he ran upon
one of them / and gaf him so great a struck with his fyste upon the canell of
the neck / that he fill down ded / And assayllyd the other and cast hem down
of the brygge / And they began for to cry much loud / and when they of the
castle herd the noise / they ran to arms and came to assaylle thelagonus / He
avauncyd him to one of them / and took his swerd from him / he did so much in
a little while that he slew fyftene of them / but they hurt him in many
places / and as the cry grew more and more / Vlixes aroose up doubtyng that
hit was thelamotus his sone / and that was issued out of prison and came where
as the noise was with a darte in his hand which he cast against thelagonus
when he saw his men slain / and hurted him a lityll / whom he knew not.

THelagonus that had receyuyd the darte. cast hit against vlixes whom he knew
not / And smote so sore between the sides that he hurted him unto the death /
and fill to the earth. And as he spack with great pain he demanded of
thelagonus what he was. ffor as much as than his vysion came to his mind. And
Thelagonus demanded on that other side / / who was he that spack so to him /
And they answered him that hit was vlixes. Than began Thelagonus to make the
grettest sorrow of the world Sayng alas caytyf / I was come to see my fader / /
and for to live with him in Joy / and I have slain him / And as soon as he had
said so / he fill down a swowne. And when his heart came to him again / / he
began to rent his gown / / and to beat his vysage with his fystes. And fylle
in weeping and approchid to his fader and said to him / that he was the unhappy
thelagonus his sone and of the queen Circes. And prayed to the gods that they
would suffer him to dye with his fader etc.

When vlixes knew that hit was his sone / He reconforted him self / / and
sent anon to fecche thelamotus his other sone / And he came Incontinent which
would have slain thelagonus / for to avenge the death of his fader / / but vlixes
repeasid him. And said to him that he was his brother / And prayed hem that they
would love each other / After this vlixes was brought in to Achaye. where he
lyuyd three days only. And his sons buried him honorably. Thelamotus held
the royame of achaye after his fader. And held with him Thelagonus nyghe by a
year and an half / And made him knight in great honor / and would that he should
dwell with him. But for as much as his mother wrote to him often times that he
should return in to his contre. He did so much that he departed with great
honor / ffor his brother did him to have all that him behooved on the way /
and gaf him many rich yeftes. And departed that one from that other with
weeping teeres / And thus Thelagonus returned in to the isle of aulides unto
Circes his mother / that had much great Joy of his coming. And hit was not
long after that cyrces his mother deyde: And thelagonus was maad king of this
isle / where In he lyved sixty year in great prosperyte and after deyde /
Thelamotus reigned in Achaye sixty and ten year / and augmented and encresid his
seygnourye strongly. And when vlixes was slain he was four score and thryttene
year old.

IN this party Dares fynysshid his book of the syege of troy / And speaks no
more of their adventures. And all this that is to fore said wrote dictes the
greek in his book / And in all this that is contained a fore wreton / their
two books were found according for the most party / And Dares put in the
end of his book / that the siege endured ten year ten monethis and twelve
days / And the so^me of the greeks that were slain at the siege to fore troy
/ was eyghte honderd and six thousand fyghtyng men. And the so^me of the
trojans that defended hem against the greeks that were slain was six honderd
and six and fyfty thousand of fightyng men / and he says furthermore that
when Eneas departed from troy by excyle / he ladde with him two honderd
ships / and that anthenor ladde with him five honderd trojans / and Eneas
ladde the remenant with him etc.

AFter this recyteth Dares in his book in the last end / by whom the most
noble kings and princes of that one party and also of that other were slain /
And says that Hector the prince of the chyvalerye of the world slew with his
hand by good and loyal fayte eyghtene kings. by his only prowess with out
malengyne / That is to wete the king Archylogus. The king Protheselaus. The
king Patroclus. The king Menon. The king Prothenor. The king Archymenus. The
king Polemon. The king Epistropus. The king Ecedyus The king Doccius. The
king Polixenus. The king phybus. The king Anthypus. The king Lenutus / The
king polibetes. The king humerus. The king Fumus. And the king Exampitus /
/ Paris slew palamydes the Emperor of the ooste of the greeks / the king
Achilles. And the king Ayax / Ayax and paris slew each other / Eneas slew
the king Amphymacus. and the king Nercus / Achylles slew the king Cupemuus.
the king yponeus. the king plebeus. the king Austerus. the king Lymonyus.
the king Euforbius. the king Menon / and the king Neptolonyus. And also he
slew Hector that took none head of him / and Troyllus that his myrondones had
enclosid and unarmed / Pyrrus the sone of the same achylles slew the queen
Panthasilee / And also he slew the noble king pryant / whom he fond unarmed
and with out deffence as a cruel tyrant / He slew the fair maid polixene
and the best manerd of the world / Dyomedes slew the king Antypus. the king
Escorpus / the king prothenor / and the king Obtyneus etc.

THus end I this book which I have translated after mine Auctor as nyghe as
god has given me connyng to whom be given the laud and preysyng / And for as
much as in the writing of the same my pen is worn / mine hand weary and not
steadfast mine eyes dimed with ouermoche lokyng on the whit paper / and my courage
not so prone and ready to labor as hit has been / and that age crepeth on me
daily and febleth all the body / and also be cause I have promysid to dyuerce
gentilmen and to my friends to adresse to hem as hastily as I might this said
book / Therefore I have practysed and learned at my great charge and dispense to
ordeyne this said book in prynte after the manner and form as ye may here see /
and is not wreton with pen and ynke as other books ben / to the end that every
man may have them attones / ffor all the books of this storye named the recule
of the historyes of troyes thus enpryntid as ye here see were begone in oon
day / and also fynysshid in oon day / which book I have presented to my said
redoubtid lady as a fore is said. And she has well acceptid hit / and largely
rewarded me / / wherefore I beseech almighty god to reward her everlasting
bliss after this life. Prayng her said grace and all them that shall read this
book not to desdaigne the simple and rude work. nether to replye against the
sayyng of the matters towchyd in this book / thauwh hit acorde not unto the
translaco^n of other which have wreton hit / ffor dyuerce men have made
dyuerce books / / which in all points acorde not as Dictes. Dares. and
Homerus ffor dictes and homerus as greeks sayn and written favorably for the
greeks / and give to them more worship than to the trojans / And Dares writes
otherwise than they do / And also as for the propre names / hit is no wonder
that they acorde not / ffor so^me oon name in these days have dyuerce
equyuocacions after the contrees that they dwlle in / but all acorde in
conclusion the general destruction of that noble cite of Troy / And the death
of so many noble princes as kings dukes Earls barons. knights and common people
and the ruin irreperable of that Cite that never syn was reedefyed which may
be ensample to all men during the world how dredefull and Ieopardous it is to
begin a war and what hormes. losses. and death follows. Terfore thapostle
says all that is wreton is wreton to our doctrine / which doctrine for the
common well I beseech god may be taken in such place and time as shall be
most needful in encrecyng of peace love and charity which grant us he that
suffryd for the same to be crucyfied on the rood tree / And say we all Amen
for charity..

Pergama flere volo. fata danais data solo
Solo capta dolo. capta redacta solo
Causa mali talis. meretrix fuit exicialis
Femina letalis. femina plena malis
Si fueris lota. si vita sequens bona tota
Si eris ignota. non eris absque nota
Passa prius paridem. peridis modo thesia pridem
Es factura fidem. ne redeas in idem
Rumor de veteri. faciet ventura timeri
Cras poterunt fieri. turpia sicut heri
Scena quid euadis. morti qui cetera tradis
Cur tu non cladis. concia clade cadis
Femina digna mori. reamatur amore priori
Reddita victori. deliciisque thori

